I'm watching the video of Trump grabbing his ear. I'm thinking that's when I slip my hand into his pocket and take his wallet. That's my qualification. We are going to have- If he were to go down, we run up his credit cards immediately. By the way, yeah, we're going to have a former legendary CIA agent, John Kariaku, who was also in prison like you, but he was only in there for two years, put in there by the CIA. He was- Oh, okay. Yeah. Not like it in another country in the United States. No, that's nice. Yes, exactly. What did you do for that? What did you do for that? Yeah. Well, he was one of those guys responsible for taking down one of the top guys in al-Qaeda named Abu Zebeda. And he was a part of a raid that captured this guy and killed, eventually killed- No, he's in Guantanamo. They never killed him. The story about how he captured the guy is crazy in, I think it was Pakistan. And John's been through a lot of good. And eventually that's when the enhanced interrogation hit happened. Started happening with the CIA where they set up these black sites around the world to basically torture people and get information from terrorists. And John was blamed for it because he was the guy inside the CIA complaining about it. Like, why are we doing this? This is against the law. It's violates the Geneva Convention. And they're like, stop bitching, John, stop bitching. And then somehow it came out and a reporter contacted him from, I think it was ABC. And they said, John Bush is on TV saying, yeah, look, there's the photo. Yeah, yeah. Bush was on TV basically saying that talking about the enhanced interrogation stuff and saying that there was a CIA operative who leaked it. And then John thought he was talking about him. So John's like, I'm going to go on live TV and talk about it. So John went on TV and blew out the blue up the hole enhanced interrogation shit. The CIA was doing. And then they got him for espionage, something like that. So Bush and crime put it in prison. But John is a lot about this stuff. And essentially so like, Julian's been talking to his paramilitary folks and I've talked to a couple guys. And you know, the one thing that seems to be insane about this whole thing is that they didn't put anybody on those roofs that were 300 feet, 150 yards away. And as we sit here in our air condition room with our microphones, we can, you know, we can tell everything. We can, we can, we do know what they should, we can take what they did wrong and let them know that they need to be better. Yeah, this is the, this is the video. Didn't have all that shit around it though. Like it was a very much clearer video, I think. But yeah, watch this head tilt. Yeah. That would have boom right there. How crazy is that dude? I tell you what that would have done. It would have, if it hadn't killed him and it would take him out of the race. I'll tell you that. Yeah. Oh yeah. I mean, that would have took out his whole visual cortex. Yeah, I think he would have been a vegetable. Yeah, not good. If it didn't kill him, it definitely would have put him up permanently. Yeah. Yeah, to be honest with it, let's face it, the bullet. Definitely would have killed him. Probably would have gone through the initial. It would have gone right through his temple. What? No, no, no, because that was that side here, that's the side. I'm saying it would have gone into his skull and probably, you know, jumped around inside his skull. It may not have exited as well. Yes, right. It bounced on the door. It would be scrambled eggs. Yep. It is so crazy how that head turned to so last minute. Listen, I remember the hand of God. Listen, Jess says that. I know. So we watched this and at first I was like, I went, I think that clip to see her. And Jess was like, no, maybe it's, does he have a hair and earpiece? Like, you know, because we didn't know right away. We're still watching it as it's happening. And then when he stands up and he's got the blood on his face and starts pumping his fist, it was like, oh, wow, he was hit. Right. He was definitely hit because he even even the commentators were like, was he hit? Like, I don't, is this, but when he stood up with the blood, it was like, oh, so what are the conventions? So what are the, all the theories on what happened? Well, the news, you've been paying more attention to this than I have. What's your body? The forest. Yeah, forest. There's a whole group of people on the internet that are insisting that the Trump campaign itself hired some sniper to take a shot at him and just the clip is ear. Yeah. Like, that is no. Or the atrics like this will push him over the edge. Like he's already over the edge. Like this isn't not just that any sniper will tell you, listen, the wind blows wrong. It can always be off to half an inch to an inch or whatever. And the fact that you're going to get him to turn his head at exactly the same trust me when they as he was turning his head and that dude pulled the trigger, when that guy pulled the trigger, he'd probably still hit him. He's turning his head. I mean, that's what that bullet's traveling. You know what I'm saying? I mean, there's just nobody in their right mind that would hire a sniper to fire, you know, at their head. It's just insane. It's amazing how there's so many people that believe that is true. It's that's Trump derangement syndrome at its finest. Then there's the other ones that know that there was a real sniper that tried to take him out and the kids of Patsy. That's my favorite because that's very much the, um, the, um, Oswald, you know, he's the Patsy, you know, um, Lee Harvey Oswald, who was, you know, people say like he didn't shoot Kennedy at all. So yeah, he was the fall guy. Right. He's just a fall guy. And honestly, what a great fall guy. Like he is perfect. Like if you really look at it, like is there a chance like, yeah, it seems like this possible there is a definite chance. Like nobody's ever going to know for sure. Why was he perfect? Because he'd been to, he'd been to the Soviet Union. Yeah. Then they let him back in. Yeah. It's almost like he's being moved around. And then the fact that when you tried to read effect through Mexico City right before, like a week before, but then the last minute, so he gets a job at the Texas to pop a book deposit story. And at the last minute, they changed the route of the car to go buy the Texas book deposit story to be on the route. It wasn't originally on the route. Right. That's to me, the most compelling part. Where it's like, so we've got a guy that looks like a perfect assassin. You know, he's got the, he's Caesar. You know, we can, we can blame it on his views of communism. Everything. Let's just have the cargo right by it. We'll have another sniper shoot him. We'll blame it on him. Right. And hopefully he'll just be killed. Hopefully the local cops will probably kill him. Yeah. But they don't. He gets grabbed. Okay. Well, now he's got to die some other way. The Ruby things were kind of breaks down. Ruby is probably maybe that was just an accident like they were hoping he would never, he would be killed by the local local cops. Ruby was definitely not an accident. Ruby was a part of MK Ultra. So when Ruby was in prison, he was getting visited by, um, you think prior to this, he was set up to kill him. So Ruby was in prison before, um, before was Ruby in prison before or after he killed Harvey, you know, he's been in prison prior. I mean, he'd been in and out of prison. It was kind of like a, he kind of like, was kind of like a, um, like a mob guy. He was like a hanger on. So in, in, uh, the book chaos, the Charles Manson book, the CIA by Tom O'Neill, he talks about a guy named Jolly West who was a CIA sort of like psychologist and chemist, I believe he was a chemist, but he was doing tests on people with LSD, um, on criminal specifically. And there's documented reports that Tom found that Jolly West visited Jack Ruby in prison multiple times and spent hours with him. And Jolly West was a very much a part of MK Ultra, the mind control experiments they were trying to, uh, doing the 60s. You know, you don't know whether that was prior to that's what I'm trying to find out. So yeah, I'd have to read, we'd have to find the book. He entered maybe you could Google his Steve, but, um, I think it was prior to him killing Lee Harvey Oswald. I think it was very much set up for him to get that I don't think they wanted him alive. And I think Jack Ruby was probably a part of that plan. Well, I saw you that we're never going to know, right? We're never going to know. Right. That's true. Um, so again, okay. So the, so there's the, there's the group of people who think the fucking that this is, I think the least plausible explanation for it that Trump somehow hired, they, the campaign set up a guy that were traded to orchestrate a bullet to fly an inch past his fucking skull. Right. There's no way. Yeah. Okay. First of all, he didn't need that to win. He had already won the election after that debate with, with Biden. There was no shot. Right. So the second one is the kids of Patsy. They're kind of maybe watching him. They know he's got anti, um, you know, conservative or whatever you want to, you know, liberal leanings. He's made a few, they haven't opened his phone yet. So you don't know what that phone, but let's say that NSA has been tracking his phone and they pick somebody and they say this, this kid's 20 years old, he's a shooter. Like we know all this by watching his phone. He's a shooter. He's extremely radicalized. He's, um, he's donated to the, whatever, to the, um, a democratic, uh, that democratic packed, I mean, what, 15 bucks, not like he's a huge supporter, but he's also 20. So, you know, he's, um, he's made, you know, all of these posts or who knows what he's made. You don't, we don't really know yet because they haven't gotten the phone, but let's say the NSA, they haven't gotten the phone still. No. Well, last I heard that the FBI is trying to crack it, trying to get into it. It's not that easy. If it's got a passcode. So, or seems weird that they wouldn't be, they, they won't be sure they'll get into it. Especially since they had that Apple thing where they cracked Apple. Yeah. But anyway, let's, they said they hadn't. Maybe they have and they're still reading it. Who knows? Anyway, so let's say the NSA already knew they've got 50 different people that could be, that could be, um, homegrown kind of assassins. And this kid is one of them and he's a shooter and he's kind of a, a loner. And they say, Hey, you know what, if we could get this kid to the rally and maybe somebody stops by and says, Hey, let's, let's radicalize, help radicalize him. Get him to the rally, put some plant some, you know, bomb material into his car, which they found. Um, and, you know, we'll get him on the roof, but we'll have another sniper shoot at Trump and Trump just happens to turn his head and misses. Who knows? You know, that's the second one is he's a Patsy and they, and this is the, maybe some, who knows whether it's the Biden administration or what these people will. Well, I mean, he's not just a Patsy. He's also clearly the shooter, right? No, he's clearly going to shoot, right? But Oswald will probably go into shoot, but can we rely on him to kill him? Let's get another person we know can kill him. So let's say that happened. So that's, I'm sorry, that's another kind of a scenario where there's another sniper, but the kids are really the fall guy. Okay, that's another one. So those are the two oddball scenarios. The true scenario is the kids probably radicalized his father saying he knows nothing about it, right? Kid kind of radicalizes himself, figures out how to get to the, you know, get to the rally, figures a way out on the rally. He had obviously had lots of, of different plans because he did. Yeah, because he also had, um, bomb material in his car. So it's like, maybe he thought, Hey, can I get on the roof? I probably can't even get on the roof. And he actually, you know, but if I don't get on the rock roof, then here's what I'm going to do. I have this bomb material in my car. I'm going to throw it in the crowd or I'm going to throw it under Trump's, you know, SUV or I'm going to who knows what he's thinking, but he obviously had alternate plans. But what happened is he got out there. He said, I can get on the roof. He gets on the roof. He does the army crawl, you know, up the, the back of the roof, the Secret Service agents see him. They call it in other people spectators call it in. There's a guy up there with a rifle. They look at a guy crawling on the roof. The Secret Service agent is told not to take the shot to allow them to check it out first. They send in the police, police officer climbs up the ladder, approaches him, says, Hey, what's going on? He had turns around. So Crooks turns around with his rifle, points it at him. The guy gets freaked out, jumps backwards. It actually falls off the roof. The cop, the cop does. So he falls off the roof. Crooks immediately turns around, gets into position and starts firing at Trump very quickly. And so the Secret Service agent that had been told not to fire starts to take some out. You know, he'd been told to wait. We're checking it out. So and so he goes ahead and takes him out. You know, he heard the bullets flying. He heard the bullets flying. So he says, that this kid's, you know, it's over. He shoots him from what I understand is the sniper that we all see in that image on the roof or the video on the roof or there's two of them that are basically like kind of a parallel to Trump facing the kid. Is that they had scoped in on that guy five minutes prior. Yeah. Yeah. I heard it. So I heard it was five minutes from a guy that I heard that actually talked to him. Oh, I can't only I can say who it was yet. Um, but a significant amount of time is like minutes. And then he radioed his superiors telling them about that. And they said, stand down. Do not take the shot or whatever. But that's because most likely because they had said, hey, let's get somebody up on that roof to see what's going on. And that's why they send the police up there. So the local cops share us right. They go and they find the ladder and they climb up there. Okay. But the snipe the scope on that sniper can see the fucking boogers in that guy's nose. I agree. You are telling me that those snipers can't tell that he's got a rifle in his hands. I agree, but they called it in like to, you know, keep in mind too, you don't know that he actually had his the sniper rifle on Trump at that time at that time. He may have just been army man crawling slowly up the roof and they see a guy crawling. Maybe he's sliding the gun. They don't know if he's got a gun. Like you don't really know what he called in. And then he calls it in and they say, okay, wait a minute, we're sending somebody over there like, you know, is he, you don't know whether he said, well, I don't know that he's immediate, he's an immediate threat. At that moment, he may not have known that. Now once the officer falls and the kid turns around and immediately takes aim as soon as he sees that, it's like, holy shit, the kid starts firing, which luckily he was, he was obviously anxiety. He's panicked. He just starts firing. Yeah. And luckily he doesn't get a good shot. Right. And that's scope and that only your only 100, your 130 yards away. Steve, you're kind of hit him. Steve, can you play the video that basically does the countdown of the people screaming at the guy that's climbing up? You're a little bit slower, so I'm going to look at it. Yeah, I think they're getting a mistake. Yeah, someone's on top of the roof. Look, there he is right there. Right there, see him? He's playing nine. Yeah, he's playing nine. See like they don't really know. Yeah. What's happening? See, there's a cop down there? Why? Because we do. We're going to make them better than people. We're going to make them bigger. Yeah, look, there he is. Yeah, because we have videos and video, but they're talking to the officer. In recorded history, the best quarter. In fact, if they showed the cop walking along the side of that building, working up at the guys. I love so much. You don't mind if I go off teleprompter, do you? This is the story. It's totally right. It's the important. The trial explains that. Oh, there's it. Wow. You guys are doing it. They get in better with time. My guys, take a look at that. Joe, take a look at the arrow on the bottom. See the big red arrow, right? That's one. That's one. That's the one. It's been a little 20 cents. I was spotted. Right. So they've sent the cop his call with climb up. He's climbing up right now. Big look at that. So that arrow is below us. Find it. Find the ladder. Immigration ever. But the ladder against the into our country. You know, and then start climbing up the ladder. Yeah. And then the worst president of the history of our country took over and look what happened to our country. Now, what's this? What's going on here? I think they're walking. That's what I look right here. Why are these guys shooting on us? People are from behind Trump. Now they have a look at the strikers. He calls it. OK. Now he just shot. So right before the bullets came, the secret service were basically like chewing people out from behind Trump. You see them like rushing people out for the first. They're got spinkings. The bullets. The bullets. Just two minutes. There was two minutes since they since. Yeah. Well, that's good. They said they said the sniper had him in his sights for three minutes. So whatever, three, two to three minutes. But keep in mind that time period there, at some point, supposedly somebody went up on the roof, a police officer or a sheriff's deputy, whatever, actually went up on the roof and the kid turned around and frightened him and he fell. I heard that from, I'm only saying that because I heard that from two different news organizations. Both of them said the same thing. Like no, they actually came up on the roof. But as soon as he did it, the kid. Steve, have you sold those little UFO things yet? No, sales are just too daunting for me. That's why we're sponsored by Shopify, man. With Shopify, it doesn't matter how small you are or what you sell. They help you sell it everywhere across the globe from their all-in-one online platform to their in-person point of sale system. Turn browsers into buyers with the internet's best converting checkout platform. At 30% better on average compared to other platforms. And so way more with considerably less effort, with Shopify magic, your AI powered All-Star. As I've mentioned before, we use Shopify for our website that we use for the podcast to sell our merch. It's easy, it's user friendly. Anyone can set it up. It takes like 10 minutes to set up to connect your domain name to it. You can set up discount codes. You can upload variants of different merch. It's just, it's unbelievably easy for anyone. There's no comparison. Shopify hands down wins. Wow, Shopify is award winning help powers 10% of all e-commerce in the US. Steve, you're gonna find it to be a breeze with Shopify. So if you guys wanna check out Shopify and help support the show, you can sign up now for a $1 per month trial at Shopify.com slash Danny Jones. That's all lowercase. Shopify.com slash d-a-n-n-y, J-o-n-e-s to grow your business no matter what stage you're at. Again, that's Shopify.com slash Danny Jones. It's linked below, not back to the show. He obviously panicked and started firing. He's like, I gotta fire now these guys are coming. They know I'm up here. This guy just fell. I gotta fire. And so he just, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. So my question is if the snipers knew that the kid was up there five minutes when they're five minutes prior to the shooting and they're radioing into their superior, telling them about it and they're saying, don't fire on them. Right, why not fire on them? For five minutes, are they not focusing on him for that entire five minutes? Are they just like chilling? I think they are. Oh no, I'm sure they've got him in his sights, right? Right, okay, so take him out of my sight. So the second he pulls the barrel of his gun up, they're seeing that, right? Right. So there was obviously quite a bit of delay to when he pulls his barrel up, looks through the scope, finds Trump and starts popping off. There was probably how long he think that would take. Ten seconds. Yeah, I was gonna say five, ten seconds. Seems like a long time. Seems like a long time. And then if you, and then go down to where Trump was, the Secret Service dog piled him pretty much immediately. Pretty quick, like two or three seconds to put them in the dog pile. Then they stood up after, I don't know how long that was, but he stood up and then the guy's like six, three. He stood up and these tower overing these guys, towering over these guys. And they're like a couple of them, one guy, the guy who looks like Andrew Schultz, he's like holding his hand above his head. Another guy's like holding his hand over here. Like, and Trump, he barges through six of them to do his fight, fight, fight. And if there are, if this is like a JFK scenario where there's multiple shooters, like a triangular hit team, Trump's fucking done. Wide open, his head was wide open. They let him stand up and like, because he said, hold on, hold on, hold on. And he got out and they didn't know if there was another shooter. Maybe they got in something in their ear, you could hear like the radio chatter. They're saying like, what do we do now? What are we saying, shoot her down? Shoot her down, show me why they stood him up and say, let's go. And they don't know, they didn't know if there was another shooter or not. So if there was another shooter, he'd be gone. But then again, Trump's too big to carry. It's like they needed help to get off the stage. It's not like they're gonna pick him up and start. Still, there's a fucking secret service. And there's like seven, six or seven of them. Right. And then there was the one secret service lady you see her behind everybody. You're like tiny ones. She was like, cowering down behind everybody, like hiding. Yeah. Well, you know, diversity higher. Yeah. I mean, first of all, if I'm six foot three, I don't think you're a student. If I'm six foot three, you don't get to be five foot two and protect me. Like I feel like that's a lot of me that's available. And these are the main parts that people shoot at. Like I'm gonna need a taller broad end. Right. You're gonna have to be at least six foot with heels. I'll take her with heels, you know, platform shoes, something. I can't get a five foot one, five foot two chicken. No. For me, yeah, that'd be fine. But no. Yeah. And it's easy. You know, like I said, you know, we're sitting here and air conditioning with our microphones talking about what they did along the way. Of course, for me, I'm not saying I know anything. I was talking to Rick Prada, who's a legendary CIA para military guy who he was a counter terrorism special forces clandestine operation special for the CIA who was in Nicaragua and Costa Rica like in the 80s during iron contra. He's been in a lot of these situations. Not like, but he wasn't a part of the secret reserve, but he actually trained with Secret Service in like the 80s and the 90s. Train with those guys. And he knows a lot of them. And he was like, his point was that like, yeah, you plan for this stuff a lot. But he goes in every single situation like this, whether it be in combat, in war, in black ops, or in a Trump rally. He goes after the first bullet flies, after the first bullet flies, you can be as prepared as humanly possible. But after that first bullet flies, your plan goes out the window. Right. So my Tyson, everybody's got a plan until they get punched in the face. Exactly. Everybody's out. Yes, exactly, man. He said everything goes out the window once the first bullet flies. I think everybody's screaming about the Secret Service Agent, too. I think that also look, they have like an action plan, right? Like they got it all laid out. They know where everybody is. They know everything. But if you've been with the Secret Service, and you're dealing with the local sheriffs, deputies, and cops, or police stations, everything like, these people don't work well together. You know, local sheriffs and police don't like the Secret Service. The Secret Service think that they're, you know, morons. And the truth is, is that when you lay it all out and you look at all, and the first one on the rallies are happening one after another after another. Can imagine how quickly they have to end they're constantly seeing different plans. And so that sniper on the roof, looking at this guy, you and I can say, you saw him, you saw him, you saw he had a rifle, you shoot a shot him, one, you don't know how long he knew he had a rifle. It may have only been for a few seconds. He's being told, stand down, we got somebody up there. We got somebody going up there. Okay. So in your mind, you're kind of thinking, they've got it handled. And the other problem is, is that during this period of time, what if he sees them and shoots him, and finds out, oh my gosh, we didn't have those buildings, we didn't have enough Secret Service snipers to have those buildings covered. And we agreed to let the local SWAT team station a guy on the roof, and that was the local SWAT team guy. He wasn't a part of our action plan. Oh my God, you just killed, you just killed a SWAT team member. He's been a police officer for 25 years. And then you're like, and then they're saying, we told you to stand down. Do you see him saying like, I get it? Yeah. I mean, I have a race screaming, you should have known you should, I get it, but you don't know everything that's happening in this guy's head. He's being told, no, no, no, no. And he may be thinking, yeah, I think I know where everybody is, but what if I don't? And I'm being told to stand down. Now look like spacey, once a kid got up and started firing, he shot him. Does it take him three seconds to make sure he's gonna shoot the right kid, get the kid? Maybe that's what took four to five or six seconds. And maybe it took him three seconds to realize, oh my God. I got a perfect shot. Actifier and another three or four seconds to get a perfect shot. And boom, takes them out. Yeah. Cause I guess if you think about it, I mean, I've never shot a sniper rifle, but I imagine like, look, if you would, you would want him to take the shot quicker. But if he took the shot quick and missed, oh yeah. Imagine the time it would take to reload it. Yeah. Then there would be way, you know, that would be way worse for sure. Listen, look, you know, it's obviously that, but there was two snipers. Yeah, possibly, did you see how they were also kind of like looking at the scope, kind of checking like what, like, he like jumped back and like grabbed him and tried pod kind of fell back? Yeah, he, they're both like, well, obviously there was a shot happening. It's like being a caught, any law enforcement. It's not a roof for four hours. It's tons of boredom with two minutes of complete gonna adrenaline, you know. How many hours has this fucking guy spent on roofs looking through a scope and nothing has happened, right? Imagine how many snipers have been there whole lives and never fire at a real person, you know. But I mean, I, I, you know, it's so easy to double to, you know, what do you call it? Something gets more than quarterback him. Yeah. Yeah. Here's what the real problem is. Why was no one on the roof to begin with? And it was so close. Like, like you couldn't put a sheriff's deputy sitting up there on a floor, you couldn't get pulled up chair? Some fact sheriff's deputy couldn't have sat up there. Well, they didn't, I mean, they, they should have, but they had a guy, they had a sheriff deputy walking around, climbing up the ladder. Yeah, but they don't have a radio. They don't have a radio. They're not on the same channel as these guys. I think they go. Squack, squawk. What's your 20? We got a kid with a AR 15 on the roof. What about the 30 clicks of the right? What about the guy that's a part of that committee that was, that was in Congress that was trying to pull his dude out of the roof? Yeah. They're trying to pull his secret, his secret service. What do you tell? What are you doing, bro? Like, you know, like, like, you know, whether you like Biden or Trump, it's like the people that, and this is tons of people on on TikTok, like I'm amazed. My, my videos will get taken now on TikTok. If I say the word gun or somebody says, if somebody says something even slightly, we're telling a story about a guy who pulled a gun or telling a story about a guy who's selling drugs, they get, you know, community violation, this and that, but you got people on there right now saying that too bad the guy missed, he should have been a better shot. It's too bad. Oh my God, he almost got rid of this, got a trumpet. And it's like the thing is when people say that at least they're consistent, right? They're calling him Hitler. And they're, they're, at least they're being honest. They're, they've been calling him Hitler this whole time. And now they're basically saying that they were, they're pissed off. He didn't die. At least they're consistent. There's also a group that's saying he's Hitler. He's Hitler. He's Hitler. Oh, my, our thoughts and prayers are with Trump. The same, here's the saying the same people that are saying that he's a threat to democracy want to take out democracy. Like this is how we're voting. This is one party. This is the other. That's democracy. You're, you're want, you want them to take out one of the two parties. Yes. Yes. Somebody say, 100. She's a threat to democracy. Let's take them out. Like are you king insane? No. How insane that sounds? Like the practice, you know, our, our country's built on, on voting. Like just vote, like figure it out. I get it. Do I think Trump should have, you know, like, you know, the, um, whatever they, oh, him denying that he lost the election. Bro, you're still election. You know what I'm saying? Like you lost. I. Like, you know what, the, um, what do I think? Oh, him denying that he lost the election. Bro, you'll see election. You know what I'm saying? Like you lost. I get it. There's, there's this. There's that there's all kinds of issues. There's some extra ballat here. These weren't counted. I understand, but in the end, it's over like quick denying quit that just say, look, I lost and we're gonna, but I'm gonna get it next time. That's fine. You know, I don't think it was fair. Whatever. I lost. You got that. But to sit here and say that I'm gonna take out the other party. Like that's just insanity. Like what kind of a person are you that I, I mean, might not like Biden, but I don't want to, the guy to die. Yeah. I don't want to take him out. The kid was a fucking 20 year old. Whose brain was not fully developed yet. And is probably on a junk load of SRI's, riddle and riddle and maybe riddle and anti depressants. Every, every school shooter in history had a laundry list of prescription, uh, prescription, uh, pharmaceutical prescriptions. What about his dad? Like his dad has anything. I don't know anything about his dad's dad's just saying like he's not, he's like, I have no idea why he would have done this. Like I don't, I didn't see any signs that this was an issue. None. That's what his father's saying. The other thing is, uh, then there were people in the, there were people in the comments who were saying because he is a registered, uh, Republican. Yeah. Yeah. Apparently that's what a lot of antifa people did. Right. And then they're saying he, um, but there's also people saying, yeah, he voted and he voted for Trump. Last time, well, he couldn't have voted for Trump. He would have been 70 years old. Yeah, he would have been 16 years old. But you see him saying like it makes those sense people make these rash, they say these things immediately. And then I had another guy, I watched another couple that there's a couple of these where they're like, he's a registered Republican. He voted for Trump the first time, but he's so, he's bit, he's now been so disenfranchised with all of Trump's lies. He decided to do the right thing and get rid of Trump. It's like, he didn't vote for Trump. Right. You know, like everything you're saying is ridiculous. Like you're just making up stuff. So anyway, well, what are, what are those are the conspiracies that I've heard? What, what, what is your, what are your, have you heard anything? What are your thoughts? The one that I heard today from a friend of mine who is, I won't say his name, but he was in the CIA. And he's not, I don't think he wanted this to be public, but this was just what he told me in privacy, in confidence over the phone. And I haven't heard this anywhere else is he believes that this guy was not acting alone. He believes that he was coerced into doing this. And so I've heard it into doing this by an intelligence agency. That'd be the crazy, not the CIA. Right. Well, that'd be the Patsy thing, right? He thinks that this guy was coerced by a foreign intelligence agency of another country. Sorry. Yeah. I had not heard that. Okay. No, neither had I until this morning when I talked to my buddy now. And he said that the one intelligence agency who is the best at doing this kind of shit, taking un mentally unstable people like this and getting them to commit. Who terrorist crimes, Mossad Iran? Oh, no, not Mossad. Mossad just gave Trump like $200 million. I don't know. I threw one out there. I'm there. Massada. The one that's protecting this guy. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, they level level Trump. Oh, yeah. What did he do? He moved the, um, what do you do? He was saying they did. He just moved the embassy. The embassy where did Jerusalem? Yeah, he's the knowledge. Oh, yeah. The capital or whatever state. But this guy said the IRGC is the best at pulling off operations like this. Well, I mean, he failed. He wasn't a great shooter. But this is very, you can't account for the flannel of what they would do. Yeah. You can't account for the guy climbing up on the, you know, ladder and saying, excuse me, what are you doing? Yeah. You couldn't account for that. Yeah. So if it was a foreign intelligence agency, how did they just get lucky that the secret service was so incompetent? I wonder what, what how much bomb material he had like that, I wonder because like, okay, let's say he, he got out there and he said, okay, I can't get on the roof. Like there's no way. There's too many cops. I'm never going to be able to do it. The guy, oh, that was his backup. Right. Then he then what was his, was his backup plan? I'm going to go get my car when Trump leaves. I'm going to, I'm going to shoot right up next to him. And I'm going to pull this lever and boom, my car will blow up and I'll take him out too. Like it was that, or I don't, I just don't understand how much material he had in the car. Like they haven't said that. They just said it was bomb making material. They had to get the bomb squad. It was bomb making material. Whatever. I just don't know how much was his car nearby. I don't know. There was another thing where they were saying to about the secret service. Like how did he get his vehicle clocked this close to, you know, to the rally. So in my opinion, they're alluding to the fact that it had gotten through security that it would must have been close for them to be blaming the secret service. Like how did they not catch this? Well, they didn't catch it. It was a mile and a half away. Like they never saw the car. That's one thing. But the, the, the stuff that I'm reading makes it sound like it went through security somehow. Well, I mean, you know, maybe having the trunk, the guard sniffing dogs didn't get it. Who knows. So I don't really know where it was. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, if you look at who has motive to want Trump gone, I mean, just look at the last couple of years. I mean, why would I ran want him gone? Like Biden's the one who's bombing Iran like, yeah. Well, well, Iran, obviously they don't have a good relationship with Israel, Saudi Arabian, Israel are kind of aligned against Iran. Iran doesn't like the three, the three headed dragon that is our and the three countries that are our biggest enemies are China, Russia and Iran. Okay. So it would probably be one of the one of those three right if it was. Those are our biggest enemies in the world. North Korea is the totally. North Korea is more like a fucking just like a nuisance to us. How do you get to a, how do you get to a 20 year old? How do you turn a 20 year old? I don't know. You see, I'm like, I'm assuming that's going to take some time. His father's going to miss him for the, the 30 days it's going to take to brain to to break this kid down brainwash and reprogram and stick back. That's what Alex Jones is saying. This has got MK Ultra written all over it. Like he was fucking brainwashed. I mean, his dad, it's not like you would think when that when the authorities showed up, he would say like, Hey, what's gone for 90 days? Just got back a week ago and said, Hey, dad, I'm going to a rally. Yeah. Yeah. Or he has he got back. He was gone for 90 days, showed up and said, Dad, can you order this rifle for me? Yeah. Well, that's the thing like who have where, who has motive, right? To take out Trump. Well, I mean, look at the fucking United States, they can, they went after Trump. He beat the impeachment. He beat Russia. Gade, he beat the civil cases. He beat the 34 bogus felonies. He did what, you know, he didn't be that he got he, well, he got he found he found guilty the fact the felonies, but it it put him in a higher regard to the American public because we everyone saw through the notion. So what it did do is you're right. What it did do is it didn't destroy his credibility, which is what they were hoping for. Right. Like if we, if we indict him and we try him and we convict him, it will destroy his credibility, not realizing that absolutely didn't harm him at all. It actually made him more popular. Yes, because exactly the whole show trial, the whole show trial basically showed I was like the Streisand effect kind of what's going to be a more interesting is that when the state of New York appellate court overturns, like if they actually, if it actually gets overturned by the appellate court, then it's just one more slap in the face. Like, Hey, you tried me. You had a little, you had a little banana was a banana Republic, um, kangaroo court put together. Yeah. And you guys found me guilty, but they went and got to the appellate court. They overturned it. And guess what? I'm not a felon now. So you guys had a good time calling me a felon and now I'm not a felon. And then the document case was just thrown out throughout the conduct of the today. That's by document case today. Yeah. So that was thrown out. Why did they do that? Well, you know, I, how crazy is that? I think it was suspended for a while because there were so many things that the, can you find an article on that, Steve? The classified document case being dropped. There were all of these kind of things that the FBI that had done, they had withheld evidence, they had staged, um, photographs, like there was all these things that made it look very staged. And as a result, they, the, the judge had kind of like put it suspended it for a while. Like we're going to suspend it for a while. And then he finally just said, you know what? I'm throwing it all out. Trump's classified document case dismissal by judge Aileen Cannon. So can you find out why they did it or if there's like, if you can like find like skim through it or find an article that explains why they did it. It said ruling on that one. So I think, oh, oh, I think I read it earlier, but I believe it was because something about the prosecutor, by the way, you see the Alex Baldwin thing about his case, oh, that hate, they dropped the charges. They dropped the charges. Yeah, because they withheld evidence about the bullets. No, what can you say in judge dismisses classified document case against Trump. Uh, but we'll rule that the entire case should be thrown out because of the appointment of the special counsel who brought the case, Jack Smith, had violated the constitution. He indicated the plan. He indicated, indicated he planned to appeal. So he's going to appeal. Okay. Well, that's not going to do anything. Right. So yeah, it's just crazy that this happens two days after the fucking trying to kill him. Like they're giving him a straight shot. I mean, he has a straight shot. He is the he's essentially the president-elect right now. So it's just one can he survive to January 20th. That's the thing. Right. Like I talked to this guy and a guy I interviewed actually for something else, but he, um, we were texting back and forth and he was like, you know, everybody thinks like because I was like, oh, he's, he's walking straight in the office now. And he's like, yeah, but you have to understand. He's like, that's, you're assuming he survives. Right. He is this still, this guy's got a lot of, of highly publicized events between now and then where he could be taken out. Like if it was, if they were smart, they'd retreat and say, okay, we fucked up. We'll try again. You know, in four years, we'll get another, another guy in. We'll get somebody in. Yeah. But or they say, hey, let's double down. We'll just take him out at all means possible and try and bury the evidence and get away with it. So I was watching Alex Jones, that Alex Jones video is all day. Oh my God. And he's saying that they're going to go for broke now. That's, that's from playing. He's saying they're lean all in. They are going to go all in balls to the wall. They're going to kill this motherfucker. And he also said that after the, after he wins the election, he said, don't be surprised if you're going to see a lot of false flag events happening. Like he claims they're going to run truck bombs into like black churches and stuff and try to incite some sort of a race war and blame it on Trump supporters. But like trying to target minority communities and use those as false flags to insight some sort of a crazy civil race war. And then you know, Julian can set it best on his little live stream heated yesterday. He said that if that bullet would a hit Trump, he said it wouldn't be a civil war. He's like civil wars. That's cute. You think it's going to be a civil war. He goes, that's going to be like the bullet that took out France Ferdinand started World War One. Right. He's going to be World War, King three if that would have killed Trump. You wouldn't be able to go outside, dude. You still haven't seen civil war. I haven't seen it. I got it. Did you ever watch the video where the kid goes over? What, how a civil war would play out today? Oh, how much the whole thing wasn't it? Oh, okay. I was just, I need to watch that. But I, you told me about this. Yeah, he breaks it down so good. He's so like, like, he's, he could care less like it's like he's just matter of factly. Like here's this, here's that, here's how many here's how many national guard troops are in this state. Here's how many, you know, here's how many, you know, he just breaks it all down very clearly. Like this is why they end up winning. Here's why who wins? Who is who ends up saying that the South winds because basically what he does is he is not even against necessarily, he assumes if you were to break up the states exactly the way it was split during the civil war, right? The Confederacy and the Union. And he took the same states. He said, well, the states are much different now. There's a massive different now because now there's infrastructure. There's all kinds of things. And you have all these state, these national guards units, right? He was so you assume that the national guards units go with the states. So now Florida has how many different, you know, I'm saying so basically if you break it the military apart that way, you're on pretty equal footing. The real problem is, is that he's like, look, you don't have to invade California. You know, what you do is you just cut them off from their water source, which is coming from out of state and electrical, which is coming from out of state. Like he just also food, they don't make enough food to feed themselves. I mean, yeah, they have, they have, um, yam, yams and, you know, almonds and stuff like that. But that's not enough to feed you like they've got a bunch of foods that they do produce, but not enough to feed their entire population. So he's like, and then in their states, there's only like three in their states that basically go that way. He's like, you just cut those off. It's not hard to stop them from feeding themselves. Right. The, the Confederate States, confeed themselves. So he breaks up same thing with power line. Say that he basically is like, you just, you don't even have to attack. You just starve them out. And he was like, so if you take that plus battles, if the battles are fought and you base it on the numbers, he starts doing the numbers too. Listen, you, he lays it all out and in the end. Look, and there it can't, doesn't win an approach attracted battle. They just don't win. Yeah. If it, if there was a civil war, I don't think it would be like a Democrat versus public and type thing. Right. Well, I mean, he, he's making it, basing it off of what if the civil war was fought today. That's what it is. But if it was a civil war fought today, who would be the two fighting parties? It would be, it would be obviously like Republican, right wing Trump or even libertarians, Trump types, which is comical, by the way. One other thing that was comical because during the civil war, the South was the Democrats, the North were the Republicans. Yeah. So that's comical because it's actually Lincoln was, right. Lincoln was a Republican. Right. So now it's like Florida is Republican. Texas is Republican. Yeah. You start adding a lot. It's swapped during Kennedy. Yeah. Kennedy was the one who changed that. So, so, so, yeah, what, so Kennedy when he was running, he, um, John, I think John, John, Jim and explain this beautifully to us. What happened during the Kennedy election was his campaign ran an operation to basically market themselves in black churches all around the country. And they got, they, they recruited like a preacher to go around and basically give these pamphlets and these flyers out to all the people in the black churches to try to win over the black vote. He was also, I think he, I think he was talking, I don't know if Kennedy actually met with MLK, but his brother did. Right. And, um, and this was like a last minute thing and it swung into black vote like crazy. Well, Martin Luther King was a Republican. So they went after the, the, yeah, you can look it up. Um, yeah. Um, it was, there was a word, there was a word for it that he used. I forget what he called it was like, he was like, um, you can probably find a Steve. I forget there was a great word for it because up until, um, Lynn, Kennedy, Linda, me, Johnson, right up until that error, um, the Republicans were the ones who were pushing through all the legislation for blacks. Right. So up until that point and they just, they flip, locked it. Yep. They said, you know what? This is not going well for us. Right. It's obviously it's going to happen. So we need to take on this agenda. We need to make this agenda, take it away from the Republicans and make it a democratic agenda. And they did. They very successfully over the next several presidencies that did that, you know, which is super successful. We were talking about before we talked about JFK. We were talking about the, if a civil war were fought today, yeah, yeah. Yeah. But before that, we were talking about, oh, you were talking about, okay, yeah, you were talking about during the civil war, you were saying the South were the, were the Democrats. Yeah. Yeah. They were the slave owners. They were, that was the Ku Klux Klan. Yeah. The, the, the, um, all the, the cotton, um, farmers, the whole whole thing was all Democrats. Listen, Democrats didn't like the emancipation, pro, pro, pro, uh, proclamation, Democrats didn't vote for that. That was all Republican. Like all of these things were Republican, um, agendas. But then yeah, you're right. Kennedy, you know, good looking guy goes in there. Or you're like, like you said, black churches, get you a bunch of reverence, starts put, starts pitching to them, civil rights, and takes that away from the Republican party, like brilliant, bro. You have to admit that's brilliant. Like this is there. This is one of their winning. This is one of their winning campaigns. Let's take that from them. Let's make it ours and make them the bad guys. Yeah. You know, um, I think it was after the civil war. There was the Mexican revolution. I think it was like in 1910, I believe. You know, and Mexico used to basically contain all of Texas and most of all of New Mexico and lots of Southern California. Mexico was massive. It ate up a lot of the United States. Like current United States. And then after the the Mexican revolution, they did a deal. When was the Mexican revolution? Can you find that true? When was 10? I said 1910. When you said 19, yeah, I'm sorry. Do you find out when the Mexican revolution was? And then find out like show like the map of Mexico before the Mexican revolution. And, um, yeah, 1910. Got it. Look at that, bro. Man had no idea. I wouldn't have even said it was it. No, I would have. And then show us a map of Mexico before the Mexican revolution. And so after we got Texas, right, it was so big and obviously Texas like like the whole area of Texas was slave owners, right? And they wanted to divide. Look at that, bro. That's not it. Is that it? I mean, you can't really tell if you can't see like the whole map of the US. Anyway, so, um, they wanted to cut Texas up into a bunch of states. So they would have more voting power for slavery. And they were like, no, no, no, no, no, no, that that's why Texas is so big. They had to make it one big state so they didn't get more voting power of like more states. Right. So, okay. So you only get a few senators. Right. Exactly. So, but I was all about like control of slavery. Did you ever see, um, in the line back to the South, uh, assassinations? Did you ever see, uh, in the line of fire? No, with Clint Eastwood? No. And, um, so it, what, what a great movie. I mean, what a great Clint Eastwood movie to it. He's probably in his 60s when this, when he, when he, uh, did this movie. He plays a secret service agent that was a part of JFK's detail when, when, uh, he gets shot. And so it's like literally, it's like 30, 40 years later. And he's still a secret like longest. He was a youngest secret service agent that I'm longest running secret service agent. And what happens is they end up going into an apartment where the land lady comes into the apartment. There's something smoking, whatever. She accidentally enters the apartment and finds this wall filled with photographs of the current president and bull's eyes on his head and pick, um, all these different, um, schematics of different rallies. He's been at shooting points. You know, that sort of thing like, oh my gosh, like, this is somebody's planning on killing the president. He goes there to check it out because she calls the secret service. A couple days later, they come. They check it out. Clint Eastwood's character is the main guy. Well, while he's there, the shooter, thi, or sees him. Mm hmm. So the shooter sees him and realizes who he is and starts communicating with him. Um, and so they know that, uh, they know that this assassin is planning on killing the president. Mm hmm. And it shows how he ends up getting himself to a position to kill the president. And your John F Kennedy said, like, anybody killed the president as long as they're willing to, to trade places. Those, uh, longs, they're willing to forfeit their life. Right. Right. And this really, if you watch this movie, let me tell you something, bro. The way the guy gets close, like he basically, granted, there's money involved. So what he does is he, no, I don't know if it's Republican, the president is Republican or Democrat. Let's say he's a Republican. So what happens is he ends up, oh, it's John Malkovich, right? Like he's the, he's the shooter. So he starts donating. So he's got a fake name fake driver's license, fake everything. His companies fake. It's got a history, everything. And he's continually donating to the party. And so eventually the Republican party, you know, whatever the net chairman or whoever is involved with the chapter that he's, you know, friendly with, eventually he says, hey, there's, there's a rally coming up or a dinner, you know, a $10,000 plate dinner, you know, they have a they'll pay, you pay $10,000. There's 500 people. They raise $5 million and you get a picture with the president. So you're going to be next to the president at some point. So he gets himself invited to this dinner. And he's built himself a composite gun. Just like he makes a Dillinger, a very root rudimentary Dillinger, right? With two bullets. And so it's two bullets. He puts it, he has a fake stomach. And he now this is obviously before like the really good X-ray machine that swoop around you and can really check you out, builds this gun right here. Wow. And he puts it in the fake stomach. And the bullets he has in a, um, a rabbit's foot. So when he goes through the metal detector, he puts it in the little tray chain, you know, his keys, it'll rabbit's foot with the tees. A plastic gun. No, no, not the plastic gun. The guns in his belly, but that can go through the metal detector. Right. Because it's composite with no bullets in the right, the bullets are in the rabbit's foot, which he throws in the tray. You know, how, it used to be you would throw all your, your keys in the tray. Mm-hmm. So the rabbit foot has the bullets in it. Right. Throws him in the tray, walks through. They pat him down. No problem. He goes to sit next to, you know, close to the president under the table. He puts the, the bullets in, puts the gun together. And then as the president comes along and shaking people's hands, you get a picture taken with them, he's right next to the fucking guy with a, with a gun that has two bullets in it. Bam. And then he can shoot himself. I'm not going to ruin the, I mean, I'll ruin the movie. If it's been 30 years, 20 years, nobody's going to see it. You know, obviously, Clint Eastwood at the last minute runs and jumps in front of the president. It takes the fucking bullet. You know, the guy shoots somebody else and gets on the elevator with plenty's wooden. There's a whole thing. Save his president. But the point is, if you watch it, you're like, man, that seems like it'd work. Like how hard is it? Listen, I got a buddy, Donovan Davis, the guy from the gap. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Donovan's got pictures with George Bush. I had my old, I, Rudy Arnott's, which is a guy was one of my business partners. He has photos of him with where he paid $10,000. I think he paid like $5,000 to be to go to a fund raiser for, for Bush. He's got photos of him with Bush. Wow. You know, so it's not that difficult. Yeah. Now granted, there's money involved. This guy probably donated 50 to $100,000 to get, and this is 30 years ago, maybe it's a couple hundred thousand to get yourself in the same room. But it's not, it's not that if you're willing to realize like, Hey, once I fire this, like I'm dead, they're either going to kill me or I see the rest of my life in prison. You know, most people just not willing to do that. They're just not no matter how politically polarized they are. They're just like, look, I just don't want to cry. Right. Right. There's not people crazy enough. Right. Like this kid, this, this kid that just did this the other day, I mean, he was clearly out of his fucking mind. But crazy enough, there's a problem is if you are crazy enough, you're usually not competent enough. That's what just happened to be crazy and competent. Yeah. How competent though? I mean, he knew how to shoot a gun, but he didn't really know how to shoot a gun. He wasn't good. Listen, if that cop hadn't been up there, if that had gone down a little bit different, he may have killed, actually, I think that's sniper probably would have killed them. But that could have gone, he fired eight shots there going right by Trump. Right. Right. That one hit him. I'm thinking that's maybe not 100% competent. It's pretty close. Yeah. More competent than I was. I was to be pretty fucking close. You know, I've been thinking the biggest, the biggest fucking thing that I can't get over here is like every, but I would say what percentage of me, I mean, there's what percentage of people think that this guy was alone, not versus this was the CIA. I feel like that's the two main camps that that areas of belief here with this whole situation. I think a majority of them believe that it was the CIA or the deep state trying to take out Trump, because there's so much stuff that's happened in the last few years with the show trial in New York with 34 felonies. Now this, the Russia gate, all the stuff that the United States apparatus, whoever's running this thing in the shadows is the one I believe that has the most motive. Whether that's this is true or not. I don't know, but it seems like that's what the consensus is of most people on the internet that I've seen. What's really like, what it Trump do last time that was so bad? He had four years. If he was going to do something insane, he would have done it. Right. Plus, if there's checks and balances, a president doesn't have that much power. Did John F Kennedy say a month before he was killed? He said he was going to remove 100,000 troops out of Vietnam every month for four months. Right. So 400,000 troops out of Vietnam. That was a military coup. The joint she's just staffed and not want that to happen. They had a crazy nuclear war plan to new China and Russia. Kennedy and his brother wanted nothing to do with it. And he said, you guys, I'm pulling out all the troops a month later. He's dead. What did Trump say? Trump said, I'm going to stop the funding to Ukraine for this war against Russia. And I'm going to end this war. Right. Then they fucking dead. Then I'll fucking bullet flies and half into a from his fucking temple. I mean, it's really you got to have there's got to be, I mean, any pull. So that poor guy in the crime. Everybody forget about that guy. I know the poor fucking guy. That's just a firefighter. No less. Yeah. His daughter was there. His wife was there. And there's still people that want to say that it was fake. Like, yeah, get the fuck out of here. So this is my my biggest problem with this is like, it makes sense until the bullet misses him because if it really was the CIA, Trump would be dead. Yeah. Well, it may be just a flu. What turned his head would have back up playing. They would have had multiple shooters. You would, I mean, I'm sure I really find it hard to believe that if it was the military or a US agency that they would have missed. Well, keep in mind too, maybe the first thing is let's sit in this kid, maybe he's competent enough to pull it off. Maybe the second one is okay, he's not going to human. Right. Yeah. He wasn't competent enough, but don't worry. There's some more rallies coming up. Yeah. Or yeah. You know what I'm saying? Like, hey, don't worry. He'll be out in the open again. We'll get him next time. Right. We have to, you know, clearly, like what we need is some shorter secret service agents. Can we get five foot one? God damn. Email agents. Jesus Christ, dude. The fact that he has the God balls to keep doing this stuff. I know. He went golfing the next fucking I know. Did you see that? Yeah. He did. Like there was a report from the car boy who's like, yeah, yeah. He goes, I watched him do a 20 foot putt with a two foot break. He sunk the goddamn putt and said the difference between me and that shooter is I don't miss. What a savage dude. I mean, Jesus Christ, you can't, you can't make this shit up. You can't make this shit up. You can't write. You can't write a better script, dude. And then with what he's to, I mean, he, he showed so much Confearlessness and defiance when he was going to be like fight fight fight. I mean, anybody else is like giving the car up, giving out of here. It's going out of here. Yeah. Right. For sure. Right. For sure. He is like nah. It is. It is over unless they fucking find a way to kill him and I really hope they don't. I really can hope they don't because it's going to be utter chaos. And I hope you have a passport to another fucking country. If that happens, the insanity that we're having this conversation, I'm the country that I grew up in. Like this is insane. I don't remember people getting shot. Reagan got shot. But this was a low nut job, you know. Like he was also five feet away from his car. Yeah. This was like, and you never saw him after that bullet went off. They, they dog piled him and you never saw him after that. And you taught and they talked to, you know, that the thing is he was left a lot. I feed away from his car. Yeah, this was like, and you never saw him after that bullet went off. They, they dog piled him. You never saw him after that. And you talked, and they talked to, you know, the thing is, he was left alive in and you knew right away what the issue was. He was in fact, way with Jodie Foster. He'd actually gone to other to rallies. It just happened to realize, Oh, what Reagan's going to be here. Oh, I'll go. Maybe I'll get a shot at him and took a shot. But, but there's, there's never been any, you know, XK Ultra. What was it called? MK Ultra. You know, nobody's ever said anything, but this was just a lone nut job. Anyways, this guy, Danny, she ends a lawyer. He, he, he worked on the Watergate case and he worked on the Pentagon Papers case. He worked on Iran Contra case. Guy goes back, right? He's been in like all the most famous cases in the United States. And he was explaining to me the whole backstory of how Kennedy got killed. It's fucking wild. He was saying that when Nixon was running for president, he was running against Roosevelt and Roosevelt dropped out and then Nixon thought he had a straight shot to win the presidency, right? No, he never thought, he never thought for a second the Kennedy was going to beat him. And he was winning in the poll. Kennedy was losing in the polls right. So they did the, until they did the thing with the blacks. Yeah. No, no, I was going to, I was saying that the, um, they did the debate. And Nixon did, because Nixon's was sweating. He looked so, but he did so badly in the debate. Oh, that was it. Yeah. Well, he starts sweating. Like, he's, he keeps having to wipe it. Then Kennedy, even though he maybe just held his own. Yeah. But, but Nixon looked so bad. He's wiping his head. He's because it was super hot. But he's also nervous. Right. Kennedy's exasperated. Yeah. Kennedy's a good looking young guy, well, spoken. Like, you know, you know what Nixon looked like. He looks like a terror. Yep. I mean, and they go through the bait and Kennedy just came off much, much more smooth. Right. So Nixon was the headed this, this thing called the 5412 committee, which was part of the national intelligence. And it was basically he was like a part of this committee, the 5412 committee that was part of COVID for the CIA. And after Roosevelt dropped or not Roosevelt, after Rockefeller dropped out, everyone thought Nixon was going to be the next president. Okay. So Nixon wanted Castro whacked. For some reason, he thought that if he could set up an assassination on Castro to line up with his presidency, it would be great. So what he did was he contacted Howard Hughes, the airplane guy. I know. Yeah. Who can write? Yeah. Yeah. And Howard Hughes had this huge connection to intelligence. I mean, he was part of like recovering the glowmar explorer, the Russian submarine, all this crazy. The YouTube spy plane. Yeah. Yeah. He did a ton of patents. Yes. So Howard Hughes went to these two mob guys who ever get their names, who were in Vegas. And they were like, he powered Hughes thought he would get these mob guys to take out Castro or set up a team to kill Castro. The mob guys that go to Chicago meet with the other head, forget the other mob guys in Chicago, they're meeting and they're saying, well, this is Santo Trofaconte territory, Cuba, right? Santo Trofaconte. I think at that time he was in Tampa, but he was like the boss of like that area. And they meet with Santo's Trofaconte in the Fountain Blue Hotel in Miami. And Santo Trofaconte is like, well, you know, I got to make sure that this is really in order to live like they're like the president Nixon who's about to be the president is wants this done. Can you get this done for us? He's like, well, if you can prove that he really, you know, right, made this order. And this is not you guys just doing this. So they got a guy for a CIA employee to come down represented Nixon to give Trofaconte the green light. So Trofaconte recruits these guys from this CIA operation, Operation 40, who were these anti-Caster Cubans who were conducting sabotage inside Cuba when Castro and Che and Raoul were down there, you know, doing their thing. And these Operation 40 guys, they picked a few of them. I think it was 10 or 15 of them. And they brought them to this ranch called Wuhakah Ranch. And they were and another ranch that was in South Florida like near the Everglades. And they were training these guys in what were called triangular fire teams. So they would set up in a triangular formation of three shooters to take out a moving target. And this was all in plans to kill Castro. After training these guys, they obviously they went there, you know, you know, the stories they went down to Cuba to try to assassinate Castro. They went twice. It was a failed attempt both times to kill Castro. And then later on, it was the same Cubans. So those Cubans were the ones that they tried to use to kill Kennedy. So when Kennedy, when they wanted to assassinate Kennedy, they figured out, they found out like the best shooters that we know that hated Kennedy because of all the shit that Kennedy did after the Bay of Pigs and all that stuff were these anti-Caster Cubans. They were great shooters. They knew they could cover it up and they can hate Kennedy. So he was saying those were the guys who actually pulled the trigger in Dilly Plaza that killed Kennedy. Later on, there's Watergate. The guys that were caught in Watergate was Bernard Barker was one of them. He was one of the anti-Caster Cubans. Now the way they were funding these guys at this branch, this Wuhakar-Ranchon Mexico during the triangular fire team training was through a bank called the Banko Internationale. And this bank is complicated, but they were skimming money off the mob. Cacinos sending it to Meyer Lansky's bank in Miami. And they were wired from Meyer Lansky's bank to the bank, Bank International in Mexico, to pay the CIA mercenaries to train them how to kill Castro, which were eventually the same guys they used to kill the president. So fast forward to Watergate, one of the guys that was in the hotel that got caught had a bank note in his pocket, had a bill, right? They traced the bill back to that same bank. Now there was an FBI guy who was trying to investigate that dollar, that bank note, find out where it came from. Somehow the guy in Nixon's staff in the White House finds out about this investigation, calls up Richard Helms in the CIA and another guy in the FBI says, you need to meet with this guy. Mark, Mark Fent, or Mark something, I forget his name. They said, you need to stop this FBI investigation into that bank account. Because if you find out what was going on with those Cubans and why we were training them down in Mexico, you're going to peel off a scab and you're going to unleash a genie that we can't put back in the bottle because they knew if they investigated that bank, they would find out that those were the guys that they used to kill Kennedy. And Nixon knew if they found out that those Cubans were the ones that did kill Kennedy, they would be able to trace those Cubans back to Nixon and they would think Nixon was the one who tried to kill Kennedy, which he wasn't. He would use those guys to kill Castro. So he stepped down to stop the investigation. So no, there was a whole other thing with the investigation. There was, I forget the guy's name, the other FBI guy, there was a bunch of shit involved with Watergate. But basically the idea behind Watergate, the reason that this is what Danny Sheen says, the reason for Watergate was they, he wanted those guys to break in because they were going, all of Howard Hughes, who was Nixon's biggest financial backer, biggest lobbyists for Nixon, all of his, if they found out all of his stuff that was in that hotel, they would find out about the shooters. So they didn't, Nixon didn't want any connection to him hiring those assassins to kill Castro because they found out about that, they would find out that the same guys killed Kennedy and they would make the connection from Nixon to Kennedy. Yeah, I understand. They would, they would assume that, which it wasn't true, but that was the reason for Watergate, according to Danny Sheen, can crazy complicated, right? But it's, it's an insane story. Okay. I mean, I thought Watergate, they were just breaking into the democratic parties headquarters just to try and plant bugs. Yeah, that's the story, right? But according to Danny, it was way, way deeper than that. It was because they didn't want to find out about who really killed the president. And Danny claims that there's still Cubans that are alive today, anti-Castro guys who were part of the CIA, Operation 40 who actually were responsible for killing Kennedy. So what happened with Nixon anyway? First, he ran against, he ran against, John F. Kennedy lost, then Kennedy got killed and LBJ, to help me, Jay, step in, then LBJ was he reelected? And I don't think so. Or did he lose against did he lose against? Because then, because then Nixon runs again and wins and wins. That's right. That's where Watergate happens. Then he have a once he once he won. Yeah. Yeah. Because he was about to start running again. So he's going to, he wants some inside information on I thought that's what that's the historic version. Right. There's one inside information. Yeah. There's a lot of different theories on on Watergate, but this was like the wildest one that I've ever heard. And Danny Sheen was a part of that whole investigation. So he would know, he, Danny actually can interview that mob guy, Trafaconte, in Miami. And Trafaconte told him that this is what happened. That's why those guys were breaking in. Right. Next. Straight from the fucking horse's mouth. That doesn't get any crazy dude. Another thing about Trump is ever since that debate with Biden, I mean, that was a fucking brutal moment too. That was like, I think that was the moment after the in that debate where he goes, I don't know what he just said. I don't think he knows either. That that was like, okay, this is done. Not for that. He was actually way more reserved than I thought he was that's what I'm saying. He was just like super reserved, super magnanimous. Yeah. Since that election, right? He hasn't been typical Trump. I think during his first during the first, you know, presidential run or whatever you want to call it, I think he learned a lot. Like I think he, you know what I'm saying? I think he learned like like there's, you just can't say some stuff. You know what I'm saying? You know, not that he's learned a ton, but he's definitely, he's tapered back the rhetoric, not a huge amount. But let's say 20% 30% like he could have really been brutal to Biden, but he wasn't, but he doesn't have to be anymore. Like they like he's like, let's listen, I remember one time he doesn't. One time I was evicting this guy and he was a, he was a former Vietnam vet. We had bought a bunch of, we bought like 20 my wife at the time. We bought like 20 units. And so there's this guy who's literally got a water hose hooked up. And then when we were trying to show the apartments, he's hosing people down. And when the other tenants would come around, he'd hose them down. Like he was just, he was just a huge nuisance, right? And he was crazy. And so we just started evicting him. Now he's pay his rent. His rent was nothing either. We wanted to raise the rent by a two or 300 bucks. He'd been in there. He'd just been or paid in the ass. So when we finally get to it, and he did everything to stop it, he hired an attorney, they tried, we went to mediation and every, you know, he just ballooned a tech. Keep going. He was a lunatic. Well, what ends up happening is he, um, he ends up when we finally get to court because the problem was he's paying his rent into the court. You're saying like, what a pain in the ass is going to be. Right. Right. Cause we're not, we're not evicting him for, we're not evicting him because he's, um, not paying. He's paying. That's the worst of it. He is paying, but he's such a nuisance. We want him gone. Right. He doesn't have a lease anymore. His lease is expired. He just wouldn't leave, but he keeps paying. So anyway, we're trying, we're trying to evict him. We end up getting into court. And when we got into court, the judge comes up and he's like, okay, listen, there's this, they, they filed the three day notice. They filed the, you know, the, the 10 day notice they did this. They did this. You've been served like, well, what is going on here? You can let's say to the guy's names like Mr. Johnson. Mr. Johnson, you know what? He says, okay, what's going on? He looks at me and he goes, Mr. Cox, he said, he said, what's going on here? Like, I'm gonna let you talk first. And I went, you know, you're on her. I said, I think you'll have a better understanding if you let Mr. Johnson explain. He's like, okay, like he's like, whatever. Jack asks, like, he's like, all right, Mr. Mr. Johnson, why don't you go ahead and explain? And he's like, you're on her. I'm a Vietnam vet. And these criminals, they're all over the place. And I have to, I use my hose so that I don't shoot them. And, and, and, and they're everywhere. And he just starts, he rants and raves for like, five. And as he's doing it, the judge is staring at him. And at some point, he looks over at me and I go, like that. And the judge goes, okay, Mr. Johnson, I think I understand what's going on here. He said, I'm, and then he, he turned out, say, Lauren for Kiriaka. Oh, and then he got five minutes. And then he goes, he ends up the judge goes, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to allow the, you know, blah, blah, blah, you've got 10 days to vacate or you'll be, you'll be, you know, remove blah, blah. And it was over. That was it. It's over. Guys still screaming when the judge fucking calls ass. He walks out like they have like a side door, judge like bolts out the side door. The guy's still screaming. We just walk away. But it's like, that's kind of like how I felt Trump was. Yeah. And the thing he's like, I don't even have to say anything. Go ahead and you answer this question. Like the more you answer these questions, Biden, though, the more people understand, you can't let this continue. I mean, even, not even just during the debate though, but like, even after the fucking assassination attempt, like he wasn't on Twitter talking all this shit, like, he was all in the fucking radical. You know, he hasn't been as divisive as he was when he was first president. Right. He's been very, very reserved. And even like his statement afterwards, like saying, like giving condolences for the people that were killed and all this stuff. Like it's interesting. And like when he talks on Thursday, it's going to be interesting because there's reports that he rewrote his script for his speech, right? Right. So I'm wondering if he's going to take the opportunity to come out and unite the country and not be typical throw overwhelmingly polarized. There's nothing he can say. People don't want, they don't, they just don't want to believe they don't. Has he won over some more people? Probably, you know, I mean, but the people that are dug in, they're, they're, they're lunatics. Like the people that are, they're just not, there's no reasoning with them. He's a racist. He does it for this. He calls for that like win. Show me the film. When did he say this? When he say that he doesn't need the polarizing decisive, decisive, a divisive messaging anymore, though, he doesn't need that. It's done. He's already won. My point is can what I'm saying is that those people that have already decided to vote for Biden, they're voting for him no matter what Trump says. Right. It doesn't matter for sure. If Trump, if Biden came out and started saying just horrific things, they wouldn't change their vote. No, nothing would change it. No. So there's nothing for him to do. The piece got his base. It's more than 50% it's, it's going to be a landslide in the electoral vote. And he's like, I've got it. I just have to not say anything overwhelmingly stupid at this point, which I'm sure his handlers, that's an issue. You know, he's always going to say, trying to say something crazy. So they're probably just stick with what teleprompter says. That's it. So all you have to do, you walk into the, into the White House. What do you think he's going to do to get rid of the, the, the Ukraine situation? What do I think he's going to do? Because I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't want to try and knit that in the box. I mean, I hope he does. I hope, I mean, I look, I don't know shit about fuck about how that works or like who's in charge of the Ukraine war. I know it goes deep into like the EU is involved with this. And the globalists, as Alex would say. And there's a lot of other countries that are really invested in this war. I don't know how he would pull out of that. I just, I think it might be somewhat easy. Um, but there's a lot of, there's a lot of pieces on that chess board to move to make that happen. But um, just the threat of just him saying he's going to do it has people freaking the fuck out. I mean, let's think that's all you have to do is freak poop now. You just have to get poo and to say, okay, oh, you've just kind of going there and say, look, you keep what you already have. That's it. Which is just you got it. That's it. And then or we're going to send in US troops. Yeah. I mean, just to put you out diplomacy, man, it's just like, I think he, I mean, that's the one thing that he did when one of the good things that he did. John, what's up, man? Thanks for coming on and talking to us on this on this little, we're doing this little podcast just trying to like uh, react to what's been going on with the whole Trump thing and how it happened. I know you have your show that you do every day and you guys have been covering this. Uh, what is your view on what happened on, I think it was Saturday with Trump and everything that's coming out. What is your view on everything? I think the, I think the easiest explanation is probably the best explanation of this early stage. And that is that this was a colossal historic screw up on the part of the US Secret Service. You know, let me add a little detail to I grew up walking distance from this, uh, this location, uh, the Butler County Fairgrounds and Farm Show. Never missed a year when I was a kid. There's not going to do a Western Pennsylvania. Um, and so we would go to the farm in the farm show in the fair. And it's a big deal because politicians always come and they have these events. So it's not like this the first time anybody's ever come to Butler County. You know, this is something that they should have been used to. Now getting to this screw up here, you've got a guy that's not just a presidential candidate presidential nominee, but he's a former president of the United States. And the only job of the Secret Service is to protect the candidate. That's it. And what they're telling us today is that they essentially outsourced coverage of these external buildings to the Butler County Pennsylvania Sheriff's Department. You know, when I first heard that, I wanted to laugh because this is literally not something you would ever do if you are the Secret Service. And going back just a little bit, you know, there were there were two major assassinations in 1968, of course. In 1972, George Wallace was shot and wounded in Laurel, Maryland. He was running for president on the American party ticket in 1981. Donald Donald Trump, Ronald Reagan was shot and grievously wounded. So after each one of these shootings, there was a top to bottom review of the Secret Service's procedures. This is the term that they're using yesterday and today. A top to bottom review. So we've gone from 1981 until Saturday with no credible attempts against the life of the candidate. So why now, how was a 20 year old able to climb to the roof of the building within the direct line of sight of the vulnerable president of the United States? Stay there for quite some time. Be confronted at least twice that we know of and still get a shot off. That doesn't make any kind of sense to me at all. Major, major screw up. And not only that, but after the Secret Service agents jumped on top of him and dog piled him, they let him stand up with shoulder to head fully exposed around those guys as he barged through those Secret Service agents to like show his show his strength and like pump his fists to his audience. If there was a second shooter, if this was anything simply remotely similar to the JFK set up, if it was a triangular hit team or multiple shooters or whatever, that was a turkey shot, an easy shot for a second shooter to get off even after that first guy was neutralized. You are exactly right. You are 100% right. And let me add something to that too. I happen to be with my son, my 20 year old son, when we heard news of this attempt on Donald Trump. And he said to me, you know, he said about four weeks ago, I went to a NASCAR event in North Carolina, right? 50,000 people in this, in this, whatever it is, track. And Donald Trump was the, the guest of honor. So they have him stand on this balcony on top of the, the press area where the press has gathered to overlook the, the trap. He's the only person wearing a red hat. He was standing out there in front of everybody. There was no security to get in yet. It didn't have to go through any metal detector and he turned to his girlfriend, my, my son did and said, my God, if somebody wanted to kill Trump, he said, this would be like fishing a barrel. So apparently this is a, this is a bigger problem than just somebody screwed up on Saturday. This is a problem with the actual standard operating procedure of protecting a candidate that, that the Secret Services implemented. Now you, you were in CIA for how many years? 15, 15 years. And you were overseas in war zones with working with armed military, taking out people like Abu Zebeda, capturing him. And I'm sure you've been in situations similar to this where there has to be like a perimeter setup or like a, like people that have to be on watch. How does this typically work? Do you know anything about like how the perimeter ers have to be set up? How wide they have to be? Yeah, actually. And I have this conversation today with a friend of mine who happens to be a former FBI agent as well. And we were in agreement that you have to sweep literally every building. You set up a perimeter around that includes every building with line of sight to the candidate and you keep sweeping it. Now, if there are buildings, multiple buildings, you have somebody on literally every single roof. Just so that something like this doesn't happen. And as long ago as 10 years, we were using drones to supplement the human surveillance at places like Barbara Maribast. You know, Barbara, you've got a prison in the center and then there's a perimeter around that. And then you've got the living area and you've got the working area and there's a perimeter around that. Then you've got guys outside the fence blocking that perimeter. But then you've got, you know, two, three, four drones overhead. And somebody inside monitoring the drone coverage. Again, this is a former president of the United States. And there was no drone coverage. Like we're supposed to, we're supposed to just accept that the Butler County, Pennsylvania sheriff's department was responsible for this. No, it's just not real life. And is it possible that the sheriff's department, I mean, there's footage of the guy climbing on the roof with cops walking around the building, looking at him. And then there was obviously like everyone's aware of the report of the cop actually climbing up there and then like falling off after the guy points his rifle at him. Is there any sort of radio frequency between these cops and the secret service? Like, I would imagine that the cop would be able to just to like turn on his radio right then and there and say shooter. In most cases, no. So what in most cases, because this is just like not just the even a one day event, it's a one hour event or three hour event altogether, the cop would radio back to his dispatch dispatch would be liaising with secret service. And then the secret service dispatcher would radio secret service. So you're going to lose, you know, 15 seconds maybe, which is plenty of time to kill somebody. But that's how haphazardly this was this was arranged. You know, it's easy to fall into this, this, this rut. Well, you know, nobody's taking a shot at a presidential candidate since 1981. They're not going to do it in Butler, Pennsylvania. Let's just get through this one hour and then we wrap it all up and we go on to Milwaukee. I guarantee you that's what these guys were thinking. And the sniper there's reports that the sniper saw the guy on the roof like five minutes before he took the shots and they were looking at him the whole time. And then he like, he was radioing his superior about it. They knew he was there and they said, don't take the shot. And I assume, I don't know what it's like to be a guy who says on the roof with a sniper for three hours. I can't imagine how boring that must be, especially when you're doing it like on multiple events, like throughout, you know, whatever the month. But like, I imagine there's got to be some sort of fear of maybe like, maybe that guy is like a SWAT guy I don't know about on that roof. I don't want to take out like an innocent cop or something like that. What do you make of that guy being aware of the guy being there and not being able to take the shot and tell there was eight shots fired? Well, your assumption is exactly correct. So the, the, the sniper, can you imagine your sniper for the secret service, you go through a 30 year career never ever fire the weapon. I can't welcome to imagine too. That's the, so we were saying it's crazy. But yeah, your thought is a good one. The sniper has to be thinking, is that one of the cops? Is that a Pennsylvania state trooper? Is it, you know, the janitor for that building who wandered onto the roof to get a better look? Should I shoot him? If I shoot him, I'm trained to kill him. So maybe I shouldn't shoot him. I should probably radio in and say, hey, there's this guy. Now, as it turned out, rather than what one shots were being fired rather than radio back to this patch and asked for permission to shoot, he just shot, which, you know, thank God he did. Right. But, um, but the system is such that it's not efficient enough to save a candidate who's under fire. It's just not. Can I ask questions? Yeah. Oh, yeah. I got my friend Matt Cox is here. He wants to ask you a question as well. Does he think that it does he think that it was just incompetence? Or does he think that there's a possibility that it was done specifically for a reason like to, to leave open, you know, uh, I don't know, an opportunity for someone to take a shot. Sure. Lots and lots of people are talking about that today. And yesterday, and my, my gut response is no or likely likely no only because, only because an operation like that would have so many moving parts that it would be virtually impossible to carry out. And I mentioned this today, this FBI friend of mine. And she said, you know, she's given us a lot of thought as well. And if they were going to do that, they wouldn't have outsourced it to a, to a 20 year old, you know, just some local local from, from, that's a part Pennsylvania. Um, and they wouldn't have done it in front of thousands of people. It's just not the way they would carry out an operation like that. That's not what they have in the past. Right. That's not what I'm saying. But in the event that there was an operation, they would miss. Yeah. They would, they would number one. They would, they would, they would, if it was the military or any kind of US, any kind of US organization, they Trump would not be here. And so he's, so is he? So what you're saying is if it's a Patsy situation where the kid is just a Patsy, at the very least, they're going to have snipers to take him out, to take out Trump. They're exactly right. And there would have to be secondary and tertiary levels, just in case the kid missed or the kid needed to be taken out. Right. You remember, you remember seeing the video of Lee Harvey Oswald saying, I'm just a Patsy, right before he was killed. You know, that's, that's something I think we're always going to have to be thinking about situations like this. Now, what do you make of, I mean, I've watched, I've been watching, as well as everyone probably has been watching, I've been watching hundreds and hundreds of people's takes on what happened over the last two days. And it seems like an overwhelming majority of people who have been looking at this and people talking heads on YouTube that have been, you know, doing a play by play. The consensus is that it was the United States that was behind this or the quote deep state was behind this because their evidence is like, look at the last four years of how they tried to take out Trump with all these other things with like, you know, there was Russia gate, there was the trial, the show trial in New York, then there was what else was that? The documents, the document case, yeah, there's so many things that they've tried to do to take him out of the race. And then now you have an assassination. Well, isn't that convenient? the documents, the document case, yeah, there's so many things that they've tried to do to take him out of the race. And then now you have an assassination. Well, isn't that convenient, right? Like that seems to be the overwhelming consensus. And I don't know because I wasn't alive back when Reagan, they tried to take out Reagan, but was it was it like that? Right. Was it taking? They tried to take out Reagan. It was like, who's the guy that was shot? It was Reagan. Yeah, Reagan was shot by John. Right. So trying to impress Judy Foster. Right. Exactly. So when Reagan was shot, was that a myth was America talking about it? The way they're talking about it right now, like was America thinking like, oh, my god, this was America that took him out of the deep state or whatever. No, no, no, no, no, no, the whole country pulled together. Reagan's popularity went into the 90s. The whole country came together. Right. It's so different. You know, you and I, you and I, Danny have talked about this in the past. I've been in Washington for 42 years. I came here. I moved here the week after I turned 18 to go to college. And it has become such an ugly, mean, spirited city. I'm not able to compare it to any other place that I've that I've been in the world. And so that's why we have these these rumors. That's why we have you know, rational people. People I respect, for example, going on Twitter, going on Facebook and saying it was the deep state. Well, like I said, there are so many moving parts to a conspiracy that if it was the deep state, they would have gotten them ages ago. They wouldn't have to have, you know, trumped up federal and state charges and, and, you know, found this 20 year old idiot to climb onto a roof. They would have gotten him. They would have gotten him somehow. I've got a buddy who's a retired colonel in the Army and kind of a prominent Republican fundraiser now. And he told me over the weekend that he went to, he went to Mar-a-Lago about six months ago for a fundraising event. And he and his wife are not only have concealed carry permits, but they're concealed carry instructors. And so he pulls up tomorrow, and the Secret Service tops him at the gate and hey folks, how are you you tonight? Do you have any weapons in the car? And he said, actually, we do. We've got two weapons in the trunk, but they're both secured. The Secret Service guy says, I'm sorry, you can't bring them onto the ground. He said, fine. He let his wife out, drove back to the hotel, locked up his guns in the safe, and then went back tomorrow, I go 15, 20 minutes later. But he said, the point is, nobody ever searched the car. And if he had said, no, I don't have any guns, he could walk right into that ballroom fully armed. What is the, what is the Secret Service thinking? This is a systemic problem here. It's not just what happens Saturday. It's through the entire system of protection that the Secret Service is supposed to be implementing. Right. What, how much credit do you give to the idea that it could have been a foreign adversary, like China, Russia, or Iran? Well, that's something that the FBI mentioned right off of that. It's something that they have to consider. And how, how possible or how probable do you think something like that would be? Unlikely, you know, when, when John Kennedy was killed, the Soviets came to us within minutes. And at the CIA, you know, we keep all these historical documents. You can, as a junior analyst, you can just go through them and get them out an idea of what it was like. That they came to us within minutes of Kennedy being killed and saying, we swear to God it wasn't us. We swear it wasn't us. The Chinese did the same thing. And then the Cubans asked the Mexicans to tell us, look, it wasn't us. Right. So that, I mean, I mean, that's, that's a trigger for World War three. Absolutely. You try to take out a candidate for President United States. Yeah. It's not worth the blowback potential. Once again, you're not going to use the 20 year old. It's the same thing. It's, there's going to be, even if they're going to do it, it's going to be a successful operation. They're not going to leave anything to chance. Yeah. They're not going to put it in the hands of a 20 year old kid. So, it's going to be from 145 yards either. It's going to be from 500 yards or 800 yards. Oh, really? Any idea where it came from. If you're going to, if you're going to use a a professional sniper to do it, first of all, he's not going to use an AR 15 with, you know, by all accounts, you know, 22 or five, five, six or whatever, whatever, you know, rounds, right. He was shooting. If you have a professional sniper, he's going to be so far away. You can't even see him. And he's not going to miss. Yeah. It's, it's crazy. Man. What, what do you think? What do you think would have happened if that bullet would have hit him and taken, and taken him out? What do you think the reaction would have been? There's a, I heard a take, my buddy Julian was saying that if, if the bullet would have hit him, it would have been like a Franz Ferdinand moment. The bullet that took out Franz Ferdinand started what we're wanting. He said, what, he said, he said, civil war doesn't even do it justice. It would be way, it would be far bigger. You know, I mentioned a few minutes ago, Danny, so many of my friends, like a lot of high school friends, for example, who still live in the area in Western Pennsylvania. These are people I've liked and respected all my life. We may not agree on politics, but we like and respect each other. We're in, in each other's weddings. We visit each other. You get the idea. And that's exactly what they were talking about. They would have armed themselves within moments and they would have taken to the streets. Right. That's exactly what would happened. Yeah. This was as close to call as we could have had. So, like, I guess the idea, like, I understand what you're saying. If this was an intelligence operation, it would have been successful. It would not have been so sloppy. But like, what about the idea that the kid could have been MK Ultra or like they like, like some sort of foreign agent could have used him and coerced him and subverted him into talking him up and saying, oh, this might be a good idea. Even if it was a failure, maybe it could, at the very least, in sight chaos in the US and disrupt the system a bit and disrupt the populace. You know, at the very best, maybe the frickin the crazy kid gets lucky and hits his shot. But you're saying, you're essentially saying that no, that's too sloppy. Even if it was just a one kid that they tried to brainwash or subvert somehow, they would have had a backup option in place. Yeah, they would have. And you know, not every country is capable of carrying out an operation like that, especially if you're talking about MK Ultra and mind control and hypnosis and all that stuff. You're talking about three, four, five countries that are able to do it. Russia, China, Israel, North Korea. That's probably about it. Right. We know it wasn't Israel. Israel just gave him $100 billion, or $100 million, right? Yeah, it's right. Adelsons. $150 million something like that. Insane. Again, the blow that potential is such that, you know, I mean, let's say the Chinese did this. Right. And we were able to develop information confirming that the Chinese had done it. I mean, you're talking about a nuclear exchange being the next step. I think it's a successful question. We run Chinese. Matt has a question. First off, I think it was just a 20 year old, but yeah, you know, for the content sake, assuming it, assuming that it was, I don't know, whatever you want to call it, deep state, or, an attempted assassination that failed. And, you know, if it was a attempted assassination that failed in your opinion, do they just take their ball and go home, or do they, and just say, hey, Trump's going to win it. We messed up, or do they try again? Very good. And I agree with you. I think it was the kid. But if it were an operation, yes, you pick up the ball and you go home. Let's use this. Really? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Once once you've blown it, that's it. It's done. It's over. You had your shot. It was one shot. It's over. That and then you deal with a blowback. You know, that's why you got to get it right the first time. Look at the, look at the Bay of Pigs, for example. The only reason that the Bay of Pigs failed was because John Kennedy made a strategic policy decision not to provide air cover. Right. So we didn't say, all right, everybody, let's try it again in two weeks. And this time we use air cover. Oh, we just, we took our lumps and went home. And that's the way it happens. Okay. Finally, maybe you can educate us, num skulls on who is this guy who is the new vice president? And what do you make? What do you make of that? Can you give us some sort of like educated opinion on this guy and what this means? Now this is actually kind of a bold choice. So Jade Vance is, he was famous well before he ever entered politics. He's very young. He's 39 years old. He's a self-made billionaire from a hedge fund that he created on Wall Street. But this guy grew up in abject poverty in the Appalachia area of southern Ohio. And he was raised by his grandmother. His mother was a heroin and meth addict and was never a major part of his life. And so his grandmother stressed education, education, education, education. And he was a smart kid. And so he won scholarships. He went to school. He ended up going to Yale. And then made it big big on Wall Street. He wrote a book called Hillbilly Elegy, talking about coming out of this abject poverty, but not as a lefty. He picked him up himself up by his bootstraps and he did it through hard work, not because welfare paid for this or welfare paid for that. That's what Hillbilly Elegy was about. It became a quite a popular and successful movie. And then he decided to go into politics. The interesting thing to me is that he was an anti-Trump Republican for a long time. I saw that. He wrote quite a powerful op-ed saying that Donald Trump was an idiot and a monster. And then we learned from Donald Trump Jr. just a week ago that the choice probably wouldn't be J.D. Vance because Donald Sr. has this visceral dislike of facial hair. And he had mentioned to family members he couldn't stand the thought of looking at J.D. Vance every day with a beard and mustache. Oh my God. That's insane. He's rich. He's self-made. He's a great campaigner. And like I say, I think this was actually a pretty bold choice. Interesting. Well, awesome. I can't thank you enough, John. I appreciate all your insight and friends and our questions here today. It really gives us some credibility here for doing this. Because we don't have any. We have no business talking about this kind of shit by ourselves. So thanks again, man. I really appreciate it. Yes, sir. I love you, man. I'll talk to you very soon. Bye bye. Let me talk to it. See, John, I tell you what makes me feel better is how close everything we said was to what he's kind of saying. You know what I mean? It's pretty not perfect, but pretty close. Yeah, except for the me saying like they're not going to take their ball and go and go and he's like, oh, no, no, take your ball and go home. Yeah, everyone else is. Yeah, that's what like I was Jones was in the opposite. They're going to dig in. Yeah, interesting. Well, but the other stuff we'll see. Yeah, the other stuff was spot on. I thought we gave some. Oh, wow. Look at that. We can see ourselves. Look at you, Matt Cox. You look good. I look damn. You really look like that. I need a fucking haircut. Dude, you kid me. Look when I smile. Look when I smile. Let me see. Let's see. Let's see. Matt smile. Look. Look at that beautiful smile. Look at this is in the crow's feet. Matt, you need to get some Biden Botox. Do not do it. I don't want to do it. It's embarrassing enough. I got the hair plug. Look how they hairline has though. It does look amazing. Your hairline looks fantastic. But oh man, I need to lose some weight. Oh, did I tell you this? Oh, God, if I've been hunching over my God, Stephen, you couldn't say something. I'm getting a haircut tomorrow. At least if my wife was here, she'd be holding her shoulders back like, yeah, right. You want to hear something funny? Yeah. Is I'm supposed to be going on on a fresh and fit. Oh, yeah, you told me that tomorrow, right? No, no, no, no, this is like the 22nd. I'm sure they were. I'm sure they record them and put them out. But, but like I've talked to that or their business, their producer, whatever, back and forth on the email and you know, and here's the thing, like I'm flying in there. And then I'm flying to Dallas because I have a, like a speaking, not speaking thing, but I have like a, a shoot that I have to do. And then I'm flying back like I'm like boom, boom, boom, boom. I do. Although I'm so I feel like a big shot. You are a big shot. God, that's insane. Um, but I still haven't got the address. I'm gonna get the address. But other than that, it's confirmed though. It's in Miami, right? They said it was confirmed. Well, like I don't know, you know, it's yeah, no, it's in Miami. It's on Brooklyn. By the way, we haven't even talked about this yet. You haven't, we haven't talked about the sense you did it. You were, you did the longest podcast ever recorded on Lex Friedman's channel. No, we did talk about it. Didn't we? Yeah, but that with that podcast never aired. Oh, you put it on Patreon. Yeah. That's how you get the Patreon. Yeah. That's right. It's exclusive. He is Matt as a, as little. I love it for the Patreon. What a great fucking, what a great day for you, man. The Patreon. That was pretty cool. Pretty cool. Yeah. Anyways, I mean, Patreon. I'm sorry, the Lex Friedman thing. Yes. Trump shooter was, oh, yeah, dude. This is so. Oh, yeah. So demolition ranch. These guys in Texas, yeah, the shirt. Yeah, man. I know these guys and I was just talking to him last week. And then I saw just saw today that dude was wearing a demolition ranch shirt. Yeah. And now this guy is getting a, I don't know if he's getting a lot of shit. I don't know. But I mean, he said he's been getting a lot of like media questioning him about it. Absolutely. So what? So this is, he made a statement on them wearing his shirt. Let's see what he's saying. It's horrible. By the audio is terrible. Why is it so fucking bad? Jesus Christ, hold on. Julian Dory finger on the pulse. Give us the update. Nobody's got more inside info on the Trump assassination than Julian motherfucking Dory. He's already done a hundred podcasts on this thing. He's been up for three days straight. Just got off a live stream with Jim Diorio special agent, the most underrated podcaster on YouTube. Yes, Julian. What's happening? We're on air, baby. We're on air. We're doing it live. What's happening, dude? What's Jimmy D say about this? Jimmy D just dropped both of fiery flames for two hours on a podcast while I was in production hell. So I'm going to listen to it back and see what he said. But it sounded really smart. Yeah, we were watching it. Has he lost weight? Oh, yeah. He lost a lot of weight, dude. He looks way thinner. He looks beautiful. Jim, Jim two point. I was a real thing. He's a real thing. But yeah, as far as what we're hearing that any inside info, so to speak, when you think that I have is not go to market. It's it's all the record stuff. But let's just say there is there are some very eye opening mistakes that occurred behind the scenes. And like I was saying on the live, I did last night myself when I talked to all these different pipe hitters. Two or one high hitters. I love that fucking word. I'm going to start using that pipe hitters. That's fucking such a good word. Once one scale comp stock like started using that like, you know, you're all so pipe hitters. I'm like, I'm going to use fucking pipe hitters. Yeah, that can go two ways though. Yeah, well, unless he was cracking up the first time he used it on Eric, and I had to turn it on and say that doesn't need what he's saying it needs to put. But there are some eye opening things, some serious concerns, definitely some security concerns moving forward that, you know, some of these guys. And I know Jim was really pounding the table on this. You know, that there may very well be some private security to help supplement what's going on here because you know, just the lack of preparation and the perimeter that we saw was insane. But I really good call with with Remiad E. Leket today and who's 12 year Navy SEAL and General Conzabad. I shit around the world. And yeah, he has heard some things and seeing some things that are really concerning. And you know, I think everyone's on the same page. Yeah. They want to make sure there's no violence of any sort that occurs against either of these candidates or anyone associated with them for the next 100 days, especially. So that we can just calm the fuck down as a country. Check out this hot take. We just had Kari Aku piped in through Skype and he was saying that if it was, he doesn't believe this was a deep state assassination attempt. He believed it was just a lone 20 year old psycho. He was saying that if it was a deep state operation or any kind of government agency that was in that was doing this, he said if they failed on the first attempt, they will not try again. They'll take their ball and go home just like the Bay of Pigs. I agree. I think I think John spot on about that. Like you had your shot. If that's the case, I don't know. But if that's the case and that's what some people are saying. Well, you had your shot and you missed. Now everyone's awake to it. Yeah. Everyone's like, oh shit. Like, like, you know, the number of people who were inserting a quarter into the Alex Jones was right again, George. I mean, that's a big fucking story right now. Yeah, it's a big fucking drawing. A lot of a lot of stuff Alex Jones does and says, but one of these guys like, yo, when people are right, I'm going to shout that from the rooftops and Alex Jones was absolutely 150% right on this issue. If you're saying it, it's going to come after Trump, it's going to come out. You know, you've seen there's going to have room and like, you know, whether or not, you know, it was actually who he thinks it was. That's not for debate. But nonetheless, you know, we watch, we watch the guy come legitimately at a minimum of two inches from being the next france Ferdinand. Yeah. Yeah. I love that bro. I used your line three or four times during this podcast with Matt, but I credited you every time. Oh, thank you. You're welcome. I appreciate that. I always always credit your show. We love it. Anyone listening go watch the Julian Dory livestream that he did 35 minute fucking rant. No camera switching straight from the fucking top right up the top of his head. No notes. Just freestyle 38 minutes of fire on this whole thing. And it was beautiful. It was gorgeous. And I mean, I don't think that I've heard a better take than from what you said. It seems like everyone's watched your video and then just kind of like went, you know, riffed off that and went from everything that, you know, all the thoughts that you had and all the perspectives that you had, you called all of your contacts, your military contacts and your, you know, FBI people that you've had on your show and got all their opinions and condensed it into one very, uh, unique perspective. And it was fucking great, dude. Yeah, I appreciate that one. Danny called me. I just called, I just called Matt Cox and said, hey, we gotta go do a podcast. Because me and Matt, just me and Matt Cox just watching what you tick tocs and then developing opinion all that. God. All right, well, we're about to wrap up my, my phone's on like 2%, but I'll hit you in a little bit later. I think I figured out the audio. Oh, we did. All right, here we go. Demolition Ranch guy responding to the shirt. Wow, 1.4 million views in four hours. Can imagine. So as a lot of you guys know, um, and we were shocked and confused to find this out, the shooter who tried to assassinate Trump was wearing merch from my channel, wearing a demolition ranch t-shirt. And that sucked to see that. Yeah, that was, that was rough. So this t-shirt, we also own a t-shirt company, um, I longer based out of this hometown right here. And my friends work there. And we, we make these shirts. We print them here in Texas and ship them all over the world. Uh, I've seen my shirts in every continent. I got a picture like two weeks ago of a guy wearing my shirt in Antarctica. And so we don't vet the people who buy our shirts, obviously, it'd be impossible to just like Nike doesn't vet who buys their shoes. I wish I could. I would love to keep people like that from buying wearing being associated with that article of clothing. Like I wish I wish he couldn't get a shirt. But it happened. And I think the difference in, you know, a gunman wearing a pair of Nike shoes and a gunman wearing my t-shirt is this brand is much more personal to me than Nike is to its executives. And so to see my name next to the shooter's name, uh, and I wish I wish we could keep that from happening. So no matter what side you're on, politically, none of us want violence. This channel is never meant to incite violence or hate. It never has. It isn't. And it never will be a channel that does that. I don't want any violence or hate anywhere around me. I have a wife and little kids. I want them to be safe and secure forever. And the videos I put out, I want to make sure that is the same for everyone who watches my videos that they aren't in any more danger because of my videos, of course. And I know you guys know that. I have 11 million subscribers who have been watching me for over 10 years and know that I am, uh, not that kind of person. This is mostly for the people who are just tuning in to see if I am a guy that is trying to make people do stuff like that. So I am not. Uh, obviously I don't have to explain that to you guys who know me, but I feel like I might need to say that for those who don't. That's crazy. That's an unfortunate situation. The guy was just trying to look like a Trump supporter and wearing like a American shirt. There's probably guns on the shirt or whatever. He was trying to blend in. And unfortunately, he picked a fucking demolition ranch shirt. I don't think anyone's blamed that blame. I can't blame him. No, but it sucks for the guy though. Well, because people are going to, but the people that are reaching out are just idiots. Of course. Yeah. The people who are reaching out. People trying to make a story out of nothing. That's just, yeah. They're, they're probably like mainstream news media type people trying to make a story out of the shit and get clicks. I forget. What was the guy? What was the chicks name that was on forget the guy's name? He's got kind of a conservative show. And she goes on there and she's like, why do you think that some neo-Nazi or something, uh, subscribed to your channel? And he's like, are you joking? Like, what are you talking about? Like, you know what I'm saying? Like, people are so out of it. You know, man, like, has I have anything to do with me? So it's crazy. Man, every, you know, the majority of like the mainstream media that you see on television or to see the shit that you see being written about in like the mainstream publications, like New York Times and Washington Post or all this, these are all opinions and pieces that are written by people who live in fucking New York and Los Angeles. Right. No, right. That's, that's the consensus of that. That's like, you know what's happening when it's all coming from those places. And they think that their opinions are more important than the people living in the rural parts of America. Right. Okay. Cause just like they say, I like all Trump supporters are stupid, right. Stupid poor white people. Right. Exactly. Like, um, I mean, I have a college education, right. And I think people are figuring that out too. And like we were talking about earlier with the whole Civil War thing, like, California, like, I think that guy made that video about Civil War and like California would be against Texas and they would cut off California. I don't know. I think California, I mean, it's obviously it's a blue state, but those are like condensed into like the cities of LA and San Francisco. But from my experience, the majority of people that I know from California, they're like either right wing or they're like closet conservatives. Like, people that are closet conservatives. It's like that weird, weird little bubble of LA where it's like you have to be liberal to be able to fit into that industry to keep your job and to keep getting work. You know, well, what you have to understand that the, the, he's basing it on the fact that like, hey, like you, the whole state, it like the state, the government, the state government is at war. You know what I'm saying? So if you're a farmer in California or saying, I disagree with that doesn't mean that the national guard isn't going to the California National Guard isn't going to go to war. You know, they're saying that, hey, the people in charge of that national in charge of the national guard. Yeah. Are going to go after like that has nothing to do with like, that's sure there's always going to be population. Yeah. It doesn't matter as much. Yeah. There's tons of people that are going to be, you know, that are going to be caught within the state saying, I disagree with what florida is doing. But I'm trapped within florida. And there's, there's a civil war. Do I up my uproot my entire family and try and move to a blue state right now or does it just hunker down? Right. So, but that's what his, if you watch that video goes, so great. It was, it's really, you could watch it in the way home. I think it's like, four minutes. I got a lot. I got a lot. I got a lot. Super. I think we actually just you reached out to my mother. I tried to reach out to this guy. I want to try to get him on here, too. We tried to get Tyler to reach out to him. Tyler can't get in touch. Really? Yeah. And Tyler's, you know, tenacious dudes of fucking ghosts. Did you see it? By the way, did you see the video of fucking Jack Black? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't, I, I, I, I am Jack Black was like saying find a better shooter. Don't miss next time. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I, I like, I could barely hear what he was saying, but I've read the comment, uh, the comments that were basically that's what he was saying. It was just like, you know, the problem, here's a problem when you surround yourself with yes, men, you know, you start to think that everything you say is clever and funny and that everybody agrees with you. Yeah. That's why these people when they go on like Fox News or CNN or they go to these panels and they start spouting their, um, near their propaganda. And when people push back, they're like shocked. Of course they're shocked. Right. I have a, I have a group of 20 people that I surround myself with that I talked to nearly every day. And they tell me I'm, everything I say is wonderful. They never push back. The moment they push back, they immediately typically crumble or they start going, oh, you know, they get upset and they start calling people names or they, you know, that's that's Jack Black. I'm sure he surrounds himself with a bunch of people that say he's just wonderful. Everything he says is hilarious and every day agree with everything he says. And then he says it in the wrong form. And it's like, oh, wow, that didn't, that's not coming off well. Yeah. It was Kyle Glass and not Jack Black. Kyle is this partner and tenacious D. Oh, okay. Oh, Kyle is the, this guy. That's that guy. Yeah. Okay. But Jack Black wasn't Jack Black just recently at some, uh, like political convention, uh, they hired him. They hired him at a super left. They hired him at like one of those, one of those conventions. And, uh, he was like, he got up basically talking about how great Biden wasn't how fucking Trump was Hitler. Yeah, these people say these things. Who's the other guy? The Nero. Oh, yeah. What a meltdown that was like, what a really colossal fuck up. Like it's the same thing. You're surrounded yourself with all these people that think you're wonderful. And then you say, Hey, I'm going to go and I'm going to hold a press conference. And I'm going to do this and say this and then it backfires on. You know, Oh, this is video. Is that what this is? I don't know. Come on. Is it this thing? What does he say? Turn the volume up. Hit the little volume button. Let the bottom left of the screen. Oh, this is video is that what this is I don't know come on Is it this thing what does he say turn the volume up hit the little volume button left bottom left of the screen? Only the city But the country and eventually he could destroy the world But we vowed we would not allow terrorists I know the city of life What do they say that's why it's weird that Donald Trump is just across the street Because he doesn't belong in my city I don't know where he belongs But he should leave doesn't belong here We knew yorkers used to tolerate him when he was just another grubby real estate hustler masquerading as a big shot It's just it's just it's the same thing, you know, whenever most of these guys come up like they never have anything of Substance to say right it's always like he's hitler. He's a racist. Yeah, he's he's a clown. He's oh He's a liar. He's it's a weird me some examples. Bro. Yeah. Well, that's that's the thing It's like it's a weird psychological thing where they can use Hollywood to prop again dies Politics like if we can get a bunch of famous actors That make a lot of money and that everyone sees on movies all the time to say something Then people are gonna fall in line because if these people think this then we should think this right? Since when are what when is the prerequisite to be an actor to be of a fucking thinker? Right or to be like some political expert or like your job is to form the policy expert your jobs was pretend to be other people right that's exactly that's what their job is exactly that's exactly what it is to pretend to be other people and Trump is I mean his life has been Like is he a textbook narcissist? Yes. Yeah, but he's got some issues. He's got a few issues He's got a few issues, but he's been fucking buying and selling and building real estate his whole life Hotels casinos golf courses He I mean say what you want about the guy or put whatever your politics are like I think it's undeniable at this rate to say that the guy doesn't love America Oh, no, I like I have no doubt in my mind that he loves America. There's no doubt in my mind. Yeah, you know he's But you know people white people don't like him What's a fun with so what I love is that when he goes out and he's like it's funny when I was a Democrat You people love to me. You know I'm saying when he was a different for in New York when he was a Democrat for 40 years And he was donating to all the Democratic parties. They loved him all the candidates loved them and then he said I think I'm gonna run as a Republican I feel like I've got those types of values Suddenly he became the you know, oh you're a bastard. Well when I was writing you those checks you didn't say that dude They got so many ways to try to assassinate him. It's scary like There's the shootings like obviously being exposed in public areas surrounded by buildings, right? That's number one number two is poisoning is he just fucking eating anything people are giving to him or you like super paranoid now You gotta have a secret service check that's gonna be the worst way to fucking die, right? In a fucking room or no one else is there you ate some pudding and you just fucking fell over But he where do you get put the guy listen you could just poison McDonald. He loves McDonald right right right? You know that's how I want to go out like you eating like a That has to taste test the food to make sure it's not poison Yeah, I need a secret service listen you saw that tubby little Little chick that was in front of him. Yeah, she'll you know, she was cowering behind him Yeah, she'll she'll try something if you said hey, would you you want to you want to take eat a quarter of my My lady, okay lady take a bite of this whopper. She's never seen a wapper that she didn't she wasn't willing to try oh Good and then you know they got tons of other like truck bombs poisoning the food There's there's so many other ways to kill the guy Airplanes CIA is synonymous is fucking is famous for assessing people in airplanes What what about planes down? I was gonna say I love Like is he getting on his fucking air like like the balls After they're cold washington a couple times the balls to he's flying what at least two times a day I'll you know granted he's flying on his own plane But like if I'm him and I'm flying twice a day across the fucking country I got my plane surrounded by cameras. I got security washing the cameras 24 7 to make sure no one approaches my goddamn plane You know like so Everyone who gets on the plane the fucking the whoever if they have I don't know if they have like a flight attendant on this private plane or like the pilots Like crazy screenings for those people every time they get on the plane to make sure there's no like suitcase bomb or anything You still you keep you have to understand all that stuff means that the That the bomber or this that the assassin is willing to die to yeah, that's a huge I like true. I just there's not a lot of people are like yeah, yeah Oh, what yeah, you're gonna give me a hundred million dollars. Okay. Give me the suitcase right. That's true. That's true. I mean I don't care how much money Give me right Yeah, yeah, it's it's surface to air missile I mean layman on Russia I'm sure there's there's lots of ways to take them out But what once again, they're probably take their ball and go home. I mean at this point It's just probably it's too late. He's too far in he's too far in let's just say let's assume that this was some kind of a coordinated Attempt to assassinate him and they do take their ball and go home There's still a lot of crazies out there. Mm-hmm like some crazy might still just get them I mean I think the kid was just a 20 year old crazy Yeah, but you know, they're still and and either this This is done one of two things. It's either for some of those people. It's either had them say wow Look how close this guy got I can do this or they've said I'll never even get close enough in it So you know I'm saying so it made some people it may have emboldened them and some people it may have said Oh, I'm not I'm not willing to be killed Like yeah, this kid he had a perfect shot couldn't do it and end up dead. No not interested So yeah, I think he probably in November he wins You know, and that's it he wins and Biden steps down and in the wars I Huh, and we end all the wars and I won't happily ever after I think he probably stops fucking with a Iran He probably We're also are we got Iran. We got the Israel Gaza Israel Gaza He's I mean that's already kind of you know on all of pilot. He'll probably give him some money and then And then just put his support behind them and then As far as Ukraine is concerned. I think he's he's probably gonna have a very harsh talk with Putin and say hey, you know look like you keep what you've got turn around you got you know look Let's I mean he's probably just kick the ball down the road Like you're not doing anything on my watch or then we're just gonna put a bunch of troops and then Putin will so well Then we'll we'll new Q and you'll say right let's do it. Yeah, let's go and then Putin's gonna go fuck never mind I'll just keep what I've got and I'll You know and basically Trump kicks the ball down the line and hopes that he can Fort a foot they can fortify it over the next four years and hold what they've got That's it like I think that's probably because I don't see him going in and telling Putin get the shit All your shit and go home and Putin being okay with that But I think he says hey you keep what you've got like this isn't gonna happen on my watch and I'll throw all the American troops in there Because fuck NATO. Yeah, and then Putin goes fuck. Okay You know that's the best case scenario. That's really the best case scenario. Yeah. Yeah I mean if anyone's got a better chance to solve this thing Diplomatically I think I think he's gonna be incentivized to do that and I think you probably can do it even though the funny thing is even though Biden has made it Abundantly clear he doesn't mind getting into a war. Right. You know, he just he's just limited on what he's doing It's very it's very you know like and it's very yeah not only that they're there He's he's actively avoiding that like they there was multiple peace talks early on in this whole war where there was like There was a victory Ukraine had over Russia early on in early battle where Russia was on their heels and one of the top generals in the military Was basically saying like now at the time to go to the negotiating table we can actually negotiate a fucking cease fire here and end this thing and Biden's White House was like fuck off no way. Yeah, that's a mistake John Mearsheimer talks about this endlessly So I don't know man, but I think I think if anyone's gonna solve these world problems I think me and you were gonna do it right here in this podcast So this little bit of you to hold of us and get us in Washington get us in the White House to guys it What's really happening How long did we just do like I was like three hour podcast man. I thought was gonna be an hour, but we went Two and a half I'm a two and a half. That's great. Cool man. Well. Thanks Matt. That was this was a this was fun Shout out shout out to your YouTube channel. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I got a YouTube channel killing it You're getting it's doing pretty good and you're blowing up dude. It is doing pretty good Let's get you're doing how many podcasts a week now Well, I mean we're posting three sometimes four, but you're recording how many Four that's nuts to sometimes you are a fucking machine. Listen. I had one today I had one today I don't know, you know the guy and I've had a couple of these where like the person You know, they're like oh like you know hold on. I'm gonna smoke a fucking fatty before I start and you know I'm like you know because you're texting let's say it's a not in person right say it's a Remote or sometimes they are in person like the guy gets stoned in the car and they show up and they sit down and then it's like Like like I don't know why these guys think that's a good idea I guess because they've never smoked then never got you know Whatever they've never smoked some dope sat down and then tried to tell a story obviously They're usually hanging out with their friends watching TV. Uh-uh. Well when you sit down and try and start thinking You know Chronologically and telling your story it breaks down. You realize right away like this is a bad idea, bro Yeah, like so they're not all bozy act like Bozy act will take like a ton of stuff a ton of fucking drugs and Be perfectly fine not the first podcast he didn't hear I gave him two gummies and he was blasted. Oh Was he oh, I thought he was fine. He was fine. You were like oh this guy's not gonna be a little No, even you said after his first podcast you're like he was all over the whole he was yeah He was he was but he was still semi-funky. Oh, yeah No, no, no one person wouldn't be able to tell this guy's texting me telling me like he's gonna hold on Give me five minutes. I'm gonna light up one real quick and I went yo bro I said that's probably not a good idea. I said I've had multiple people who've done that You know I've been doing this for a few years now like it never works I was like oh, I'm just fucking around. I'm not gonna do that. Just give me five minutes and then he gets on there We went an hour and I'm going Hey, and here's the thing like I saw your paperwork So I've seen your paperwork like I know what you're telling me is true that you you did get this much time all of these things did happen You were charged with these crimes. I've read the the Sorry the articles and but when I'm asking him questions he's like You know, he's like yeah, but like I got interested like like like a blunt like I don't know what he said eight times seven eight times So many times and I went I said oh, I said like well like for what like you know like a bunch of stuff like what? You're like I don't know like a lot of different things like I Anyway, so so then and he just kept going and then there was another time where he was like oh I'm making this I was making this much money and I remember the article had said he had made several million dollars And I was like yeah, so I was like so what kind of what are you spending that money on? It's like um you know I Stop like you know we're like I mean, I don't really know the bars low, huh, and I'm like you don't you made Five or six million dollars and you don't know what you spent any of it on did you buy cars? I don't I don't I don't know I mean and I was like like I've read the articles like you know saying it's like he was so fucked up That we I kept thinking he'll get better. I finally just said listen bro. We got to stop I put on Paul that said listen I said how do you feel you're doing right now? You said yeah I said any goes and he goes um not good man I mean he said like I I listen I know you told me not to but I got fucked up before here. Oh super nervous a Lot of anxiety. I'm anxious and I um And I went Yeah, I said here's the problem I'm asking you questions that you should know the answers to and you're like oh I don't know Like you don't know You don't know that when you were at the counter and you used of credit credit card and the guy said I got a call the manager Whether or not he called the manager Yeah, bro like I can't remember you can't remember whether this is a huge deal Uh, and I go I mean bro like I'm sorry, but I said I don't think you're bullshitting I read everything I saw I know what's what's going on. I know you got a rest I know what happened. I said but you got to do better bro. And he goes um Yeah, I uh and he just next you know he can see a moving boom. He just disappeared He just Exacted it. Wow. So you're supposed to know now now people are gonna want to watch now. It's horrible bro And the worst thing is is like it it would be different if I thought You're you're fucking bullshit me But he sent me all this stuff and I've read all this stuff and there were newspaper articles And he's in him and there's he sent me like he sent me like his paperwork from being arrested and what he was charged with it It's a indictment like this is true. You just got so overwhelmingly fucked up and you were so anxious You could not tell your story. Right. And so I so I texted I said hey bro I don't know what happened. I think you just disconnected. I said look I get it. I said do you want to read you want to reschedule this? He's like bro Let me just think about this like I don't know. I shouldn't have got fucked up I'm so embarrassed. I'm so sorry, you know any apologize that I get it But it was just like You know like these guys they come on the like I said the bar is low And this guy has an amazing story by the way like it's it's a dark with guys on my channel love dark web fraud Kind of story. Oh, man guys. You think you're ever gonna venture out of true crime and cover some more stuff You know, I did once or twice I've done some like UFO stuff right and and and and like a few of them did really well Like we probably want some one of my top 10 videos is probably like a UFO video. Yeah, but Um But then I did a few more and then they start very quickly they start dropping it trust the they don't they don't get a lot of views And then um, you know every time I venture out like I'll venture out every once while some guys got a crime story Like it's almost like he's trying to work in his crime story like I you know like he did Six months or what else are you interested besides true crime stories? I just like what do you what do you like? What are there kind of what type of stuff are you like interested in talking about or Um You love talking about China. We've done a bunch of China podcasts I feel like I'm over China And I just don't you know if Luckily I tick typically have a little bit more knowledge than the person I'm talking to so yeah You can semi sound like you know what you're talking about but And the problem with China too is that like there's so many things going wrong right now You know, and it's it's just getting worse and worse like I'm just interested in like it's such an interesting time to be alive right now Really is true and you know here's maybe it's not even that interesting Danny Maybe it's just that the access to the information is so overwhelming at this point like it's probably always at this Interested interesting back in the 70s and 80s and the 90s when I grew up. They just the there's no internet There's no internet. So I don't have a clue what's going on three states away now It's just you wake up you fucking grab your phone and you're instantly drowning in information. It's it's insane dude I'm also super interested in like this whole how like like the in Japan You know that there's just there's tons of just abandoned houses and and they're there They're like they're working class is disappearing and all these people are old like there's nobody to replace these jobs And and that's happening everywhere that's happening in Japan. It's happening here. It's happening. Yeah, so I'm like neo feudalism dude It's insane like what's gonna happen like What's gonna happen what's gonna happen when there's not enough people in Japan to pay into their Social security style system to pay the people that are retired Like what's gonna happen when yeah same thing with here like what happens when there's not enough people to pay in to support the people that have been paying it I mean I You know that they're like oh it's gonna collapse like they're not gonna let it collapse They basically just sent enough money to you crane that you could have fixed it So I know they'll fix it, but it's like how and you know so those things worry me But I'm unfortunately I'm not smart enough to come up with the solution Or have yourself enough credit bro. You're super smart everyone. I talked to they talk to brag about how smart you are I'm just just because of my con man. They just don't know. They don't know. I'm fooling them No, you're smart like I do what's gonna happen. Yeah I don't know and also do you see that they're talking about there's like reports of the military times talking about like bringing back the draft and There's lots of there's lots of countries like France and Germany. They're talking about bringing back the draft. Yeah, nobody Nobody wants to be a protesting I think it's getting so bad. They're protesting about it. They're like seriously Contemplating bringing back and drive the draft, but there are other countries where you have to you have to go in for two years or four years Or so you you you have to right and here We're listening people when my mother would tell stories. This is during World War two. She was a little kid in World War two like six seven eight years old She remembers when they put out flyers and the newspaper came out and they said listen any extra pans that you have That they're going around they like and this isn't like government that they had a god they had guys in a little outfit It's the government, but like they'll get like a truck right? We're bringing a truck around through all the city names neighborhoods in these blocks in this area for the next week if you have extra pots and pans Bring them outside and give them to us. They're building Liberty ships out of them Could you imagine if right now they said hey we're going through your neighborhood if you have extra metal pans Donate them. We're not buying them You're giving them for the war effort and you know what? There's so many of them. They didn't know what to do with if they did that now Nobody give anything. Oh, no. They'd be like go fuck you. It's like you don't realize how good you have it They didn't have it one tenth as good as we have it now and they're giving everything they can We got four pans, but we could live off of one. I got three kids to feed. I got one pan Fuck it give the other three pans. I want to help build a ship to help defeat Nazi Germany and now People wouldn't they wouldn't donate a dollar No, you know, it's so so sad and they will here's the real problem is like with the us like I don't think you'll I think the real problem is and this is what really sucks Is that the us is so isolated? We'll never be invaded does that make sense. Yeah, like we're surrounded by two oceans Right like we've got the best you know we've got the best geographical set up right So we're always going to be in a great position. The problem is economically we may be devastated And that's what China and Russia and everybody's working on right absolutely um, but but like in Europe they've been invaded so many times at least they have that fear You know and so just like that. I forget his name. He's a British politician where he's like other countries aren't they're not teaching their children to hate their country You know like they're not in Russia they're not preaching to hate Russia and hate the government of Russia And the country of Russia like in the United States you're being raised to hate your own country. Yeah, so I just think that It's just it's so sad when I think it goes to what Boost to Monte is said on this podcast many times is we need an enemy to be able to unite It's like the 9-11 thing. It's like that 9-11 with showed us You know a real existential threat and people banded together like no other 9-11 and we haven't had anything like that We don't really have an enemy so we fight ourselves those countries over there in Europe They've been through so much hell In the last 100 years that it's like I mean even if you're even if you're like in your teens there's like You have your relatives telling you about it You have the epigenetic fucking fear built into you of What's been happening in that part of the world you're surrounded by other countries and other Foreign governments and militaries all the time and you see these atrocities every decade or so There's some atrocity where one country is invading another one and then they're wiping out an entire race Trying to and you're like you know like the Serbs you know when they invade you know Croatia and the Serbs and then they go on They're going around with hit squads like you know it's possible it's happening a couple of years C'mon or miles or you know kill em eaters away or whatever you say call whatever they are forget what this system That kilometer but kilometers. Yeah, it's not far away like oh my god That's only two countries away and like that's a that's a five-hour drive and I could be there and right now They've got hit squads going around killing Croatians like but it's we're so far removed That we just think that could never happen So the idea of saying hey, there's a draft and people freaking out like you can't make me this you can't like I'm not doing that like pro What are you gonna do if they show up on our borders the problem is they're not gonna show up on our door And the pro yeah, that's the problem And if there was a draft like the problem is people are waking up now to how much bullshit is wrapped up in these wars And how it's just fueling this in military industrial compact Plex and growing it's just a mechanism to grow our GDP and Dominate the rest of the world and install democracies in the rest of the world like we can't just worry about ourselves Did you see so why would you want to be drafted into this fuckery? I mean I hear you there's what are you fighting for you're fighting for Some billionaires Like and you're fighting for this fucking fake democracy of people running running this fucking brain dead puppet that we don't know who the hell's running it but they obviously Their moral standards aren't what They used to be in this country with the bleat as far as leadership goes. Did you see this? Did you ever watch the series fall out? No, oh my god Stephen. Oh fuck yes. I was great though It's so I you know what I think you told me about this before I meant to watch it and I just did it it is it's it's it's so So it sucks. I don't get to spend as much time watching the shows anymore. What's great is that it's everything you just said it's like It's like capitalism and the industrial complex gone what like in the 50s like what if it didn't taper off You know instead It's it goes wild and then it's gets to such a point where they start a nuclear war because they built these bunkers And we can survive the war. I mean it's it's insanity like that right But the problem is the bunkers is gonna be all the billionaires and the fucking joint chiefs of staff and all the Politicians flying around in their jet with their fucking pocket books full of all this lobbying money and while us the The working class blue collar podcasters like we don't make it. We don't make it. Whoa color Just a blue collard Podcasters not you man. You just went up at the tax bracket. We know what's going on with you Matt You're not class by blue collar anymore But anyways, thanks again. This was a great podcast You gotta watch these these I know I don't have time man. I'm raising two kids. I got fucking I don't have the Library of time that you and Julian have their wife is right now study all this shit and spend all this time My wife raising the kids She is raising the kids, but I got a lot of busy too, man. I do a lot of shit with my kids. I'm not a fucking absent father Um What are you gonna cut up that sizzle real? We just got done filming it Matt Give us a break. It's a pace himself for a week. Yeah, this is I need a week long breather I we have to have to hire 45 minutes. We have to hire an editor So if you're an editor out there and you're watching this We are now hiring an editor to cut up a sizzle reel for a One of Matt's books that we're turning into a pitch for a television series or a documentary Whatever either way hit us up a series. No, not a series. Maybe it might be a four-part deal Like a doc. Well, yeah doc a doc a limited doc series. Yeah. All based on The story of you meeting ephraim Devaroli from war dogs in prison and his scam against Warner brothers to writing the boss who them into oblivion Wanting you in a writing the book the lawsuit the whole thing. It's super good. We've been filming it for the last few months. We interviewed Devaroli we interviewed Pete Raciney we interviewed FBI agent Jim Diorio We interviewed you yeah, who what pack house? Yeah, I already mentioned pack house. Oh, okay. Yeah He was one of the first I thought you said Devaroli. Oh, no. Yeah, we didn't interview Devaroli we interviewed pack house Yeah Yeah, we and we want to put together a sizzle reel it should be super gold But we did talented talented talented editor to help us out. Yeah for what would it need three five minutes three minutes five minutes five minutes Five minutes sizzle five minutes sizzle. Yep could be bang and and I've actually already written out a semi Oh, you know sizzle so kind of a loose leaf kind of like how I thought it should be how we can edit it But does it right out? Yeah, but you know whatever it comes up whatever somebody comes up with something better I mean, I'm on novice. I don't really know what I'm doing as far as the sizzle is concerned But yeah, but we've definitely got the footage Beautiful Thank God Stephen was here to shoot it and yep Stephen did most of it. Stephen said it all up Steve was a cinematographer and Do you need to draw with them? I am I just was the driver pretty much yeah All right, tell the room where they can find your YouTube channel follow your podcast all that stuff Let's wrap it up. I'll get the fuck out of here. It's not a lot listen to be honest with you guys can do better I'll be honest It's Matt Cox inside true crime if you have some time check it out for podcast a week. Matt's a goddamn workhorse Knocking it out. We'll link it below Good night everybody see ya