must be a little weird to get scooped by CNN on Joe Biden's dementia. Like you have no idea. None of us knew, you know, but no, that now, Jake Tapper has uncovered the truth. Like it turns out Joe Biden was in cognitive decline. Did you know that? How did he find out? Just hardcore shoe leather investors working his horses, working his sources, like calling all the people on Washington, digging up like for your documents. I just find the Epstein file so fast and because the two biggest issues are, are there people to whom he's trafficked minors, but nobody has been charged with being the recipient of that sex trafficking. But the much more interesting question for me is was he working with or for any foreign intelligence agencies? Israel is the number one recipient of the NSA technology and NSA intelligence. But at the same time, the documents that describe who are our greatest intelligence threats, who are our greatest intelligence adversaries. Chief spies on us the most who is capable of spying out the most. Number one on the list is Israel as well. And I think last time you're hearing I am bushed you just by rolling the cameras, not doing that. We are on camera right now. Right. It was funny because every show you ever go on, it always begins in some sort of way to indicate that you're actually starting like, Glenn, great, well, welcome to the program. Thank you, Tucker, for having me. But the last time I was on, we were just sitting here chatting and it turned out 10 minutes and I was like, oh, we're rolling. Yeah, we've been rolling since we started. Yeah, but you are one of those people. And this is the highest compliment I can give who's exactly the same off camera, exactly the same as you are on camera. Right. That's why I that's why I thought our conversation was just the conversation that we always have. And it turned out it was just the show, which may no difference. I went one day, your staff courteously got me see this first time in it. I was like, yeah, that's what I think. That's how I speak and that's all fine. Yeah, there is if you like Glenn Greenwald, you like him at dinner. Trust me, that's what I can say about you. So you are, I think the Dean of alternative media, you've been doing this longer than anybody that I know personally. So it must be a little weird to get scooped by CNN on Joe Biden's dementia. Like you have no idea. None of us knew. I mean, there was that debate and we were all shocked, but we were like, but we were told he had a cold. So it's like, okay, he's on some cold medication. Like who hasn't been there before. Let me see a little dog drag drag, like a little doggy, a little groggy, a little just like drag, but no, that now Jake Tapper has uncovered the truth. Like it turns out Joe Biden was in talking of the client. Why do you know that? How did he find out? Just hardcore shoe leather investors working his sources, like calling all the people in Washington digging up like for a document. No, it really, you know, one of those things where you kind of can't believe what you're witnessing because Jake Tapper is pretending to have uncovered a scandal that he himself led the way in the media or one of the leaders in the media, uncovering up to the point where if somebody would go on his show and say Joe Biden is obviously in cognitive decline, he can't get a sentence out. He would say how dare you bully kids who stutter. Like what do you, what do you want all ashamed of what you're doing? That's what he told Laura Trump, but she was like, yeah, I just, I feel bad for Joe Biden. I wish you could get a sentence out. He's like, do you ever think about what you're doing to kid to stutter in the kind of world you're creating for them? And she's like, what? And I get everyone else. I never even knew Joe Biden had his stutter. I've been watching him for decades. I never saw him stutter before. The whole stuttering thing was just it's actually that. Yes, he told Laura Trump that she was like in an event and she was a very like, you know, benign remark. She was just saying, yeah, you watched Joe Biden because we talked about this before. I was on your show. It wasn't even when he was president. It was in the run up to the 2020 campaign and we were talking about this. And we always talked about everybody I know did. No one takes joining it. Like we've all had that experience of watching an older person and our family, you know, go through cognitive decline. It's actually quite sad. So the way she was saying it was like, yeah, you know, honestly, as a human being, I watched Joe Biden and he's in the middle of a sentence that he can't finish. I'm like, come on, Joe, get that out. And then when he went on, she went on a jig tap or show, he played that tape. He said, do you understand the world of bullying that you're creating for kids who stutter? And she was like, what? I'm just wondering, stuttering kids. Yeah. And she's like, I didn't even know he had a stutter. And he said, and we all know he has a stutter. And I know that you are mocking his stutter. And so this was not just a person who didn't speak about Joe Biden's cognitive decline. Who's now uncovering this shocking truth that 85% of the public has known for years according to polls. He would go on, I heard him this week saying one of the very few people because he was asked why didn't people in the Democratic Party speak up and say this and say, I'll know it. And he said, well, Dean Phillips tried and he got mauled and maligned in his character was attacked by the Democratic Party. I was like, by the Democratic Party, go watch what happened when Dean Phillips went on jig tap or show and said that one of the reasons he was running for president, he was concerned about Joe Biden's age and his infirmities and how he couldn't win and couldn't govern. And jig tap or said to him, do you know that your Democratic colleagues despise you and they've been telling me he worth possible thing? That's what he did to everybody who went on his show in order to say, hey, I think Joe Biden was incognition of the client. He was, I mean, obviously he wanted Biden to win desperately and would not tolerate anyone going on the show and saying that Biden was incognition of the client. And now he's making millions of dollars off a book. But the only good thing is that his credibility is so in tatters from it that he had to hire a PR crisis firm like the kind of Anthony Weiner had to hire that like, Puffy Combs hired like a imagine being a journalist and being exposed as such a fraud that you have to hire a PR crisis team of the kind that like public figures hire when they're involved in some like big, you know, sex scandal or like bribery scandal. That's whose managing jig tapers behavior and his compartment. They've tried to place like hit pieces on me and 16, like, you know, shitty places like the daily beast. But every and everything he says now is scripted, you know, like every interview he does now at first, it was like, I can, what are you talking about? This is outrageous. And now every time he's in an interview, he says, I look back on my coverage with humility. You know that phrase they feed you to make it seem like you're accepting accountability that you're really not. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. What's interesting though is to that it wasn't just, you know, I disagree with you. I Biden seems fine to me. What's interesting is that he used the kind of most vulgar or moral blackmail you can't like you're attacking children who stutter. You're attacking disabled kids when you criticize the president of the United States. Like that is so low. It's hard to believe that happened. I haven't seen the clip. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, he claims he called or a large Trump to apologize. Maybe he should do that on his show since that's where he told his audience. She was attacking kids who stutter. Like that's a pretty, that's like going to the worst thing he's pretty much that you could do is like bully kids with disabilities. Right. Like if I could never did that, I would punish them for three months. You know, so like accusing her of having done that, like probably doesn't warrant a pop private apology or maybe it does too. But also, you know, you go on there and you were like, hey, I did something really despicable. You know, it's so amazing too, as they're trying to rewrite history. Obviously, one of the ways they're trying to rewrite history is to say we were the victims of the fraud. We and the media were the victims of the fraud. And we're so angry at this inner team of Joe Biden's White House advisors who kept this from us, who hid this, even though the entire public knew forever. But I know I've written about this so many times. It drives me crazy how easily history is rewritten. The first time I ever heard concerns about Joe Biden's cognitive decline was back in in 2018 when the Democratic field was coalescing of, you know, people who were going to run against Donald Trump. And they were really worried Joe Biden was going to get the nomination solely by virtue of name recognition because he was the vice president to to Barack Obama for eight years. Was viewed as loyal has been around forever. And they all knew there was no way he could sustain the rigors of an election because he was in cognitive decline. And so it was like these Democratic operatives like Andrea Mitchell talked about it. Where you book her and Julian Castro in that 2019 debate all made fun of Biden for not being able to remember what he had said three seconds ago. This was the Democrats who were raising it trying to alert everybody that you shouldn't vote for Joe Biden because he's not the same Joe Biden he was. I'm not talking about 20, 20, 30. I'm talking about 2018 and 2019. Remember the minute it was down to Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders in the 2020 primary, that's when all of a sudden the media narrative shifted and it became the only people who are talking about Biden's supposed to cognitive decline are Bernie bros and Maga people and it's absolutely immoral and disgusting. And that's when I wrote an article saying, what do you mean you were the ones who first raised it? I heard it from you. You know, they did those DC insiders. So it's not and the only reason why you know what say Joe Biden from that was that COVID happened and he got to run the campaign from his basement where he only talked to like Nicole Wallace. He spoke to him like some, you know, L.A. and Grandpa. You know that voice that you use for like your L.A. and Grandpa like Mr. President or Mr. Biden hello, oh and then you did that fake laugh they could get even close to a joke because those were the kind of interviews he was doing and he was in that basement in Delaware. That's the only reason why he could sustain that campaign. But it was so widely known. I mean his sister Valerie told a good friend of mine that she didn't want him to run in 2020 because he had dementia. My former makeup artist, he made a part of this was there in the room when he was injected with amphetamines before an event more than once during that campaign. And like I said all that on TV and everyone I knew and DC who knew Biden I knew Biden said yeah no he's got dementia like everybody, everybody knew everybody knew it wasn't just like some right wing Twitter thing where people are being cruel. It was like the people who knew Biden knew that. So like how could you not, well I think the reason this media for all the other media frauds that have been perpetrated is probably the most damaging. In 2016 they pushed this whole deranged demented conspiracy theory that Vladimir Putin had sex tapes on Donald Trump where he was being urinated on by a prostitute and of course if you know Donald Trump that's pretty much the last thing that all the people on the planet is one thing he didn't commit. Yeah no for sure. But you know it was that sort of thing like they always accused people on the pandemic or you know whoever of being conspiracy theorists like think about that conspiracy like Donald Trump was being blackmailed by the Russian government into sacrificing the interest of the United States to serve the interests of the Kremlin that really was the predominant media narrative from 2016 to 2018. So that's what they did to try and stop Trump the first time. In 2020 you know weeks before the election the New York Post had very serious reporting about the Biden family and ethically exploiting Joe Biden's influence in Ukraine and China to profit not for themselves only but also for Joe Biden and we were told by the media over and over the lie that this is Russian disinformation that this laptop should be the contents of it should be ignored because it's inauthentic. That of course was when I left the intercept because they wouldn't let me write about it claiming that the results about its authenticity when I knew there weren't but that was an end Twitter and Facebook centered it. But on those kind of questions like Russia gate the authenticity of these emails like for most Americans they don't have the competence to judge that because they do other things. But when it comes to seeing older people and cognitive decline most of them have had that experience with like a grandparent or a parent or a sibling or a neighbor or whatever and don't need to be told by quote unquote experts that is happening because they can see it with their own eyes. And for the media to have sat there for a year and a half and told everybody as Joe Scarborough said this version of Joe Biden is the best Biden we've ever seen. I mean imagine being such a state propagandist that you do that and then keep your job. I think that's why this scandal is so devastating to them and why like when Jake Tapper stands up to write a book saying I've uncovered the truth with investigative reporting. You know everybody is reacting with justifiable nausea. You got him and it takes some balls to do that though. I mean I famously advocated for the Iraq war realized in 2003 that it was a bad idea and said I was wrong. What I didn't do was write a book saying like it was wrong and I always thought it was wrong. Or like hey I'm here to write a book saying why the Iraq war was based on falsehoods. It's like we already know Tucker thank you right. You didn't go and write that book because you were the one helping to perpetuate that. I totally agree. So I guess without repentance without the acknowledgement of wrongdoing of dishonest without saying I screwed up and making that the headline nothing that follows is credible at all. It's like all fake unless you admit your role in the lie. Right. And if that happened if you said like look I was really swept up in the media bubble. Yes. And I want to tell the story of why I did this or how I got I convinced myself of this lie. Then there would be some nobility to it. There would be some value and work. Yes. This is what I mean like I was there were several people but myself was included who was I was bashed in the table every day. You know we were compiling tapes of Jake Dapper doing all the things that had just referenced. And I remember at the time Jake Dapper always serving the Democratic Party in these ways. And his initial response was to send out like publicists to try and you know plant stories that I was lying that I was manipulating media. There was one in the Daily Beast, one in the Huffington Post. We actually attacking you. Oh yeah. They were pitching stories like yeah there's you know they were in like shitty liberal sites that no one like having to post in the Daily Beast. There was a couple others. But they had pitched them like to the New York Post at the Wall Street Journal I think as well like New York Post got in contact with me. They didn't they didn't run it because it was so easy to prove that what was the allegation that all of these incidents that I just described and there were others as well of things he did on his show were like taking out a contact or the video was manipulated. Just like they did when people saw Joe Biden wandering around on that D-Day and had to be you know redirected by Georgia Maloney or having been taken out the stage by this that's the other thing. They didn't just deny it. They attacked anyone who said it. People in 2024 who were saying oh look Biden clearly doesn't know where he is including at that event with Obama that big George Clooney fundraiser. The Washington Post were in articles saying they were using it was a new phrase cheap fakes like they weren't exactly fake but the narrative was fake and anyone who said Joe Biden clearly isn't cognitive decline if you look at him at these events they were called right wing disinformation agents. And as it turns out George Clooney ended up saying the reason why I wanted Biden not to run was because the Joe Biden I saw that event was completely unrecognizable. He was like he was he has dementia. At the time when people were saying like clearly he doesn't know where he is being led up the stage by Barack Obama. None of this was new we this is what we have been seeing for so long the media affirmatively use that disinformation term that has become their weapon of deception and and propaganda and smearing people who tell the truth to label all of that disinformation. And so they were the ones who perpetrated the fraud. And now they're pretending like they're the ones uncovering it. It is I think the reason they don't get it is because of that insulated bubble that they exist in they all do believe that their truth will their good their benevolent or not partisan. And that unfortunately there was no way for them to have told the story because Mike Donald and was lying about it or Joe Biden was keeping the truth from them. And so what can they do? So here's a company we're always excited to advertise because we actually use their products everyday it's merry weather farms. Remember when everybody knew their neighborhood butcher you look back and you feel like oh there was something really important about that knowing the person who cut your meat. And at some point your grandparents are the people who raised their meat. So they could trust what they ate. But that time has long gone it's been replaced by an era of grocery store mystery meat boxed by distant beef corporations. Look none of which raised a single cow unlike your childhood they don't know you they're not interested in you the whole thing is creepy the only thing that matters to them is money and God knows what you're eating. Merry weather farms is the answer to that they raised their cattle in the US and Wyoming Nebraska and Colorado and they prepare their meat themselves in their facilities in this country. No middlemen no outsourcing no foreign beef sneaking through a backdoor nobody wants foreign meat. Sorry we have a great meat the best meat here in the United States and we buy ours at merry weather farms. Their cuts are pasture raised hormone free antibiotic free and absolutely delicious. I gourged on one last night you got to try this for real every day we eat it go to merryweather farms dot com slash Tucker use the code Tucker 76 for 15% off your first order that's merryweather farms dot com slash Tucker. I think that kind of self deception is a byproduct of the tribalism that really defines DC and it's like we can't help the other side like they're we're going to start with the other side is evil in anything that helps them we can't do therefore we're going to have to make some accommodations that may include lying but it's not really lying it's in the service of the greater good. Oh yeah which is what every person who has ever done anything evil has said to justify it. I'm not an evil person I'm not a sociopath I'm doing something that seems evil but it's for a greater cause the end of justify the means I mean it's the most basic. Yes. All statement you can have and that's since the emergence of Trump that is all that journalism has become not just journalism but so many academia yeah so many different institutions have renounced their core function whatever that might be science in order to devote themselves to this monomoneical mission of stopping Donald Trump and his movement and you know Sam Harris just whether through stupidity or just like in an like an advisable candor you know was the first one who came out when the hundred by the laptop stuff after he realized it was a lie and said like yeah I guess this laptop was true but at the end of the day I really don't care if they have to lie about it fine the evil of a like Donald Trump is so much greater and he was the first one to really candidly acknowledge what they are all thinking which is will I will spread disinformation will you know hide things because the destruction and fear that we have of Donald Trump in power is so great that anything we do to try and impede it is not just asifiable but almost like morally imperative that is how most of these institutions ended up reasoning and that's why they lost their credit world detrick bonhoeffer right yeah it's very self-corrifying too like we're on the frontline of fighting fascism what I mean this is such a tired question but I've never really gotten an answer that satisfies me what is I mean I look at Trump and I'm like you know this is not a radical person in most ways why in a lot of the things that he says are things that the Democratic Party was like officially four ten years ago you know less wars pay attention to the forgotten man free trade is kind of bad right exactly great I mean this is these are not he is not a radical right winger is I would have conceived of a radical right winger in nineteen ninety eight or two thousand eighteen so why why but the hive like reacted to him like the devil does holy water just like I can't be near you what what is that I still don't fully understand it I think it's two things one less important though still not trivial which is comport mentally he's just such a radical departure from the way anybody who has ever gotten close to the presidency has conducted themselves and I remember so well the time there is here yeah it's true but like but once you understand what that is you can put it in your proper in the proper context and not go insane about it I remember the time that I realized just how far gone the media was when it came to this and like the political establishment generally which was during the 2016 campaign when they kept asking about a collusion with Russia inclusion with Russia and all that and he said I don't know anything about that I have nothing to your Russians but hey Russians if you're listening they were asking did you participate in the haptic yeah it was like I didn't have anything to do with that but hey like Russia if you're listening maybe you could find Hillary Clinton's like eighty seven thousand deleted emails which was obviously like a joke just yeah yeah yeah just a joke I have nothing to do with Russia but if there's such great hackers maybe they can buy the media took that and they for over a year earnestly pretended that this was proof that he was in kuhu with Russia because he submits hacking requests to Russia like if you have some like factorial secret relationship with Russia the way you're going to like submit your request is by standing in front of 130 cameras and be like hey Putin this is my latest hacking request go find those emails instead of like having a you know Don Jr. meet in a parking lot with some like Russian Asian or whatever I mean but the fact that they they were willing to they really thought that that was a smoking gun and could not understand how Trump jokes how he uses irony how he like purposely trolls was you know the time that I realized just how far gone they were but I think the bigger reason why they were I think we've talked about this before is I would say since the end of world war two maybe before that but certainly since the the end of world war two what we have more or less is a continuity of core Washington dogma on foreign and economic policy right you have you know on the margins things that make it appear like the parties are so different they fight about abortion they do do to screen abortion or culture war issues all of that but on the question of how powers distributed on how the US maintains global hegemony on feeding the war machine on how our economic system functions and whom it who it serves there is complete continuity between Republicans Democrats like those permanent power factions Washington the corporatism militarism don't care at all who wins because their policies prevail no matter what you can vote for whoever you want you can vote against it you can vote for it doesn't matter it continues Trump buying necessity because they're Republicans that already chosen Jeff Bush as there can't we all expected it was going to be another Bush Clinton race it was going to be Joe Bush and Hillary Clinton that was the assumption that everyone had Hillary would have lost had the DNC not cheated for her but they did cheat for her so she was the nominee but the only way Trump could break through how do you break through against all the Republican money behind you Bush you have to run against the Bush family you have to run against conservative Republican dogma on both finding economics and foreign policy he ran against the Iraq war he ran against permanent war he ran against serving corporatism at the expense of the working people against free trade at the expense of you know in like having an industrial base and he became a kind of threat and Steve Benham was the architect of the time and Steve Benham's vision very much was that like the Republican establishment is at least as bad as the Democratic establishment and he was a threat to disrupt this bipartisan continuity on which power factions in Washington depending I think that's what made him so anathe much is so many different factions he was a challenge to the post war order basically like questioning the viability of NATO which it's like walking into a church and saying like we sure Jesus is divine you know like that alone that that actually changed my life when he said that I grew up around NATO grew up supporting NATO unthinkingly never thought of you know guys they'd 100% NATO keeps the Soviets from rolling into Belgium you know and like that's good what's why is that bad of course we love NATO and then he was like hey but like the Soviet Union doesn't exist anymore that no one had ever in a lifetime of DC no one had ever mentioned NATO in a way that challenged me to think about what it was or its role until that and he just said offhandedly and I was like NATO really he's against NATO how could you begin NATO and that began a chain of thinking that totally changed my view of everything so I think you're right it's dangerous to people saying stuff like that I mean you just what you want is per continuity with the status quo yeah and like who was a more reliable maven of the status quo than Hillary Clinton yes or Joe Biden and so that's why they were so desperate including all you know all the neo cons and conservatives that you knew so many of them openly supported Clinton Biden and many of them like to this day like half the Republican Senate caucus at least hate Trump hate his ideology he's just oh yeah you were you were doing like rounds voted for Trump like so I don't know but I'm just saying right that's those types yeah so can I just go back I want to ask you more about that and like the place of neo conservatives and I guess we're not even to use that term so think of a new term as I asked all right I will but before you get that like you mentioned Russia get a couple of times and the hacking and the subsequent leaking of those emails from the DNC who did that it's possible of course the Russians did it like sometimes you get the official story and it's possible you know I know Julian Assange a long time I know him very well and what a good man oh he's I think he's like one of the heroes of our life degree and not just a hero but like incredibly consequential and it just a decent person too and like brilliant and courageous not without his personality flaws but oftentimes that kind of of courage I get whenever people he's complained about Julian's difficult personality let's do the generous term difficult personality I would always say like who do you think is going to go in like spill the secrets of the world's most powerful government you think it's going to be some like mild matter like gentle genial person no it takes a certain personality yes yes and but in an event he had insinuated several times that it came from within the DNC he had raised the possibility that Seth Rich was murdered because he was the leaker and it was Julian was WikiLeaks who ran those docs it was WikiLeaks who received them yet but who who shared them with the world who then published them all exactly so it's not a small thing when the guy who runs WikiLeaks suggests something correct that said if you are the recipient of leaks as I've been many times you don't actually know who the kind of you're not sure if the person bringing you the leaks or is the person who actually engineered it that could be a cut you know go between and but at the same time you know Julian is extremely smart you know I talked to him this day he's I think not fully recovered he'll never be I mean after what he went through but his brain is you know just like a font of insight and I trust his judgment so much you can go back and look at stuff he said and it proved to be so prescient and so when he says that I do think Julian sees himself for good reason as an enemy of the intelligence agencies in the west I mean he is that so undoubtedly we did like seven and a half years in confinement because of it yeah like nine eight years in the Ecuador and embassy and then four and a half years in the prison that the BBC calls go on the the British Guantanamo so Mike Pompeo the head of CIA plotted his assassination so I think he has assassination batch of the Ecuadorians into lifting the asylum they had given him and promised him and allowed the one in police to go in and you know coerced threatened bribed the Ecuadorians to lift that asylum that grant of asylum so that they could then go in and Mike Pompeo and it's like first month as CIA director gave a speech saying we're going to destroy WikiLeaks it's the time that they stopped hiding behind the first amendment so he was very serious about that he's Mike Pompeo should be charged with plotting someone's assassination that's a crime you can't do that in the United States I mean there's so many things Mike Pompeo should be charged with but we know for certain that he was wanting I mean he was the CIA director thinking oh now I get to murder people who I want yeah who embarrass me who've never been trying who committed crimes he'd never been charged with the crime in the United States when that until like until 2018 right when when when they engineered this you know obscenely baseless indictment that they knew they never wanted to bring them to the United States to stand trial he would never have been convicted they wanted to break him psychologically and physically and they came very close to doing that but in an event so when Julian Assange says something like that part of me knows that he views himself as an enemy of the intelligence agencies and wants to use the same methods they use which is sometimes you spread disinformation for confusion but I also believe that he believes there's the enemy of the intelligence agencies and wants to use the same methods they use, which is sometimes you spread disinformation for confusion. But I also believe that he believes there's something to it. And so we never had a real investigation into to anything relating to renegade at all, because in the first term, Trump was, you know, that whole administration was commandeered. It was run by people who were opposed to Trump's agenda for the most part. And part of this new administration is constructed to avoid that from happening. And I think they are now going back and looking at a lot of these things. So we're not positive. If crypto currencies, the future of finance, but we do know that what we have now is broken and dangerous. debt has never been higher in this country. Many of our so-called leaders are getting rich, serving you. It's a scam. So where does it go? Well, thankfully there are options. Donald Trump has said repeatedly he wants the United States to be the crypto capital of the world. He's already created the crypto advisory council and recently signed an executive order to establish a Bitcoin strategic reserve. This could give normal people an alternative to the government's failing system and frankly to the US dollar. I'm not saying put all your money outside the US dollar, but like don't be crazy. Don't be stupid here. You can see where it's going. So the people at I trust capital can help you get in to this. It's complicated for people aren't following it. They make it easy. They're based 100% in the United States of America. We looked into this. They serve as only American investors and they operate the only platform that allows you to buy and sell crypto 24 seven both inside and outside of your tax advantage to IRA. And it all happens on one easy to use dashboard. They'll also operate a closed loop system, meaning that bad actors can't access your account and steal your money. So if you're considering adding Bitcoin, if you want to or some other cryptocurrency portfolio, I trust can be trusted and it's easy to understand. I trust capital dot com or click the link below. What do you think the chances are that those emails came from a DNC employee? I don't know. I just I don't like to I'm open to it. I'm definitely open to it, but I'm not going to affirm it. I think it's very strange. Probably. I got from an MPD Metropolitan League Department officer who was a friend of mine, the fact which I checked, which is that the FBI immediately took over the murder investigation. Now why would the FBI of a routine supposedly routine random attempted robbery? Why would the FBI take that? Right. Like is there a good reason for that? That's bizarre. Yeah, I know. Um, that's why I say I'm open to it. Even though you know, that's been something that is immediately branded like such an obvious conspiracy theory that the second you suggest that you're receptive to it. But that's exactly when conspiracy theories are often ones that deserve attention. I don't know. And American citizen got murdered in my city. And so I feel like I have an absolute right to ask why the FBI take that over and what did they learn? And like what is that? That's a totally fair question. They don't, you know, it's so funny. They set themselves up as the arbiters of everything is the moral arbiters for sure. And you're like, not allowed to ask that question. It's like, I live. I spent my life in DC. I know this treat he was shot on. He's an American just like me. I have absolutely a fundamental right to ask like and same with Epstein. Why wasn't there a real investigation into this? And like this seems anomalous. Like what's the answer? Well, you know, you know what? And then the topic is by like the bench peers of the world and the people who are the say like the people who have been wanting themselves to be the guardians of official versions or, you know, no challenging any sorts of like, why did the USS Liberty happen? Those kind of things like what happened with JF? My favorite was why did JF camera? I don't care. It was a long time ago. Yeah, it was a long time ago. And uh, the pressure guy murdered that now is just asking questions. So big. Oh, it's like, I don't know. I feel like my job is like a not just a journalist, but a human being in a citizen is like I kind of want to be asking questions. I don't want to just be ingesting what I'm told because what we've been told has been proven to be deliver lives so often. Also, I like people who ask questions. I'm uncomfortable with people who make declarative statements exclusively because you actually don't know the answer to most like I said, where do you think those emails came from? Podesta's emails, DNC emails and you're like, I don't really know, but here are the questions that I have like, that's the honest answer. Well, also, you know, times not just in politics where deliver lives happen, but in every field of discipline, like physics and chemistry and biology, everything linguistics where a certain time arrives and people believe they discovered an absolute proven truth by the next generation. It's completely debunked. Like if you don't have, and that's why I believe in the absolute necessity of preserving the right to question everything. That's the scientific method. Yeah, and it's just basic humility. It's like to think that human beings have discovered unchallenged truths that can never be disproven in the end of that from here. Henceforth, you're not a lot of question. No, I'm not accepting that from anybody. Oh, I want to print that and put it on my fridge. I'll give you I'll sign it for you. Thank you. Um, yeah. Okay. So, let me, let me do the apps. Do you want to talk about the the aftermiles and relations that as well? Yeah, sure. I mean, just because I just want to, I just find the Epstein files so fascinating because all the people who are now in charge of the government under Donald Trump, particularly cash battalion, Dan Bungino at the FBI, but others as well throughout the government were over the last four years everywhere in the media on their shows on every other show banging on the table, demanding the immediate release of all the Epstein files. We're now five months into the Trump administration. We haven't gotten a single document that wasn't previously published of the Epstein files. They made a humiliating showing a pretending to release it when they called those conservative influence and they'll wave around the binder Epstein files. We're like, oh my God, what was in them? And then it turns out like nothing. You know, just every document that was in this binder was already previous release, the litigation or journalism that was done. And the PAMBODD is new excuse because I mean, I'm glad that there are a lot of people in the Trump movement and the mock movement who are not contrary to how they're depicted in some sort of cult. Like they hold these people accountable. Like they want to understand like we were promising things like why isn't this happening? And so PAMBODD's excuse now is we have thousands and thousands of sex videos of Jeffrey Epstein having sex with minors, implying that it's obviously going to take a lot of time to go through these videos. And therefore we have to be patient before we get them. It's like I don't care about sex videos of Jeffrey Epstein having sex with children because we already know that Jeffrey Epstein had sex with children. That's kind of the reason we know who he is. He's been twice charged with that once convicted and then was ready to be charged again. For me, the two biggest issues are are there people to whom he's sex trafficked minors? Because he was charged with sex trafficking, but nobody has been charged with being the recipient of that sex trafficking. But the much more interesting question for me is and there's a lot of reason to believe it's true is was he working with or for any foreign intelligence agencies? There is no way they don't already have that answer. Maybe the answer is no. Maybe he wasn't working with any it's it would be shy with shock me, but maybe that's their answer. Maybe their answer is he was. Why don't we have those answers? Like have FBI agents for whatever reason go through those sex tapes for the next three years. That's fine. What stops them from releasing that question? For people who may not be as familiar with the details, what leads you to raise that question? Is there evidence that suggests he might have been working with the foreign intelligence? Well, first of all, the source of his wealth has always been mysterious. I mean, he wasn't just very rich. He was living the life of a multi multi billionaire. He had you know, $50 million properties and Manhattan and what was Pompe Beach and New Mexico flying around on a 747. This is not just like somebody who's very wealthy. This is somebody with essentially unlimited resources, right? Like Bill Gates type well. And one of the ways one of the his primary benefactors is last Wexner who is a multi billionaire. Somebody with whom he were closely and I guess the argument or the the claim is he was a brilliant strategist for how to save taxes, how to save money on taxes. He was like a highly competent accountant. Basically, yeah, he gets tax account. That's how they tell you how like what strategies to use to save money. So maybe less Wexner valued him so much that he gave him I don't know $3 billion in general billionaires. Don't like to give money away that they don't have to. Maybe less Wexner is like super generous. Like oh, so grateful you're Jeffrey Epstein. Here's like $2 billion. But less Wexner has all sorts of ties to like his main non money making endeavor in life is supporting Israel and donating to to pro Israel groups and working closely with the Israeli government. Jazane Maxwell, who's now in prison as having been essentially his right hand man, her father Robert Maxwell who died in a very mysterious way. He slipped off his yacht was a known massage and he worked with the massage. He had very close ties to Israel. We all knows even a state funeral. Yes, in Israel. Yes. And you know, when I did this note in reporting, people there's a lot of documents that we released that in just because there were so many there, not not not all, not all, not got the attention they deserved. One of the set of files we released described the intelligence relationship that we have with Israel. The NSA has with Israel. Israel is the number one recipient of the NSA technology and NSA intelligence. We share more with Israel. Even more than we do with the five eyes partners who developed this technology, we give more to Israel, more intelligence, intelligence about Americans as well and more intelligence know how. But at the same time, the documents that describe who are our greatest intelligence threats, who are our greatest intelligence adversaries. You've spies on us the most who is capable of spying at the most. Number one on the list is Israel as well. Obviously these really use some, I mean, the most dangerous spying programs like Pegasus and others come from Israel are developed by Israel are controlled by the Israelis by which I simply mean to say that Israel uses every weapon as a disposal, including gathering and incriminating information about the enemies. Some people have suggested that, oh no, it's not Israel. It's probably the Kateri intelligence agencies within New York. Maybe it was like, maybe it was Peru. Maybe it was like Indonesia. People said that Epstein was working with the Kateri. Yeah. There's, I want to keep a list of people who make that claim. Do you know any? It's pretty funny. Like, like supporters of like loyalists of Israel in the United States are now constantly trying to convince people that the real foreign government that is extra earning extreme amounts of influence over our politicians and our institutions is Kater. I find it hilarious. And I'm always like, you know what? Let me know when the Congress starts passing on a weekly basis pro-Kater resolutions or when like students are being expelled and deported because they've criticized Kater. Let me know when like we start sending billions of dollars a year to Kater. Let me know when all that starts to happen and I'll be receptive to the fact that maybe Kateri. But anyway, I'm not saying it's Israel. I'm just saying the nature of what Jeffrey Epstein was doing, the amount of wealth that it required, the number of the most powerful elites on the planet who were with him, who were involved with him, who were at his island too, despite knowing that he had been convicted in 2010 of having sex with minors, hiring prostitutes who were underage, who continued to consort with him in the proximate ways. Something was going on there. It would be incredibly valuable. He had cameras in every part of his house. He had tapes of everything. Obviously that would be of immense value to any foreign intelligence agent. And American. He was close friends with Bill Burns. Right. Maybe he had this. Maybe domestic intelligence agencies as well. But it really is starting to inflate my suspicions. A great deal every day that goes by when we're not getting that information particularly because the people who have it are the people who spent years demanding its release and promising to facilitate it if they got into power. You're probably pretty sick and Nike. It's hard to blame me for feeling that way. Any company that worships Colin Kaepernick, any company that chills for the lunacy of the left social agenda is clearly not on your side. In fact, they're your enemy. You need an alternative. X, X, Y, athletics is the far better choice. It's the only athletic brand committed to fighting for free speech, women's sports and the truth. Honesty, the truth. They're not going to lie to you. For example, to show that 80% of Americans oppose letting men play in women's sports. That's not a radical view. It's a moderate sensible view rooted in biology. The woke corporations like Nike make you feel like a lunatic for saying obvious things like men or men and women or women. That is tyranny. How can you fight back by abandoning the company's promoting it and by embracing companies like XX, XY, athletics. It's an American company. It's not opposed to the United States or to telling the truth. Head to the truth fits.com to learn a lot more and use the code Tucker25 for 25% off. Two facts. Data points are now called that suggests to me that something's up. One is the fact that Epstein was represented in his first time with the authorities in Florida by Bill Crystal's lawyer, J. LeFQuitz, and who I know. The second is the statement by Alex Acosta, which I think maybe is at the top of your memory about why Epstein got off so easily. How is this not talked about every day? Okay. In Florida, in the United States generally, having sex with minors, hiring, using minors as prostitutes is considered a pretty terrible crime. Most people agree on that. I don't really have to debate that. That's considered something that deserves huge amounts of jail time and typically results in huge amounts of jail time. Jeffrey Epstein barely went to jail for that. As part of the plea bargain, the enormous amounts of evidence, it wasn't a question of could they prove his guilt. They gave him a plea deal. A plea deal where he spent like six seconds in jail and then most of the time at home doing community service. And Alex Acosta, who was the US attorney for the Southern District of Florida at the time, which was in charge of the case, that's where Epstein was. Ultimately, I ended up in a just department and other roles inside the government. And so he was constantly asked, why would you give Jeff for Epstein such a generous plea deal that nobody would ever get for those crimes? And he ended up saying, I was told that he's intelligence and therefore leave him alone. That's what Alex Acosta, the prosecutor says that he was told about what he should do at the Jeffrey, like leave him alone because he's intelligent. Well, there were just kind of the conversation just like, and like we know now, if the prosecutor says the federal prosecutor in Florida says that, then I think we can assume that that's true. Right. So why do we know what that means? That's what I, you know, like what would be the reason that people inside the Trump administration who have long expressed vehemently, vocally at the top of their agenda demands that the Epstein files be released? Why are they not telling us that information? I think the net effect of this is to drive everyone insane and to make everyone like angry and suspicious and paranoid and conspiracy minded. I do think that it's like you expect that we're going to hear the truth. And then it's like, oh, by the way, no, everyone assumes the worst. I mean, why wouldn't you assume the worst? Well, you know, it's that improves Americans. The things like, you know, I whenever I talk about independent media, including from people who are supporters of it, believe it's a positive development, they all say, oh, but you know, there's so many conspiracy theories that end up being cultivated and spread that people embrace. And that's true. Yeah, of course. There's been a lot of conspiracy theories embraced by the credible legacy media as well. I mean, it wasn't like Reddit that convinced Americans saw them who saying how to an active nuclear weapons program. You know, the Joe Biden was the best version ever, right? Or that like the North Vietnamese were the aggressors and the Gulf of Pankin, right? That came from like CBS and Walter Cronkite in the New York Times. But in any event, of course, there's going to be Americans who are now as amenable to every conspiracy theory, because what have we lived through the Iraq war, the 2008 financial crisis, all of the lies in the 2011, 2011 itself. And then if you go back further, like the Vietnam war, but then also COVID. And like one after the next at best, massive fundamental systemic failure on the part of all the institutions we were taught to trust and probably at worst and probably more accurately, overwhelming deceit and lies and falsehoods and propaganda continuously disseminated by them in order to facilitate what they wanted. What is going to happen to a society where people lose faith and trust in institutions, not because, you know, Charlotte tends on the sidelines, encouraging them to make that happen, but because rationally, those institutions no longer merit trust or faith. If you lied too much, I don't believe you. It's kind of basic. So the only antidote to that is transparency is revealing the truth. And I really worry right now, especially that this is hardening people's cynicism and rage. And really at some point, nihilism, like nothing is true. That is the conclusion a lot of people are going to nothing astrotably, anything because all fake. Well, and also, you know, cash, battalion and my genome are people who were among the most popular among the Maga base. I mean, these were the people among the most respected. Again, by geno show on rumble, a platform that still maybe like 30, 40, maybe 50% of the people in the United States who have never even heard of was getting bigger audiences than almost every daytime cable show. Cash Patel, you know, the surge of support for him, and he was nominated to lead the FBI was massive because people thought, no, that's who we need to get in and root this out and clean it out. And I believe that they, they're, I believe there is something to that. I think they are authentic and genuine in that way. But at the same time, something is constraining them. And so I asked myself, what kinds of truths would people be determined to hide who are more powerful than they are? And when it comes to the Epstein files, I continuously zero in on that question of who was he working with or for whom? And I can see people in government not wanting that answer to be disclosed, just like the same reason we didn't have the JFK files and still don't. We still don't for 65 years. I know a bunch, you know, well, I think of him as a friend. I think he is a man of integrity. And, and I think his integrity remains pure because of his rage, like Dan's mad at lying. And so I do, I don't know what's going on at all. And to be clear, he said, I know that Epstein killed himself because I've seen the evidence. So I'm pretty confident in the case of Dan Bongino. I don't even mind that, but then the question still becomes like they said, they know how their, their supporters are going to react to that. Right. And they were among the people raising doubts about whether Epstein killed himself. I'm not I'm not, I wouldn't shock me if Epstein killed himself. Like you live a life of great wealth. And then suddenly you know, you're going to spend the prison. You just find your, the rest of your life in prison. It seems odd to me that you can go to a federal prison and kill yourself. Like there's not safeguards against that. But whatever. Think, I think got things that are running by the government failed. I'm not suggesting that they're lying about that. But even there, they're saying like, look, I promise you we read the files. He killed himself. So that my question is, well, why can't we read those that is my, that is my question too. And I would just say in the case of Bongino, I know cash but I'm not like a friend of cash tells him a friend of Bongino's. And I do think that will come out. But I think big picture DOJ is making a huge mistake, huge mistake in promising to reveal things and then not revealing them. And that gives the whole country a kind of moral blue balls at that point. And it's bad. It's really bad. Like it's going to, it's going to cause a lot of hate. And second, I think that we underestimate the physical threat that people in Washington face. It's always like blackmail or ideological affinity that gets people, people are forgetting hurt. I do think that's a company. I mean, I know that's a component here. I mean, political assassination, political murder has been going on for as long as politics have. And the JFK case is an example of the president of the United States having his head blown off. Exactly. Exactly. And you think that that's not ever present or constantly present in the minds of people in Washington. They killed the president. Got away with it for over 60 years. So like clearly there are forces that are above justice. I know. Don't really talk about as well. It was killed in Jack Ruby went to prison. Jack Ruby. The whole story is Jack Ruby. But with all stories, Jack Ruby. I mean, he just walked up to the person they had. And he just caught him in the stomach. And there's no evidence he even liked the Kennedys. There's zero evidence. He ever campaigned for them. Never gave them money. There's not one person who's ever come forward to say, you know, Jack Ruby was passionately attached to JFK. Not one person. Right. So like what was the motive there? He was clearly sent there to silence Lee Harvey Oswald. So by whom is the obvious question? There are very serious indications by whom. But whatever. I don't know. But I don't know why everyone spends all this time on Lee Harvey Oswald when the key to the story is so clearly Jack Ruby. Yeah. I mean, this is, I think we are so indoctrinated to believe that this sort of thing happens in other countries. Like how much think about how much we've heard, for example, about Putin and Navani. Right. And we're also supposed to like obsess on the idea that in Russia, you know, if you get too much influence, you become too much of a threat to somebody you get killed or imprisoned. The funny thing is Putin didn't even kill the valley. I think everybody, the CIA says that to like, no, there's no heavy exactly after months of well, of course, I got blamed for his murder. I was in Russia when he died. I was in Russia when he died. I was in Russia. You were going to go, you had your big Putin interview and then like two days earlier, Putin killed no money. And you're like, they're with Putin. No, but that's a big part of how that propaganda works. I grew up thinking that like these kind of bad things happen. They just don't happen in our country. It must be cool to live, you live outside the country, famously. We're, you know, you're a foreigner living in a country. You've been a long time. You speak the language, you're engaged in the politics. So you're like part of it, but you're also from the United States. So you're not coming at it with that baggage. You can see you're just like, you don't lie to yourself about what it is. Yeah, I do think I think one of the great, one of the things for which I'm most grateful is that I was never embedded in the DC political and media scene. And obviously you removed yourself from it, which is why we're here in not in Georgetown. It didn't help me being a part of that at all. I'll tell you, there's a, I've had a friendly relationship with Alex Thompson for a while. I've been, you know, joke, Jake Topper's co-author in that book for political report. Yeah. So now works at Axios. Yeah. And I've been very aggressive about praising him like going back two years when he was one of the only ones working for these news outlets who was on the story of Biden's cognitive decline, getting mauled and attacked by the entire Democratic party. I was often praising him and defending him. You know, I mean, I wouldn't say we're great friends, but you know, he like sent me a copy of the book with very nice words. And so when I go to attack Jake Topper, which is essentially attacking that book, of course, there's a part of my brain that like, you know, thinks about like, wait, what is that going to do to my relationship with Alex Thompson? And I guess we like, I don't care. But if that is your light, you know, I mean, Alex Thompson is not like an important close friend of mine. But like if you live in Washington and every your whole social scene is integrated into that is why there's no adversary relationship between the media. You know, funny, funny, so funny. I Jake Topper and Alex Thompson were on that shitty PBS show that is now hosted by Jeffrey Goldberg. So can you imagine the Washington Goldberg as a PBS show? Yes. Like the week in Washington. I did a free Goldberg hosted TV show. Yeah, a PBS like the week in Washington. It's like the most I know. You can't find anyone less telegenic. But anyway, he is the the person sits there like anyway, Jeffrey Goldberg was defending the media saying like, I think it's outrageous that we're being blamed for this whole thing. But by the end of the client when there was nothing we could do. And so at the end, he said to Jake Topper like, what is the lesson that we have to take from all this? And to pepper was got very serious. He like, Furt is brow, but he only like, look down at the table because he just, it was a very weird thing. Like he's just kind of, you know, he's on television every day. You know, you look up. You talk to people. You can get, he was like looking down in his head bowed. Like the face of somebody who has a PR crisis firm. And he said, uh, what I have realized is that you cannot trust what people in power tell you people in power lie. And when they tell you things, you have to take it with skepticism. You cannot take it on face value. So Jake Topper at 56 years old, after 30 years of working in journalism has discovered what if I were to teach college freshman a class on journalism would be the thing that I would say on the first day about what the job is, right? Like why it's important to have journalism because people in power lie to keep their power. And this is something that now that Trump's in office, they've suddenly discovered it's an important thing to do to be adversarial to people in power. And I think that is in their mind, like there is an element of truth to their revisionist history that makes them the victim. Like they are friends with Mike Donald and like I need a done. Their kids go to school, they're same schools. They live in the same neighborhoods. They intermarry. You know, like half these couples are like one media, one in politics and then the robin door that constantly switch and their obvious firms together. Washington is like, you know, Versailles. And so it's impossible to be adversarial. Man, we had dinner without naming names, but with the journalist last night, you and I did hear who I don't I never met before. Nice guy actually. But from DC grew up two blocks from me. Mother went to the same school that I did. He went to the same schools as everyone I know. I mean, it's like if you're from there, you are connected to every other person who's from there. Of course, it's like to a much greater extent than people understand just physically. Yes. It's like a British court like totally incestuous. Some believable, you know, this is what I think I think a lot of times, you know, because I've been a very harsh critic of media corporations and the like people, you know, ask me like when did this change or whatever? And I think there's always been a lot of closeness between the media and its supposed to heyday in the 50s with like with Murrow and Cronkite and all that. But you know, they were you look at Time Magazine and the New York Times, they were outposts for US propaganda and foreign policy during the Cold War. But I think, you know, there was a long time when journalism was considered this like working class, you know, outsider profession and the people who went into it didn't want to be like wearing our money suits and, you know, going to dinner at the White House and with like BLS celebrities, they were just like, you know, working class guys, you just want to like throw rocks at power. That's was the personality. That's why they wanted to journalism. And of course, going back even further, like the first amendment says, you know, all Americans enjoy freedom of the press. It's there was no such thing as like this secret priesthood of called journalists like professionals. Even the press was literally the printing press that everybody could use and everybody did use. You'd not to be a journalist to use it. It was just a means of expressing and disrupting and informing and organizing and that's what they protected. And as huge corporations started buying media outlets, you know, like Westinghouse buys CBS and then it's owned by Biocomp or just now on say, you know, that sort of thing, the corporatization of mainstream media. If you think about the kind of attributes that are required to succeed in large corporations, it's never being... If you think about the kind of attributes that are required to succeed in large corporations, it's never being disruptive to anybody who has authority, it's conformity, it's just sort of being a good soldier for people in power, which is the exact opposite attributes that make a good journalist. And the incentive schemes that journalists are now encouraged to follow to rise within media are the kind of people who worship power, who are obedient to it. And that to me has become the most fundamentally right apart. And that's why, you know, what inspired media journalism, like the blogosphere of like the early 2000s, which are just all these angry people on the right and left, like hating the media, no credentials, but like seeing things that they weren't seeing, you know, hating the Bush administration, but either from the right or from the left, hating the mainstream media, saying thing, and it like you start realizing like, wow, like this mainstream media and politics is like a tiny little like Obama once described it as, you know, like, well, like John Boehner is supposed to call me a communist, but you know, everyone knows the reality is we just fight within the 40 hard lines. Like we're basically on the same team. We just the 40 hard line. And you realize there's this whole other space and way of looking at things. And it was really the internet that gave rise to it, which is why the internet is in control and getting censoring it is the thing that is on the top of their agenda because it's the biggest threat to them. So the people trying to wreck our civilization want you to be passive. They want you weak so they can control you. Weakness is their goal. No, thanks. Our friends at Beam, a proud American company, understand that our country can only be great if its people are strong. And that's why they've created a new creatine product to help listeners like you stay mentally sharp and physically fit. People like to mock creatine. See, and that's like creatine at all. People buy it because it works. Beams creatine can help you improve your strength, your brain, health, your longevity. It's completely free of sugar and synthetic garbage that's in almost everything else that you eat. Of course, you don't hear about it too much because again, a population that is strong, clear minded and physically capable is a threat to tyrants. That's why they want you to play in video games to celebrate American strength. The actual American strength, Beam is offering up to 30% off their best selling creatine for the next 48 hours. Go to shop beam.com slash Tucker use the code Tucker at checkout. That's shop beam B. A. M. .com slash Tucker use the code Tucker up to 30% off. It's built on core values. Integrity results no BS. Beam, we strongly recommend it. Why do you see things? Well, I should just say, I think your mom worked at McDonald's actually. Yeah. I mean, I think it's just like, I think which wouldn't be shocking if you were in any other business, but I don't think I know a single other person. I don't think I know a single other person in our generation in media who can say that. Yeah. I think like, I do, Richard Nixon had this as well. This, you know, I think Trump has it to an extent too, even though like Trump grew up very wealthy, but it was like outer borough wealth, which is not looked upon kindly, but like old money and Manhattan. And then he comes into Manhattan and started building gigantic buildings and being all like flashy about it. You know, and so he understood that he was looked down upon by those people same with Richard Nixon, Richard Nixon always knew that like the intelligency on the East Coast. He didn't him thought he was disgusting. And I think if you were up feeling excluded from certain kind of power centers, there's always going to be a kind of resentment that you have toward it. And I suppose in some way that could lead to like a desperation to be integrated into it, but I think we're often the not in certainly my case, it maybe want to like deconstruct it and show like the facade that they use to glorify themselves, but the dirt and felt that really lay underneath. And I think that kind of distance really helps with clarity of vision. I totally agree. And traveling, you were saying last night that you think that traveling is one of the most expanding things you can do. I had this, I do that interview with Alexander Dugan, and I even interviewed him too. And I know we're all supposed to hate him and he's a fascist, whatever. But one of the reason I really love him is he's a philosopher. When I say I love him, I mean, I love talking to him. He's a philosopher. And I was like, that was, I know, I sometimes I studied philosophy in college. It was my obsession. I wanted to teach philosophy. I ended up being more practical in law school. But thinking about things in terms of their first principles and like always needing like rationale or logical training that gets you from the start of your question to the end of whatever answer you think you've embraced is very important to me. And just thinking about, you know, like not being reflexive. So one of the things he said to me was he said, you know, I'm always accused of being like a racist bar white supremacist because I'm so devoted to preserving Russian culture and Russian civilization. And he said, actually the biggest racist by far are Western liberals because they believe that their way of being is so superior that every single other culture should give way to adapting itself to their way of life. Like the whole world should be homogenized in their vision because they're inherently superior. Like they find a tribe, some ancient tribe and they want to immediately like mold it into like Washington, Neil liberals. And what he was saying was like what makes the world valuable and interesting and ultimately like the way you advance and think about things is that you have all these different traditions, all these different civilizations like Russian civilization and Chinese civilization and Muslim civilization. And Western civilization and preserving those is what ensures that we have this diversity of thought and it's like everything. Yeah, everything contributes something. Exactly. And so you are constantly told and maybe it's as universal when you grow up in a society that your way of life is, you know, we're always told like the United States is the greatest country ever to exist in the whole history of the world. Like what a great coincidence for me that I was born in like the objectively greatest country to ever be on the planet not just now but all of human history. And there are some parts of the United States. I know I love and I think are very uniquely valuable for sure. But the more you get to know other types of ways of thinking and you have this experience like it's some neighbor has a politics different than yours and you think they're crazy and then you go and talk to them and you understand them better. And then that makes you be more open to ways of looking at things that that to me is what you know like intellectual vibrancy is is going to places that you don't understand hearing ideas that you were taught to believe are crazy or evil or wrong. And then you know when you talk to the human beings who believe them you understand that they actually have as much conviction about it or as much rationale for it as you do for yours. I just think that's a beautiful sentiment and thank you for saying it. So what you're really arguing for his diversity. Yeah. Like diversity like not the kind that you know we've been told is diversity where everyone thinks the same thing but like they have surface level diversity. The Indian guy, the black guy and the white lady all went to Princeton and their diverse. Yeah. I remember this initiative where we wanted to diversify our newsroom at the intercept and so we hired like a black Harvard student his parents were partners of Golden Sacks and then like a Latino person who went to Yale and their partners were at JP Morgan and then like you know and that was like diversity like everything but like working class diversity or experiential diversity. You know the most like superficial kind the most easily accommodated kind. Yeah. I do know very much. So what did you think? So you interviewed Dugan and Russia in Moscow. What did you think of it? What was last time you were there? I had been several times because I did a note in and you know we incidences and for the one of the last seen of citizen for the film that was made about the Snowden. Our work was noted that one the Oscar that wore a point distracted was her and myself going to Russia to interview Snowden about like a next sort of story. The magic and her starting to imagine a Snowden film winning an Oscar now. I mean at the time it was we were we started winning all the awards and we did the whole like a word circuit and we started winning. We were very shocked and at the time I remember after they announced citizen for as the winner of the Oscars it was Neil Patrick Harris who was the host of the Oscars we had gone on stage and got in the word and he then said Edward Snowden wanted to be here but he was unable to for some sort of treason. You know like playing a doing a word play on reason but like with the word treason and it's like you fucking idiots like your Hollywood you want to like the McCarthy era you went through all these things that you claim. Well he was told to say that. Yeah of course it was part of the script but it was a very you know war is a brilliant film maker and I think the one because of the quality of the film like in the drama inherent in the story not because the politics of it were that we were exposing spying programs developed under a president Obama largely almost entirely but as you're so right this was before Russia gate this was before you know where anything connected to Russia was considered like no chance you wouldn't even get it here I don't think it would even yeah they wouldn't even consider it right at this point so you'd been to Moscow before but you were just there this winter the spring just yeah a few months ago two three months would you think well I mean you know we talked about this before but like I remember the first time I ever went to Russia I was so shocked by the immense disparity between well ahead been taught to think what what was your like and what I was seeing in front of of my own eyes and you know you can go anywhere like you know people come to Brazil to Rio G's narrow and they only go to the richest neighborhoods and they're like oh it's but you know there's a whole undergirding of misery and suffering that you don't see because you don't go there so I'm very cognizant of that right you can't go to a country and spend like two days there and be shown the best parts of them right think like oh wow nonetheless it's not only beautiful it's extremely well run it's clean but the thing that you know that I felt like was most present was the richness of Russian history and culture and tradition I mean this is a civilization that has been around for you know thousands of years and that has produced the highest in like literature and music and dance and architecture and I mean it has been through like wars of like like the most difficult kind and you just feel the heaviness of all of that like the the the the greatness of it and obviously I understand that there's political repression there I understand that there's a huge all kinds of social problems I'm not denying any of that that's true everywhere right pretty much but you understand why Russians have this immense pride in their country and in their civilization and so it didn't feel like a gas station with nuclear as McCain said exactly right I mean has there ever been an uglier thing that any politician just a dumber I mean and McCain was dumb I knew him very well very very low IQ totally a wasp you had to say that but it's true um with good qualities he good qualities but he was an idiot but to say something like that how loud it is like there's just I don't know like if you're an idiot keep it to yourself a gas station with nuclear weapons I just yeah I mean what yeah I mean I mean like you you know your tonn in college even like the greatest literature is like Tolstoy and Dostoevsky who are the greatest novel is ever and you know which is true oh I mean undoubtedly and also just the history like the role they played in World War II and like the Bolshevik revolution and the you know the wars of the the 17th and 18th centuries and then you know the like Moscow itself and St. Petersburg even more so are so you know beautiful and striking overwhelming like you know way that like the best Western European cities are you know like the history of it the the grandness of it and so yeah I mean that you have to go see things for yourself and you start realizing how much you're content how much you know that this like when I started writing about politics I'll just show you this quick story um I never intended to be a journalist I didn't go to school for journalism that was not part of my my white plan in any way it was just after 9-11 you know as I saw these radical changes like two are civil liberties and the name of fighting terrorism but also just the climate became so repressive in terms of what you could question what you could say that's when I started feeling you need to want to say things that I felt like weren't being said and when I started doing that more of us full time it gave me the luxury of going and looking at things so that I wasn't being told by the New York Times what a document said I was able to go spend the three hours to read the document and when you go and do that you have the like luxury at that time which most people don't have there to carry their kids their workers that are you can't fight propaganda if you don't you know have the resources to do it especially time I started realizing how many things I had believed and I like got you know high opinion of my intellect I thought I was like a high-end political consumer you know I like lived in New York I like went to good schools in many ways that makes it worse not better I've learned that yeah and so you know just going back and I basically decided I had to dismantle almost everything because so much of it was just ingested through no critical factor why would you want to dismantle your assumptions I mean that's such a painful process it sucks but why would you want that why wouldn't you just say you know I believe what I believe and that's it like I decided in college you know it's just right this is like right after 9 11 and the war in terror like the rock war which everybody was kind of like wait what just happened we went just went into this massive land war this invasion on the other side of the country of country that had nothing to do with 9 11 because we were told they were somehow responsible based on nuclear weapons and chemical weapons they actually didn't have like everybody at that point more or less was starting to question and you know you feel angry and betrayed when inside your brain you're led to believe things that are just false yes and you want to sponge it from yourself you want to cleanse yourself I think that's a virtuous response why I think you've done that that has been I have a particularly it took a little longer but yeah and it was because you are so much more immersed in little more painful yes it was right in the middle of it but um but a lot of people you know didn't I just want to call to the attention of listeners how rare what you did was and that process of self examination which is the root of wisdom um is unusual people just don't want to deal with it like Jake Tapper saying I look upon my book some of my coverage with humility like that fake kind of like well there's really nothing more galling than fake humility I mean that's the that's like metaphor scripted scripted fake humility because like the one thing you hope is real is humility but um it's not so I kind of ask about something so because of AI I'm a little suspicious of things I see on the internet because is it could that really be real so someone sent this to me this is a person who I confirmed is a real person I didn't believe it at first Congressman Randy fine of uh of florida and he said this the other day on Fox News last week quote in world war two we did not negotiate a surrender with the Nazis we did not negotiate a surrender with the Japanese we nuke the Japanese twice in order to get unconditional surrender that needs to be the same here in Gaza there is something deeply wrong with this culture and it needs to be defeated so we're gonna nuke Gaza because of its culture we're gonna kill everybody because we don't like the culture which by the way lots of Christians and Gaza Muslims and Gaza just innocent people in Gaza all kind of course but like to say there's some like gos and culture that's cohesive it's like what but we're gonna kill them all because we don't like their culture and so I didn't believe that was real I didn't really think he was a member Congress I texted he's newly elected like in the last he filled Matt I think Mike it was Mike Walter Matt G to see one of the other it was walls I thought yeah so I texted a friend of mine in Congress is this really a member of Congress yes it's like I don't even know what to say to that but that first of all it's it's evil but how can you say something like that not get expelled from Congress or the republic how can that person be a member of the republican party I don't understand so let me let me see two things about that uh and yes Randy fine is very real I've been watching him for a while now ever since truly so is him as this America first candidate he had served in the Florida Senate in the Florida legislature I maybe the Florida house but one of those two bodies he was a member of the Florida uh hates DeSantis hates him he hates DeSantis he's like has a feud with DeSantis and his entire political existence is centered around the foreign country which is Israel not the United States you barely ever talked about the United States so that's America first right America first so let me just say two things one is this broader point and then I want to give them more point more important one I started noticing this in like 2006 2007 and I know you hear this all the time World War II was one of the worst things that has ever happened to humanity and the reason it happened was because you had these massive military powers with these new technologies that had never previously been used in war engaged in mass destruction and a madman who was reading and had started the war for all kinds of reasons and you had the world's most powerful factions throughout the world destroying each other in the most inhumane way to the point where we not only use nuclear weapons but after the war was over we decided we never wanted to have a war like that again we we imposed by convention we agreed to all sorts of limits to the Geneva Convention and all these other treaties and conventions ways to make sure that what happened in World War II never happens again the the people who got blamed for it it was a former victor's justice at Nuremberg were put to death but at the same time the Nuremberg trial the the judges and prosecutors said the only way the principles that we're pronouncing here at the Nuremberg trials will have any value as anything other than victor's justice is if the principles were enunciating applied to all countries in the future including the part the countries presiding over the tribunal it was meant to initiate universal principles that all countries agreed to on earth because it was so inhumane like it's a script everybody of their humanity and yet so every time we have a new war where someone wants to sell a new war in the United States the only historical framework that they'll use as if they only studied one thing in in high school in college like the only thing they know is World War II and either you're on the side of the not the world war II but no but they know all they know is that the media version Churchill is good because he went and fought and chamberlain is bad because he tried to use diplomacy I wrote an article about this one like six months after I started writing about politics in 2006 how everything was had like superimposed on it was the framework of World War II and you are either Churchill or chamberlain and you choose one or the other in neocons to this very day by which I mean people who always want the United States to go to war in the Middle East and elsewhere the minute you say you're not interested to war your chamberlain and the minute that you want to go to war your heroic Churchill and so the idea that because we use nuclear weapons against Japan imperial Japan filled with enormous amounts of skill and money and know how a massive military force allied with Nazi Germany one of the most industrialized military forces ever that because we ended the war with nuclear weapons then we're supposed to now use it on a completely defenseless population of two million people half of whom are children who have no army of any kind can't even break out of Gaza let alone threaten any other country in the world is absolutely but that is one of the queer war propaganda themes that are always used is everything is world war two and that's the only war that we can reference even though at the time the idea was we have to prevent all this remember happening again they want to replicate it eternally but I don't know that I can support a party with someone like Randy for me I don't understand like how could someone Randy fine I mean that's so disgusting it's demented it's that is that is that is psychotic to say that does anyone say that but about Randy fine well here's I think Randy fine is such an important despite his how repulsive he is ethically morally and physically despite that I think is a very important instrument for looking at this radical contradiction within the republican party and especially the the america first movement so Donald Trump and obviously there are a lot of republicans who want to run for that my quality and for the mac gates seat and whoever Trump endorses is get essentially guaranteed the the winner and he endorsed Randy fine and said Randy fine is all america first and I remember the day that that happened thinking Randy fine actually is not even concerned about america let alone placing it first his entire political existence is driven by loyalty to a foreign country everything for him is Israel everything and to to like even to an extent that is very severe for a congress that in general prioritizes a real to a shocking amount I can't think of a foreign country that is as important to as Israel as the United States that has any other kind of foreign country placing its interest on part with if not above it and so here you have a member of the republican party who identifies America first who Donald Trump endorses a member of america first and whose loyalty is to a foreign country who wants to have the american worker fund that foreign country wants the america worker to pay for their military give four billion dollars automatically every year and it deal negotiated by obama net nahi wahu and when obama was on his way out and every time Israel wants to have a new where we send them whatever they want billions more we feed them all these weapons paid for by the america taxpayer we isolate ourselves from the rest of the world we buck every u.n. resolution that the entire world supports in order to tire ourselves to Israel we lose our own standing our own soft power our own imagery in the world we lose massive amounts of money all sorts of people have said that the reason we have there's so much anti-american hatred in the middle least the reason why people want to attack our country the reason why we can't get things done in the middle east a country region we have a lot of interest is because the hatred for the United States driven primarily by our standing behind and doing everything will work as real audience at that in this manifesto we spelled it out I just can we just talk one second about the fact that been lot in wrote a note to the american people explaining why al-Qaeda was driven to attack the United States and there were some religious references obviously because al-Qaeda is nominally religious organization but overwhelmingly he listed very specific grievances with american foreign policy all having to do with the fact that we constantly interfere in that region we place military bases on sacred Saudi soil we impose a sanctioned regime on a rock for years that killed 500,000 Iraqi children that might on all right albright said was worth it we overthrow their leaders and impose the ones that we want that then serve the interest of the United States and Israel and we fund an arm Israel to repress and kill paless Indians and he said that it's not that you're some country that's just sitting there peacefully and that never bothers us and we just hide it hey look over there they let there women were bikini so we better go and attack them right like we were attacked for our freedom so he writes a sweater I remember the letter at the time he was interviewed by aljazeera and previously by by the new worker so we got to hear from us on bin Laden although right after 9-11 the US government told media outlets do not broadcast any speeches or interviews with Osama bin Laden and their reasoning was we're concerned that he may have embedded within his speech some sort of secret code that will activate sleeper cells inside the United States like he was going to blink worse code or like have secret phrases and then people inside the United States would hear it so they told ABC CBS NBC Fox CNN do not air any interviews with bin Laden when of course it was because they didn't want Americans to hear from bin Laden why there was so much anti-American sentiment it was because of our interference in the Middle East in general and our support for Israel in particular they were selling this lie that it was because we're free and they hate our freedom there are a lot of countries that are free like Brazil women walking around the bikinis they have elections al Qaeda has never attacked Brazil or Japan or South Korea or Norway and bin Laden was explaining why there's so many Muslims in that region who ate the United States but the United States government didn't want anyone to hear it 20 years later while october 7th happened and we're supporting this at the cleansing and I would call it now a genocide as well in Gaza that's what most genocideal experts including Israelis and Jewish ones call it hard to say anything else but whatever in the middle of all that a bunch of young people who were told the history of 911 that the US government wanted everyone to believe discovered the bin Laden letter because it was on the Guardian's website because the Guardian's in British newspaper it was not no American news outlet despite its historical importance and they started passing it around on TikTok and saying oh wow I never knew any of this I never understood that one of the reasons why these people attacked us was because we are so monomonatically devoted to Israel and why that we're constantly interfering in that region bombing them sanctions overthrowing their government overthrowing their leaders what of course people are going to get angry at us and want to attack and the minute that letter started to become well read by the American people who were you know primarily younger the US government went ballistic and demanded that TikTok ban it the Guardian a news outlet immediately took the letter off their website so nobody could read it any longer all those links that people were posting on TikTok to go read that letter would no longer work and then TikTok immediately under pressure from the US government which is obviously already closed TikTok and banned it from the United States anyway started banning all the hashtags bin Laden letter you could not anymore read or I mean this is like the stuff we're taught that the Soviets did right like hiding letters hiding documents or racing history and I continued to be shocked by that event that everybody thought that that was fine to take a letter that is of great historical importance yes from the person that is alleged to have been responsible for the single worst attack on American so maybe on par with Pearl Harbor but in terms of like a single day casual account explaining from his perspective why he did it like you want to hear from your enemy right like you want to understand like what I want all relevant information and all decide yeah yeah yeah you don't want people deciding for you what you can and can't read yeah they were petrified that young Americans were going to hear the reasons proffered and they made that letter disappear why would the guardian which is supposed to like this left wing British publication like why would they go along with that the guardian is very you know supportive of the western establishment the UK is aggressively supportive of the zirl always has been finds out with arms does a lot of reconnaissance fights over gaza to feed the Israelis intelligence and when that kind of pressure comes to bear tick tock a gigantic multi multi billion dollar corporation the guardian one of the oldest newspapers in the west they fold in a second like they're no match for that kind of pressure a pressure that said we want that letter center so Americans don't know about it have never read it don't hear from it so they only hear from us but so okay so that was just that I'm still amazed every time every like I didn't mean to go into that because just why do you love us on bananas so much I mean of course that's and then that I remember being shocked by it and saying like how can how can it possibly be the case that we're watching this and it wasn't there was no pretext to it it was explicit like we can't have people reading this this is terrorist propaganda and then exactly if you stand up and say no I actually I think people should be about to read that and then they'll say like oh being this. This is terrorist propaganda. And then exactly if you stand up and say, no, I actually think people should be able to read that. And then they'll say like, oh, you're pro alcIDI, you want terrorist propaganda to be spread. And I'm like, no, I just think adults should have all information that they want to have available to them. And I don't think the government should be prohibiting certain information from from being accessible. Also, 3,000 Americans were murdered that day. And I'm an American. I'm an absolute right to know every all available information about that. I don't understand by what, what's the justification for keeping an information from me and American citizen in faith, who pays his taxes and obeys the laws of it was born here. But you know, but this is you can't do that. You know, after the 2022 invasion by the Russians into Ukraine, one of the first things the EU parliament did is made a crime to platform Russian state media. So if you want to say, I want to hear from Russia, I want to understand like what Russia's argument is for doing this, you couldn't get it. I mean, if you looked hard enough, you could. If you went to rumble, you could. That's why they're banned in France because they refuse to remove our tea and Sputnik. Think about what that says. Like, we want to make sure that we monopolize the flow of information that our citizen regats and nothing disputes. What we want them to believe can even be heard or available. I went to Russia because it drove me. I had no interest really going to Russia, but it, it comes so grateful that I did, but it drove me so crazy that I wasn't allowed in the Americans were not allowed. Relevant information about what their government was doing. Yeah, like I want to hear from them, what their perspective is. Like, I think like, oh, they're they're murderous, you know, imperialist who just want to consume their neighbor or maybe there's some other way of looking at things that I'm not permitted in the West. I know what the truth is. And that's the whole point of living here is I get to know what the truth is I get to decide for myself what's true. And if you take that away, then why was speaking? Let me just finish this thing about Randy Fine. If I could. Okay, so the so I like in 2022 and 23, there were a bunch of mug and people who were opposed to the funding of the war in Ukraine. And some non-mug of people too like RFK Jr. And I was obviously very opposed to it from the start. You were too. I went on to show many times to talk about that. And I had a bunch of them on like Mac gates and Marjorie Taylor green and RFK Jr. A lot of them. And I always had this same plan. I would ask them like, why are you opposed to having the US fund the war in Ukraine? Like, don't you want the US to stand up for Ukraine against Russia? And they would all say, this isn't our business. This is on the other side of the world. It doesn't affect my constituents. Our communities are falling apart. We have fentanyl addiction, sweeping our communities. Nobody has jobs. Nobody has health care. Our country is falling apart. We don't have the money to keep sending to foreign countries. And it's outrageous that we keep doing it. And they would be very passionate and very adamant. I would encourage them to keep developing that idea. And they would and they would say all those things with which I completely and then my next question was always, do you apply the same rationale to the United States funding the Israeli military and Israeli society and Israeli wars? And they would all stutter to try and distinguish why it was that they had one view for Ukraine and a very compelling rationale. But then had to say, oh, no, Israel is different to the point that RFK Jr. And I actually really appreciated this about him. When I kept pressing about I said, you're saying we don't have money to put the fund for and wars in our country is falling apart. Why are we sending billions of dollars to Israel when Israelis have a higher standard of living than millions of American workers than millions of Americans. Why is the American worker forced to subsidize Israel? You said we can't be doing that. We can't afford it when you came to Ukraine. Why isn't it come? Why isn't the same applicable to Israel? And he then finally said, you know what? I'm going to think about that. Maybe it is time for Israel to stand on its own. I was like, oh, you think? So this is the utterly irreconcilable contradiction at the heart of the America First Movement, which is America First means we use our resources for ourselves. We build our military to defend our borders, to defend the American people. We use our resources to improve their lives materially to build better roads and better schools and better communities to offer them addiction services and whatever else they need, healthcare access. And we do not anymore use it for this globalist agenda of going around the world, giving it to other countries and funding other countries. That is the America First philosophy as Trump has articulated it and many people have articulated it for years and the foreign policy of America First as well. Excellent. And then on the one, the other hand, those same people, many are adamant that we have to fund Israel. We have to fund its military. We have to fund its wars. We have to subsidize society. We have to sacrifice our own interest to protect theirs. We have to put the lives of our service members in risk to have American citizens die in order to protect Israel in the wars that it starts with its neighbors. And there is no reconciling this. There is no way to take an America First ideology and make it consistent with this constant prioritization of Israeli interests. Let alone what is now happening, which is the aggressive erosion of our free speech rights and core civil liberties guaranteed to us by the Constitution, not to protect our own government from criticism, but to protect this foreign country from criticism. And I do think there are people now starting finally to understand that these two things cannot be maintained simultaneously. It's going to blow up the Trump movement. I think I don't think it needs to. I think there's a, you know, you could pivot, but I agree just conceptually that those are irreconcilable goals. There's so blatantly irreconcilable. And of course the proof in the pudding is going to be what happens with Iran. You know, I woke up today. I'm here and I saw the New York Times and the Fleet Story on the front page of the New York Times is Israel may attack Iran despite Trump's desire to reach a deal. And it's like, how can that even be possible? What do you mean Israel might attack Iran despite Trump's desire to reach a deal? Their weapons came from the United States. We pay for the operation of those weapons. They can't attack Iran without some kind of military and logistical support from the United States. And who is Israel that depends on the United States, that is a vassal state of the United States. Supposedly, just say we don't care what the President of the United States wants in his foreign policy. We're going to subvert it and undermine and blow it up and destroy it if we want to. That's not the behavior of an ally. And I think that, you know, someone who's really tried to avoid this topic and bears no aim as toward Israel. I actually like a lot of Israelis. Talk to me the other day. But I think the idea that we're getting a lot out of this or interested being served is not, is clearly not true. It's the opposite. Well, you know, there's these really government has had a relationship, a close relationship with the Chinese Communist government for over 40 years. And there have been a lot of transfers of military technology from Israel to China, including transfers of American military technology to China. It's a fact. People lie about it and it was a strong truth. Well, it is true actually. And I don't think that's widely known. I mean, the Chinese help operate the port of Haifa, one of the most beautiful ports in the world. Wonderful place. But yeah, they're in the port of Haifa. So how is it that the main recipient of American support, both financial and moral and legal and, you know, all the things that we have done for our closest ally, how is it that that country is materially supporting our main global adversary? A country really described that Trump administration as an enemy. Okay, that's their posture toward, you know, Chinese and enemy. And our military technology is going to Israel and then why they've been China? That's a fact. Like how I don't think, again, I don't think most people know that. And I don't, I don't know even if people in the administration know that. I mean, some do. How can that, what is the answer to that Mark Lavigne? Well, but well, also, you know, there's this fascinating history, but because it's 30 years ago, a lot of people didn't live through it. People did forgot about it. It's been whitewashed, but the last two presidents that tried to exert independence with respect to Israel, and that told Israel, you cannot do this. If you want to continue to receive our largesse, we're Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush. Ronald Reagan called the Israeli bombing of Lebanon, a whole across. I know. And picked up the phone and ordered them to stop and they did and then withdrew the military barrier to the media. Exactly. George H. W. Bush, this and then our Marine barracks were bombed to your land. But then he didn't go to wars. They were demanding he did with Iran, whoever they he said, why are we even there? But how did our American, I mean, without getting into this, but like, did anyone know that the bombing was coming? Is it possible that information Intel about that bombing was withheld from the United States? I mean, the as well as it's true, have a lot of their neighbors under extremely heavy surveillance of you imagined they would. But the other interesting thing was in the George H. W. Bush administration, which was run by these kind of realists like that of the kind, you know, that they didn't call it to the South of America. First, but the idea was, you know, we do foreign policy not for benevolence to other countries. We don't rebuild other countries. We prioritize American interests. People like James Baker and Brent Skokroff who were the key foreign policy figures in the Bush 41 administration. He was in the CIA had a very similar foreign policy. And their argument was what American president has always said, which is that one of the worst threats to American national interests in the Middle East is the ongoing Palestinian Israeli conflict. And the expansion of Israeli settlements in the West Bank was a direct threat to American interests. And James Baker said, as part of the state department policy, if you continue to expand West Bank settlements, which prevent an Israeli Palestinian to state solution that harm our interests, we're going to see, giving you the loan guarantees that you desperately need. Why are we going to give you loan guarantees if you're directly harming what we keep telling you are our interests. And what happened was there was this massive smear campaign. You can go read it any newspaper. Remember, it was led by Bill Clinton, who was preparing to run against George H. W. Bush, calling the Bush administration anti-Semites, suggesting that they were inflaming anti-Semitism by disagreeing with Israel and public. And since that's been no president, James Baker, I mean, this is like one of the most respected foreign policy operatives in the world. And I hated James Baker for a lot of what he believed at the time. I would have to probably go back and provide some of that and think about why. If only we had that now. But there was like zero, zero, zero, zero evidence that he harbored any animosity. Well, there's also evidence that there are plans to come in violence against George H. W. Bush, the president actually that's been incredibly alleged. So whatever. No, of course, you're absolutely what you're saying is absolutely right in. No one wants to deal with with being slander and it is slander. It's not true. It's unfair. It's actually pretty over the top. Well, I really have a Tucker. You're transferring American military technology. China. If they're operating, at least in part, the port of Hifa, we're supporting you. You have to explain that right away. Or else we're going to stop all aid because why would we want to be supporting? I would want to be helping the transfer of American military technology to China. What the hell is going on? So what's the what is the answer to why the Trump administration given their views of China doesn't? I think that the first step, while just say my position is probably different from yours, but like not against Israel, like Israel, like going there, like the Israeli nice people, I'm not, you know, don't seek any kind of argument. I'm not anti-Israel. But I think what America lacks desperately lacks and it's gotten to a point where it's dangerous for the country is like an honest conversation about all any of this stuff. And that's because certain ruthless actors that's coordinated online, like attack everyone is like a, you know, call them really hurtful names that affect your personal relationships when you raise these questions. But like someone needs to be brave enough to just say, let's have a rational conversation about our national interest. I don't think it's harder than that. But you know what the irony of it, the core irony of it is the conservative critique or grievance about the American left over the past 20 years has been the minute you try and have an honest conversation about any kind of policy you instantly get smeared as a racist, right, a misogynist because of identity politics. Because of identity politics. I don't know. You may be suggesting that something like that's going on. Oh, it might be a little bit similar that the minute you like to end up suggesting a question or let alone or even a piece of criticism about Israel, you instantly are branded and anti somebody. It seems pretty similar to me to the tactics long used by the American left that the conservatives have been vocally complaining about for a long time. So that's, you know, Glenn, I would love to shout you down and say that's unfair, but it's not that is fair. It's true what you're saying is true. And it's I agree and it's, you know, shameful. So, um, but, you know, the choice is not between like being a Nazi or being randy fine, the there is like a reasonable sensible rational course forward where our country like every other country makes its foreign policy decisions on the basis of what's best for its own citizens. Like, like you can say, I don't think it serves our interest to keep the war in Ukraine going and paying for it without being a Kremlin agent. Exactly. We're saying, I don't know, you know, how is it good that American military technology winds up in China or Pakistani fighters that they receive from China? Um, through Israel. Like, if that's true, and I think, I think there's a lot of evidence that it is true, like, how is that a good arrangement and why is our greatest ally doing that to us? I don't understand. I'm like really confused. Like, why don't you answer the question? And it's not enough to call me names. You should have to have an honest conversation about this. And I do think when that begins, like, healing begins, things get better when people can be honest. I think, I mean, but there's so many mechanisms, like we just, I just, I'm still, every, I know I've talked about it so many times, but my mind always gets so blown when we talk about it again. Time and honesty and discourse, they ban the bin Laden letter. There's so many mechanisms designed to prevent, of course, any honest conversation from being held about all sorts of policies that people in power want to keep immune from questioning or challenge. Like, hey, why are we still in NATO? That's to me, the thing that turned, that turned people against Trump, it turned people in the establishment against Trump or anything. We already talked about that, but like, that's not supposed to be a questionable topic. Like, why are we still in NATO? And like, oh, it's a defensive alliance, except like we bombed Serbia and like either Slavia with it, even though they weren't actually posing a threat to Western Europe and had nothing to do with the Soviet Union, or like it went to war in Libya to remove Marqaddafi because he wanted to start using the bin oil more for like the benefits of people. Okay, Glenn, if I can say, it's a defensive alliance. Okay. Yeah. Those are preemptive. It's a defensive alliance. That's offensive. No, it's, yeah. No, I, so there are all those mechanisms, including like calling people racist for a long time who wanted to raise issues about whatever. Well, sure. I mean, I remember this in 1991 when I got into this business doing a story on Head Start. I've never been against Head Start as an idea. The original idea was like, we're going to literally raise children's IQs through better nutrition and early childhood education. That is not a crazy idea. And strike me as crazy at the time. And you start asking questions that well, does it work? I don't know. It's supposed to help these kids. Is it helping them? Shut up, racist. It's like, how was that? I was so confused. And I realized no one even remembers what Head Start is, but it was a, it was a very promising program in the minds of many that didn't work. But the point of calling you names was to continue doing things the way they'd always been done to people are benefiting from that. Exactly. Exactly. It doesn't do with race. Just as I don't think this argument has anything to necessarily to do with ethnicity or religion. It's just like this has for America. That protest movements of college campuses were, I don't want to say led by because that's maybe an exaggeration. But in many cases, it's actually definitely true. But driven in large part by Jewish students vehemently opposed to the destruction of Gaza by Israel. So the idea that somehow it's anti-Semitic to question either the Israeli destruction of Gaza or the US financing of it when you have huge numbers of Jews on the streets every day marching in protest against it by itself should reveal how corrupted that that tactic is. And yet it's so effective because it's instantaneous. No one wants to be called to racism. No one wants to be called in anti-Semite. No. And it is an effective tactic. At least like it makes it so that you think like, maybe it's just easier for me to keep my mouth shut about this and talk about something else. I've always felt that way. It's ways that I don't want to get involved in it. It's not worth it. I've got all kinds of concerns about my country, which really is kind of falling apart in key and measurable ways. People are dying younger. I feel like that's something we should think a lot about and try and fix and everything. It's like, I don't want to get involved. And I do grieve when I see our public conversation hijacked by what I consider foreign concerns. Like, both sides. You shut down mid-tem and hatin because of some conflict thousands of miles away. It's like we accept this and American more though. Well, that is that is it. But it's not just Israel. I mean, you see it all the time. People getting murdered in like the upper mid-west because of like there's a sick Hindu, you know, whatever. All that stuff. I just feel like I do feel like this country needs a lot of care and attention that it's been neglected. And that's how I feel. So I or maybe that's how I justify staying out of it. I don't want to be involved in that. But you have kind of been a little bit more involved than it used to be. And I think, but also because what's going to destroy the magga movement, which I think is really important, it's an a sense not just about Trump. Of course, I love Trump. I've said that many times. I have displayed it. I campaigned for Trump. And I'm glad that I did. But I feel like if there's one thing that could destroy this essential reform movement, it's like kind of our last chance to make government responsive to the people who own the government, which is the citizenry, this will destroy it. Because the massive contradictions sitting at the heart of it. Not just that like, it's not all the stuff we talked about, but also free speech, free expression, not being punished for your views was also a vital part of this movement. I know that's what why I found so much common ground with the American right and with the magga movement over the last 10 years because of my vehement opposition to attempts to censor the internet or introduce laws to characterize certain views as hate speech and therefore punishable. And that's exactly what has been done. And it's still being done. Believe it. Like when I always liked to Santa's, I spent a lot of time in Florida. I was there for part of the pandemic. And I like to say this is the smart. You know, it's not a warm guy or anything, but I don't know. I'm not looking for new friends. I like respect to Santa's and he's very on it on the details. Then he finds a hate speech law. If I traveled to a foreign country deciding a hate speech law in Florida, and I was so confused. I didn't even think this was real. And I said to somebody, well, that was a hate speech law. It looks like a hate speech law. It looks like Sharia law kind of a version of Sharia law in Florida shut up. And no one said anything about it. And then like all the desantis people start attacking me for noting I've never talked to the census again on the basis of that. Like I don't what is that? How can you do that in the United States? I mean, there there's there's this attempt now to impose on colleges require colleges to adopt but also enact into American law. This radical expansion of what anti-Semitism means. Like there's laws that say here's what racism is. Here's what, you know, xenophobia is here's what Islamophobia is misogyny, whatever, to expand the definition of anti-Semitism to include statements not only about Jewish people who should be subjected to critique like you should be able to say, huh, that Ben Shapiro seems to care quite a lot about Israel. Maybe even to the point that he cares about more than the United States like you should be able to express that critique. So this expanded definition prohibits not only statements like that accusing any Jewish person of having greater oil, you can have you I can say, oh, that person's Irish. He seems to really care a lot about Ireland more than United States or that person is Indian. He really seems to care a lot about India. Maybe even more so that you're out to say all that or in my case, Swedish, I've been accused of dual-ilty many times. Oh, yeah, which I'm really good at is so annoying and very disturbing. But the other thing is you cannot say, for this is one example, you cannot say Israel is a racist endeavor. You can say Iran is a racist endeavor. You can say Hamas is a racist. However, you are a United States is a racist endeavor. You can say anything you can be a student at a school a month away from completing your PhD with a completely clean record. And you can write it not bad saying, I think America is a country of violence and imperialism and evil and was founded on racism. And you'll be totally fine. You write an op-ed one tenth of those criticisms, but about Israel and ISIS coming to get you into deport you. Why is that? Why is not just our free speech being limited, but being limited, not even to protect our own society and our own government, but to protect a foreign government from critique? So this is the kind of thing that cannot be sustained by a movement that has certain values that are being radically assaulted by this one single policy and loyalty toward this other country. I could not agree more. I mean, it's in no matter and I do think, and I know people who love Israel and believe in the project and it's fine. I have a million friends who believe that and that I'm not mad at them about it. But you could believe that and say America's founding documents, its bill of rights is sacrosanct and under no circumstances should American citizens be stripped of their rights. Any circumstances, period doesn't matter whether it's in the service of a foreign nation or any service of anything. Like that's the whole point of America. Like you could have that position, couldn't you? I mean, the whole movement is about preserving American identity and American values. So what does that mean? It certainly has to include America's founding documents and what else it would include. I don't know what else there is. Right. So if you cannot simultaneously say that you want to be a movement that is devoted to preserving American identity and American values while at the same time permitting attacks on the core rights and the core founding ideals on which the entire country was founded. Right. No, I couldn't agree more. For all my really sustained efforts to just stay away from stuff. I don't want to deal with it. I've set people. It's like not my greatest interest in life. It's like the other top 10. And I shouldn't have to care this much about a foreign country. That's kind of like my internal monologue on this question. I feel like it's being pushed to the point where it's in this whole species of news stories, ideas, developments is a threat to our bill of rights. Like, and that's has to be the point where you're like, no, stop. Right. I mean, I was said before that you go to other countries and you see all these values of other countries that you're told have none. But I also said like there are certain things about the United States that I consider uniquely valuable. And one of them is, you know, the stuff that I went and studied in law school, which I became incredibly enamored of and still am, which are like the Federalist papers and the dates over like how to form this new government to prevent it from replicating the tyrannies of other governments, including the empire that they had just risked all of their lives to wage war from and gain independence from and created these documents that to this very day continue to be our guiding principles. And the idea that we're going to permit the erosion of those for any is offensive to me, but to do so in defense of a foreign country on the other side of the world because they have so much influence in our politics. That is, I mean, that is just so offensive to me. I don't care what impact it has in my career. I don't care what people say about me. Like that is something I will never stop talking about. I agree. And I think it's not sustainable because as you said, it's the contradiction is just too, it's just too obvious. And last thing I'll say is that it's like top concern minor or whatever, but I don't think it's great for Israel actually. At all. I didn't like long term. This is not the way to play. Well, and Israeli politician actually in general just said Israel is on the way to becoming a pariah state. Yeah, that's not, I don't know how that helps. And you can't transfer American military technology to China. I just want to say that for the fifth time because I don't think most people know that that's happening, but it is. I want to ask you one last question. I'm, we have this like long and deep conversation off camera about what makes people happy. And there does seem to be quite apart from politics or global affairs, like an epidemic of unhappiness, at least in the world that I live in in the West in the West, not think out in my family, but everywhere else people are really unhappy. It's measurable. So it's like, where do you think what is that? Well, first of all, there's a documentary that is on Netflix that I watched many years ago called happiness. And it measures the rate of happiness in various places around the world. And it turns out that in some of the poorest countries in the world, the levels of happiness are the tias and some of the richest countries of the world, the rate of happiness is at its lowest. And in many of those poorest countries, they live in villages where they have their children around them all the time. Yes. They have extreme connectivity and connection to other human beings who live in their community. They live in a communitarian way. So they are constantly receiving one of the things that you might even say the greatest thing that constitutes human happiness, which is connection to other human beings. We are political and social animals. We can't survive isolated. You look at any people who have been put in sustained isolation. And they will say that there's nothing worse than that. John McCain talked about it all the time, but he was physically savage, but that that was nowhere near as, you know, as horrifying and terrorizing is the sustained isolation that he was Captain, where you have no human beings around to connect to or talk to or interact with. We need that so fundamentally. And you look at how the West is now constructed where people leave their early in the morning, both couples, you know, both parts of a couple that children don't go run off to. So everybody's running off in different directions. When our parents get sick, we put them at homes. We don't, you know, when they get old that we put them at homes, we don't stay together as families anymore. And then when we work, we all go scatter far away and we spend all day in cubicles. And then the worst part is the internet encourages us to stay at home. people got trained during COVID, especially how it'll live completely isolated from the rest of the world and from everybody else, they were forced into it. And if you deprive human beings of connection, then you can have all the money in the world, all the fame in the world, whatever you think is, is the thing that will make you happy and you will never find happiness. And I think we know we both know you're on a hurry. Here's a friend of ours who wrote this incredibly, like, I think revolutionary book about how to understand addiction and depression and sadness in general, emptiness. Right. He then wrote another book about just like the depression epidemic in, in, especially among younger people in the West, that first book about addiction, the thesis of it was that people think the opposite of addiction is sobriety. When in reality, opposite of addiction is connection. And by that, what he means is that all of these things are spiritual diseases, depression and addiction and anxiety and all these disorders that people suffer from that are new. Like you talked to anyone in Gen Z, I have colleagues in Gen Z, my kids are getting to that age. You know, they're 16 and 17. I see their age group. There's so much like mental disorder. It's because society is not giving human beings what they want, which is connection. And that's why like the only you can go talk to medical doctors about addiction. And they will all tell you the same thing, which is like, there is no cure for addiction. Chemically, medically, the only cure for addiction is going to places like an A or A or whatever because there you find this instant and immediate connection based on with any kind of human being based on shared experiences. And that's the only thing that cures that disease because it's a disease of the spirit, like of the soul. There's not a biological disease where chemical medications will cure it. And I think that the ability to be open to human connection to have it readily available is probably medications will cure it. And I think that the ability to be open to human connection, to have it readily available is probably the foundation of human happiness and the deprivation of it is what will eliminate human happiness in all of modern societies about keeping people stratified and isolated away from each other. And I think there's surveys that say, people who are in their twenties will say, on average, they have like one friend at most, or like two friends at most that they rarely see people who are away from their family. Everything is about depriving people of connection. Not saying that was the intention of the plan, but that's the outcome. And there's no way to have human happiness without connection. I know that in my life, the place where I've seen it most clearly is in AA. I haven't, so many years, I haven't been AA a ton, but the first time I ever went, I was so struck by how what I was seeing was kind of what people have talked about, but sort of presented an Earth sets replica of like true connection between people from totally different backgrounds, cultures, races, it was the diversity we're always promised, but like we're so cynical about, I am so cynical about it's all bullshit. You go to an AA meeting and because it begins with stripping away with basically ritual humiliation. Well, I'm talking about alcoholic. It's like, say that out loud, it hurts, even if it's true, which is my case. And like the first admission is like, I am powerless. It's exactly right. Like you're to confess your impudence. But you have to confess it. And once that strips away all the pretense, and then you like, you experience people on a level that church promises, but I personally have never experienced in church, I want to, but where it's just like, you are dealing with people on the most human level, like all that matters is the other person's soul or something. I don't know. I, you know, it's interesting. You know, I think the new Pope and like this is the part of Catholicism that I really admire so much like the ethos of the Gospels, you know, Jesus always wanted to minister to the like the lepers and the prostitutes and the outcast, even though there was no necessarily like common bond between them other than their humanity, which is what the Gospels teach you to to basically think about the world as being about is human connection, as as as the ability to look at the lowest people and see their soul, see that they're equal before God all of this. Exactly. And one of the things diversity does like diversity in this like modern corporatized HR sense is it pretends to do that, but it actually is constantly reminding you of these differences and forces to think about them like, oh, I have three black coworkers and I'm supposed to get along with and I have like two gay ones over here and like you're just constantly stratifying people across the lines like how to garage them and counting them based on their differences. And so there's any kind of like similarity or connection is forced. It's like very self conscious. Nothing causes more division than that. Right. You strip everybody down to like no ego and have everybody converge based on their greatest weakness and suffering and difficulty. And you don't even have to give the slightest thought to, oh, this person is different and yet I'm able to have communion with them. That's so genuine. It just happens automatically like it all those things fade away. Like people can walk into an an a meeting and just feel like they're living in a different world and thinking about other people and feeling other people in a way and then they walk out in the whole world then reappears that cost constantly teaches us to you know keep everybody at arm's length. But you walk into those kind of meetings. The idea of it is like you strip down to your the deepest core of like foundation of your humanity. And then on that level everyone is the same. And it's the connection that emerges from that is why it works. Why people go their whole lives to it. You know, even if they haven't had a drink or a drug for 25 years, they still need it. Well, that's why I went. I have no interest in drinking. I went because I loved one. You know, someone I love needed to go. So I brought that person. And I was like, I want to go every day. I've never seen anything. Because it makes you it makes you see the potential for what the world could be. Like it's what everyone wants is the connection. Right. Other people are all the matters just to receive other people are all the matters. And you gosh, that's so easy to lose that thread. Yeah, that's like our humanity. That's like the soul that's like the spirit. It's everything. And that is what Western society is assaulting and and depriving people of. And so it's no wonder we have epidemics of addiction and suicide and anxiety disorders and depression and distraction. It's so easy to see why you should write. You should write on this. Yeah, I mean, I've thought a lot about it. I think a lot about it. I try and like incorporate it. And at some point, maybe it will. I hope you will. You can you describe it much better than I do. I'm still trying to short it out of my head. I really is less than the year ago. I saw this. I was like, I'm not stop thinking about it. Yeah, we talked about it last night. And so then I thought about it last night this morning. So it's fresh in my mind as well. Like in terms of what it means and how to think about it. But yeah, it's something that is I think it's kind of like sitting there right in plain sight. It's a solution to a lot of things. But for a lot of reasons, you need a lot of vulnerability and humility to strip yourself down that way to admit your powerlessness were constantly thought to a firm power invulnerability. Like I'm strong. I'm powerful. I can do with anything. But human beings are by themselves, not all that powerful. But there's a lot of things we can do. There's a lot of things we can't. And the whole point of these kind of addiction groups or whatever. There's a lot of these different kind of groups. I think all communities are like them is like together like human beings connecting to each other creates a much bigger power than every human being sitting kind of isolated in the low. Yes. I mean, I believe in a religion that it extols humility that in which humility is like the the cover charge, like you don't get anywhere without humility that teaches that God like submitted to being tortured to death. So like and you get on your knees in a church, 100% Islam, like bow on the ground. Like it's exactly right. An expression of that same. I remember after 9 11 when I was like, you know, all about attacking Islam, I knew nothing but Islam. I'm not Muslim by the way. I don't work for contrary to what a lot of people despite the paychecks on guitar. Not a secret. But I remember hearing someone on to our to see it at the time and like we had all these endless experts, most of whom kind of worked for the CIA, but whatever I realized that later, but I remember who was come on and be like, Islam is bad and I was like, sounds bad, you know, whatever. I don't know if I ever met a Muslim, but he's like, you know what Islam means? Submission. And like let it hang in the air like that was self-evidently disgusting. And I was like, God, I think submission to God is like the whole point of life, but I didn't say anything. I was like, I don't think I'm against that. Anyone who submits to God, like, I'm just for that. Well, and the, the found, I mean, I think a lot of religion seek the same things just find different ways to think about how to find them. But the whole point of AA and NA, like the foundation of it is that you submit to a higher power. Yes. It can be, you know, understanding that there's a lot of people who are now atheists or secular. It doesn't necessarily have to be some like religious conception of a God. And so many people go into these groups and they're adamantly contemptuous of this idea, like this is so irrational. I'm not going to pretend that there's some magic thing of and, you know, I used to think that way too. And then I got the point where I was like, no, you know what, actually is irrational thinking that there's no higher power than you like, I am the highest power. Like that's the the absurd thing. But it's all about, you know, losing that sense that you're invulnerable and understanding that, you know, you can find something higher than yourself. And it could just be the connection of the human group, whatever you want it to be, like whatever you recognize is being able to something being able to do things that you can't do is already an acknowledgement that there's a higher power than you. But if you think your God, you're not allowed. And I mean, if you think your God, you're going to have a lot of difficulty. You're going to be Tori Anul and it's a good thing. Well, thank you. Really always my favorite person to talk to you. So I appreciate your thank you. I was enjoy this. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's and more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.