Go Roman find it! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night! All day! So Brian, what's up, man? What's up, man? Last time I saw you, we were on another continent. The European continent. Yeah, it was fun. That was exciting. Thank you very much for that. You're welcome. Going to visit the Greek ruins with you is really special. That was very cool. That was, uh, was that your first time seeing, like, the Acropolis in downtown? It was my first time in Greece. Yeah. Really? Mm-hmm. And the girls, too? My wife had been, but the girls hadn't been. It was exciting. It was fun, man. It's so crazy. It's just to be there in that place where all this started is just to be on that soil standing there in the place where those people were 2,500 years ago. Very special. Or longer. Or longer, yeah. Yeah, by thousands of years, potentially. Yeah. Yeah. Really exciting stuff. It's cool, man. What's also interesting, you know, when you're there, how it seems like your work is getting out there. But it seems like the people that are involved in the day to day there, like the people that are giving tours and the people that they don't really know. Yeah. That's, it's still, I think it's still, I wouldn't say it's controversial, but I think it's still a subject of debate, which is the way it should be. And what we're talking about is the potential of the ancient Greeks using psychedelics. Yeah. To find God, which is a big idea. Well, it seems not just likely. Yeah. It all, it all the pieces, I mean, it's like, oh, duh, you know, like if you found a murder weapon in the house where someone was suspected of being a murderer, you go, oh, that's probably what happened. Yeah. Like if you find vessels that contain psychedelic compounds in an area where people experience these profound rituals. Right. Well, they're probably doing drugs, fans. Well, at least in Spain, they were. Yeah. The fact that there were no vessels found in Greece and main land Greece and most especially by the sanctuary in a loose. I think that that leaves healthy room for debate. I was there like, I was there the week before last at this at the conference I was preparing back in July. So we finally had the conference at a loose because of all the cities in Europe. It was nominated to be the European capital of culture for 2023. So it was postponed from 21 because of the pandemic and people finally came through town a couple weeks ago. And the site archeologist, her name is Papi Papangeli, who was on site when I first was interviewing her for the book back in 2018. I got to see her again for the first time in five years. And she's probably spent more time at a loose than any human being living or dead. Wow. Because she spent like 40 years basically maintaining the site. And so she's to commute from Athens, from her home to alusis every day for like close to 40 years. So she's done that pilgrimage more than any person living or dead throughout recorded history. Wow. And when she finally saw the evidence. So I gave like a PowerPoint of the things that I talked about here a couple years ago. All the evidence from the book about these ritual vessels that were discovered in the 1990s in Spain. And they show pretty clear evidence of Ergot inside like a tiny beer chalice. So something like an Ergotize beer, which was the thing that was hypothesized back in the 1970s as the elusive mystery to these great mysteries. And so I showed her all the evidence did my PowerPoint. And Papi was thoroughly unconvinced. That's psychedelics had anything to do with the mysteries in alusis. Interesting. What's her theory? Her theory is that it's a modern interpolation that we think that we can't achieve these states of mind in the absence of drugs. And so when I do ask her, she talks about the long pilgrimage. And she talks about the fasting that would have taken place. And she talks about like the emotional preparation for years in advance of this sort of culminating experience of a lifetime. So she points to all kinds of different things. Maybe some like endogenous and dogenously produced ecstatic experience. But she's just not a fan of the drug hypothesis. And so the fact that this forensic evidence for drugs was found in these vessels 2,200 years ago at the place at the time where it looks like there's a connection to ancient alusis. She's un-persuated, which I think is very funny. And super cool, because I think debate is needed. Well, it's always good to be healthy in your skepticism. But at a certain point in time, we have to, what do you think is going on? Like, what does she think? Why the evidence that connects to the vessels that were in Spain? Does she think that has no connection? It seems like they're the same people, or at least from the same teachings? I asked her that. Yes, she believes there was a Greek influence. So we know that the place where these vessels were found 2,200 years ago. We know that there was a Greek colony called Impution. And so we know that there were ancient Greeks who found part of the colony not too far from this place. And the place we're talking about is Puntos. So it's a town a bit further inland. So it's undeniable that ancient Greeks were at this ancient colony as far back as like 575 BC, by the way. So when they established the colony. And so you have like 400 years from the establishment of this colony until you see this, like this Hellenistic period, where people who were influenced by the Greeks were then reinterpreting what seems to be their idea of the mysteries and honor of Demeter and Persephone, the two goddesses who were worshipped back in Greece at alluses. So that all lines up. And you see images of what could be like an incense burner that looks like Demeter and Persephone. And you find these fazas that look like they belong in Athens, showing Dionysus and this drunken parade. And you see what the most interesting to me was this Kalathos that shows Triptolamus. And Triptolamus was kind of like the missionary of the ancient mysteries. And you see images of him in the museum at alluses. And they found a near identical image of him at this, not too far from this site in Spain. So like all the pieces kind of fit together. But I think that, you know, I can't speak for probably, but maybe she sees it as sort of like a renegade group, you know, something that was because, you know, again, to celebrate the mysteries outside the temple, outside Demeter's temple at alluses was a sacrilege. We have to keep that in mind. It doesn't mean that people weren't trying to recreate what was happening there. And there's this famous incident in Athens in 414 BC called the Prophenation of the Mysteries, where we know that some people at least were trying to recreate what they thought was happening in the temple at home in private dining room. So if that was happening and the mystery was spilling out of this temple, it stands to reason that something was happening in Spain, maybe in southern Italy. I spent a lot of time looking there to, or maybe across North Africa, the Near East. So like, I think it's very possible. I think what she's looking for is evidence in Greece, at alluses, or thereabouts, which is why I've been spending so much time there over the past couple of years. Well, it seems like even today rituals and, you know, these psychedelic ceremonies that people do in other countries when they go to the jungle, there's so much fanfare and there's so much behind it. There's so much, there's a lot of secrets. Like people contain these secrets. They talk about these things that they're about to embark on and they're in control of this experience for these people. Like they're not gonna tell you the exact recipe, how they do it. You know, most of them kind of keep that secret, they brew it, they bring it to you. There's always been like someone who holds like secret information and it kind of makes sense. And you see the exact same thing in America. You see these little psychedelic ceremonies that people do outside of the jungle. You know, and they've brought ayahuasca back and now that they get a group of people together in the living room and they burn candles, and it falls together. You know? That sounds fun. But it seems very similar to that kind of thing where they would try to reenact it or recreate it somewhere else. Yeah, I mean, even in the classical period, like so we think alluses goes back to sort of like the Acropolis, right? So when you're looking at these sites, you're looking at different moments in time. So you can't look at the Acropolis and not think about the Mycenaean period that goes back to like 1500 BC. And you can't think about like the classical golden age of Athens in the fifth century BC. And you can't think about what happened to it thereafter because the power changes hands, right? To the Romans in 146 BC. And then, you know, it goes into the Byzantine Empire in the fifth century AD. And then it goes to the Ottomans after that. So like there's always been this transfer of power and these sites experience different levels of participation and ritual and mystery. So when you look at alluses, you know, as old as it could be going back, you know, probably to 1500 BC. In the classical period, it was always changing. So when you talk about secrets, you talk about potions and sacraments. I think they were always, always changing throughout time. And so maybe the secret recipe in the fifth century BC was different from what it looked like a thousand years before that and a thousand years since. And so what we do know is that Dionysus, who's this other god of ritual madness and ecstasy in the theater, remember when to the theater? Dionysus, you know, he sneaks into the mysteries at some point. And I think what you begin to see is this like this urge towards what some scholars call private, spontaneous, pagan piety, which means that aside from these centralized temples, like the temple of Demeter, it sits at a lusis and that's where these rights happen. And it's an utter profanation to celebrate them outside. What you see with Dionysus coming into these mysteries is this urge towards the celebration of ritual and ceremony outside the temples privately and spontaneously. So like the church is the temples of Dionysus were sort of outside. They were always celebrated in the forests and the mountains and at the southern slope of the Acropolis, which is interesting in urban centers too. But I think over time, you begin to see like this thirst to celebrate these mysteries outside the temples, which is why the evidence in Spain makes so much sense to me. When it comes to an dogenously created experiences, have you ever looked into what people experience doing Kundalini yoga? Yeah. Have you? That's pretty interesting. I practiced yoga for a little time. Well, I studied Sanskrit. Oh, really? Wow. I studied Sanskrit. So you can read that stuff? Have you seen that new AI that it's translating cuneiform? Yeah. And then amazing. I was talking about that earlier this year. And then amazing. We're getting smarter. That's, well, not enough. Our successors. Maybe they'll crack the coat. Oh, they're definitely cracked the coat. I'm sure to be easy for them. Probably. I mean, if we didn't have the Rosetta stone, how much would we know about the hieroglyphs and ancient Egyptian writing? Very little. And that was relatively recently in the grand scheme of history, right? It's just amazing that one piece of archaeological evidence led to like, oh my god, like a jigsaw puzzle. That's the piece. Yeah. This is it. That's what we're looking for here. We're looking for a little jigsaw. So with Kundalini yoga, which I think is very, I've not practiced it. I've only done like your bullshit soccer mom yoga. That counts too. I've done, I mean, I've done some other kind of classes, flow classes and classes to music and stuff like that. But most of the yoga that I've done has been that beaker stuff, that 90 minute hot yoga, that's 20 something poses. You do them the same ones every day. I really love it. But I know that gives you some sort of strange high. It really does. Like when you leave there, like it's not a coincidence that yoga people are all flaky and super peaceful. Like it really does something for you that it just puts you in a very relaxed and unique state. But Kundalini, as practiced by several people that I know, but I've just never done it, is supposedly you can reach states that are very similar to being on psychedelic drugs. In terms of like absolute visions, geometric patterns that are flowing around you. But you're not supposed to concentrate on that, which is interesting. Like at least in court, one of my friends who took it his instructor was saying that you're getting distracted, trying to, trying to have these experiences. That's not the goal. It's to set up, they call them the cities, the powers that arise. And it can be everything from visions to supernatural powers and supernatural. Oh, supernatural powers. Super natural. I didn't know about that. What have they claimed? Well, when you're traveling outside time and space, the ability to see into the deep past and the far future, the ability to transport your body, to teleport all kinds of mental telepathy and things like that. I mean, that's not the goal of yoga, obviously, they call them the cities. But it happens. Does it though? Well, it's, sure, we have lots of literature that test to it. Eight classical cities. Anima, the ability to reduce one's body to the size of an atom. That's a superpower. Yeah. Mahima, the ability to expand one's body to an infinitely large size. La Gima, the ability to become weightless or lighter than air, the green of the ability to become heavy or dense and prop D, the ability to realize whatever one desires. That one seems like a problem. It's not a superpower you want. Yeah, that seems like a real problem. Yeah. Yeah. King of the world. Yeah, it's not a good thing. Yeah. Not for some people. You could handle it. I don't know if anybody could. Yeah. And that's kind of the whole point is that you're talking, what you just talked about is the way the ego gets in the, the way it steps into this river. Right? So in all these spiritual practices, it's supposed to be about the deflation of the ego. And so if you're going through these spiritual exercises and these proxies and these disciplines, and your ego is still very much intact, then when the superpower is arise, what do you do with them? Yeah. And that's the dangerous part of any spiritual discipline. It's the dangerous part of psychedelics, for sure. Because you get this, this dramatic insight into the nature of yourself and maybe the underlying structure of the cosmos and all of a sudden, you think you're all knowing and maybe all powerful. Well, also you sort of espouse that to others who haven't experienced it. And there's like the guru thing that happens, which I think is really problematic for Western people. For whatever reason, there's a lot of especially men in Western culture that get involved in those things. And then they become leaders. And they're semi-cult leaders. Yeah. Someone sent me an article yesterday about this as an interesting title, Chasing the Numinous, Hungry Ghosts in the Shadow of the Psychedelic Renaissance. It just came out in this journal, Chasing the Numinous. And talk to this notion of the hungry ghosts is Breta and Sans here. It's speaking of more Sans gets so Breta, these hungry ghosts who are constantly hungry, constantly thirsty. And no matter how much they feed or try and satiate themselves, it's never enough. And so it's sort of this metaphor for the Western mind and consumerism and extraction. And wouldn't it be a shame if we approached psychedelics, yoga, all these spiritual disciplines with that sort of, that broken Western mentality trying to figure out what this can do for me? Yeah, that's what it is. What can this do for me? Most psychedelic experiences that I've ever had, one of the key sort of overwhelming aspects of it is to get out of your own way, and that you're in your own way, and that you thinking about yourself, and you think of yourself, and it's just wasted energy, wasted, and that instead you should be thinking about like the things you're doing and how you're interacting with the world. And also your ego's just bullshit. It's just, it's just, it's just some leftover chimp shit that's designed to keep us alive. This is designed to make sure that you procreate, make sure that you think very highly of yourself. So you want to procreate. But you came to psychedelics later in life. Yes, yeah. Is that, I mean, was that a good thing? Yeah, probably because I made a lot of mistakes. And you know, you learned from that, like you do need mistakes in life. And you also need to understand what it's like to be very stupid, very foolish, and young, and brash. And then also older and more experienced, but still, no nothing in terms, I mean, you really, as much as you know, the smartest person alive, no, basically nothing about the nature of the universe. You know, you might know things on a molecular level, on a cosmic level, you understand, oh, gosh, these are formed, that's cute. But you really fucking don't know shit. You don't know shit, you haven't seen shit. There's too much out there, it's just too big. It should be, and I think it was forever, when we didn't have light pollution. It was the overwhelming evidence that you're not shit. You know, if you thought very highly of yourself, and you lay on your back and looked up in the cosmos, at best, you could think that you were sent down from God to do His bidding. But you didn't think you were anything greater than that. You couldn't, there's too much evidence. The sky is just filled with these fucking enormous, nuclear explosions that are happening all over the cosmos. It's impossible to even wrap your mind. I mean, back then, they had no real knowledge of the scope of it all. But it's pretty obvious that it's insane. That mean, the night sky is, I'm sure, have you seen the night sky on a place where there's absolutely no light? You know, yes, but sadly, like I can count it on two hands. I can only count it on one. Well, twice, the second time not is profound, but I went to the Keck Observatory on the Big Island. And you go, the first time I went, it was quite a while ago. And when we first drove up there, I was really bummed out because it was so cloudy. I was like, God, this sucks. We're not gonna be able to see anything. But then when we went through the clouds to where the observatory is, there's nothing. It's just stars. And you get out and you're like, oh my God. It's like being on a spaceship. It's like you're in a convertible spaceship and you're hurling through the galaxy. Because what they've done on the Big Island is pretty profound. They put these lights, the street lights are a type of light that doesn't expand outward. What does it call, what are those lights called, Jamie, you're a photographer. And a fuse. Yeah, that's right. Thank you. Diffused lighting. Diffused lighting all throughout the Big Island. So it doesn't fuck with the light pollution issue that you get when you're trying to look at the real sky. So even though there is light from these streets and all that, it doesn't affect it. When you're way up there, it's a couple hours drive from the shore. And you get up there and it's just the one time that I went there. And this is, I guess this is about 20 years ago. The one time I went there was just like, oh my God. Just, oh my God. You can't believe it. You can't believe it so much. And it really made me sad. Cause it was like, that's what people used to see every night. That's what people used to see every night before these jackasses invented electricity. And it's in, you motherfucker. What have you done? What have you done? We don't think of it as anything like that because we just electricity is amazing. You can go out at night and go dinner. You can fucking drive your Tesla. Electricity is amazing. But it has made us so ignorant to our place in the cosmos. And it's taken away so much wonder. Because when the sky's just totally dark, you look up and you see us star, you know, way over there. Or they'll look the moon. Or I can see the moon. You just get used to it. It's just, you don't see enough. You don't see enough. And then when you actually do, you're like, oh, now I know. Well, you know, why would they, when the people are starving to death and just struggling, hunting and gathering? Why would they be concentrating on constellations? Of course, there's nothing to do at night. That's what I have. And it's amazing. What do you think you do all night? I think that that could be the origin of the religious sensibility. If you think that when we were hunting and gathering, you're talking about like 99% of our history, by the way. And then when you think about what comes before us, I know you think about this a lot. Yeah. I've been fascinated with some conversations I've been having with a friend called Lee Berger. He's a paleoanthropologist in South Africa. And it got me thinking about all these archaic hominins. And one of them is is homo erectus, which I'm like, I don't know why I'm so fascinated by erectus of all the hominins. But you know, it goes back at least probably two million years, which is something to think about. Homo hablis comes before erectus. That could be like 2.8 million years. And so erectus probably sheds the body hair of hablis. It's bipedal, obviously. And they probably discover fire. And so what that means, and by the way, they go off and explore the planet, which is crazy for being that old. I mean, they were potentially the first seafarers, the first seafaring hominins. Do we know what kind of vessels they use? No idea. Probably raffes. Jamie can find it. They were heading, I mean, we have erectus remains from Africa to Asia. So they were on the move over a million years ago. And the thing about fire, why I mentioned that? The thing about fire is that if they, whether or not they were cooking their food, they had fire for warmth and light at night. But it didn't obscure the night sky. And so it's interesting to think about whether erectus sat around their campfires a million years ago and told stories, the first stories about the night sky. They had language? We don't know if they had language or not. But they speculate that maybe the beginnings of proto language wouldn't be gone because, I mean, I was joking, but like, what do you do at night? What do you do at night? Again, we're not just distracted by light pollution. We're distracted by a million things when the sun sets. And that's, again, that's relatively recently. I mean, even in the Middle Ages, there was nothing to do. And so, but think about a million years ago. And so it's possible that around these primordial fires, the very first stories, storytelling, would have emerged around these, around the constellations. And then they're like, what is the moment? What is Homo erectus look like, Jamie? Do they have an artist interpretation? It's a wild. Wow. It's a very person-like. This article says that if they sailed, they'd probably also had a lingo for it, a sailing lingo to describe probably where they were going or what you were gonna see. And they sort of had the shape of the arms and the legs and the proportions very similar to humans. Yeah, similar, but this thing. I mean, they were bipedal. Yeah, but that looks like almost like a person. And that's really old, by the way. Yeah. It's at least two million years old. What, 1.8 million? Yeah. So what freaks me on? I was like, what made them stand up? You know, like, we're the only ones. Like, what the hell was that all about? Yeah. What was that about? You do see champs occasionally walking on their hind legs and you see gorillas doing as well. Yeah. Orangutans, but it's just not normal. Like, what would make someone say this is the only way to go? I don't need forelives. They were curious. Right, but how would that be an evolutionary advantage? I mean, well, you can scavenge a lot better. And you can protect yourself from prey a lot better. And also you can hunt prey a lot better. And so what they think, I'm not sure if it was a rectus or another one, but they would, they were good at long distance running so they could wear out potential prey. So there's an, there's an adapted, there's at least one adapted advantage. It's persistent something. Persistence something to wear out and chase down prey. That's a hard way to do it. Yeah, that's, that's, that's, they don't sweat. That's what, so you just run them down. Just run them down. The things that run really fast can't run really long. A lot of them, some of them can. Like Antelope can. Good luck running one of those down. Have you tried? No, but like the ones that we have in America that we call Antelope that I think they're, I want to say they're maybe even in a goat family because sometimes they call them speed goats. But those, the, the Antelope that they have in America, the pronghorn Antelope is actually the reason why it's so fast. It's because at one point in time, there was a cheetah here. And they're, they went extinct, but the Antelope survived. So it has the speed to evade something that runs insanely fast. So these little fuckers can go like 60 miles an hour. Damn. They're amazing. I only saw one for the first time this year on like actually in the wild. Where? In Utah. Huh. Yeah, it's really cool. We parked the car got out, put the, put the magnifying glasses out to check them out. Just, it's a, it's a prehistoric creature. It really is. It's just a remnant of the past. It lived with all the other megaphone that went extinct about, you know, whatever was it, 15,000 years ago, 2800. 2800. Yeah. At least starting them. Yeah. So those, those creatures were like the last of the Mohicans. Like they, they had to run super fast. So they can now like nothing can fuck with them. Humans like at a certain point in time when they're young, they're very vulnerable, but a certain point in time they get to the boy, like good luck catch me bitch. Like coyotes and mountain lions like you can't catch them. They're too fast. Yeah. I mean, they're faster than everything. What's the population like and you, not so good? Yeah. Not so good. It's good in some places. It's good in Wyoming. It's good in some places in the West. But they get hammered. The, the babies get hammered by coyotes. And it's, it's hard for them to, to compete. You know, it's just when your calves and your, your, you know, your fawns are getting slaughtered. There's not a lot your species can do. Hmm. You know, that, that, that becomes an issue in areas that have a lot of predators. You know, that becomes an issue's areas that have a lot of bears and there's like areas that have a lot of bear, like the moose population just gets hammered because the babies never make it. Hmm. I can most play. I think in one of the places in Alberta, it's more, I think it's somewhere in the range of 50 to 60% of all baby deer and moose to just get eaten by bears. Jeez. Yeah. You think a lot about death? Well, the cycle of, I think a lot about nature and how amazingly fascinating that it's so amazingly fascinating to me that we live in this very bizarre technological sort of raft in the middle of nature. You know, we live in these cities, these little, little communities that we have everything set up for the, the nature of the human animal in 2023. But the rest of the, like you go out in the wild, like they have no idea that game is being played. They've, they don't, they've, they're doing the exact same thing they've been doing forever. And it's things chasing after things and things try not to get eaten and that's everyday. That's all it is. That's all it is. And then when things die, there's, you know, raptors come in and, and vultures come in and, and all these scavengers come in and that's their job. That's why the way we treat our dead is so, at least we used to think was so unique to Homo sapiens and how we treat the notion of, of death and burial. Have we talked about Homo nalady? No. We need to talk about Homo nalady. Okay. Jamie, I brought some, some slides in that. I brought some, some things I want to show you. Okay. Um, I get a cigar. Yeah, I go for a little tiny one, so. This will be a fun, a fun adventure. Do you see where it is? It's at the, like number 16 there. Yeah. Homo nalady. Homo nalady. That's a cute name. It sounds like a song. Doesn't it? Like it have a good beat to it. Um, what, what year is Homo nalady? Yeah, there it is. So it was discovered by, by Lee in South Africa and the cradle of humankind. This goes back. Uh, well, this, the, the, the, this could be anywhere from 250 to 300,000, 335,000 years old. That's what I wanted to show you. Um, this is, this is. They think that this could be anywhere from 250 to 300,000, 335,000 years old. That's what I wanted to show you. This is where it was discovered. So you see the rising star cave system there in South Africa. It was found in this cavernous underground labyrinth of networks where Lee found a number of different bodies that had been apparently left there by this species, Homo naleti. And the reason that's interesting is because again, Homo sapiens to our knowledge are the only species to have ever intentionally buried their dead. So you see things like you see grief and morning practices in the animal. You talked about the animal world. Like when they just die, they're left to rot typically. Although you see morning practices in insitations and you see it in elephants and maybe chimpanzees, no one buries their dead. So that was the big bright line that no species had ever crossed. Seemingly aside from Homo sapiens, although there's also evidence for Neanderthal burial, which goes back potentially a very long time, like over 400,000 years. There's a site in Spain called Sima de los Waisos. But Neanderthals very close to us as well. We have Neanderthal DNA, like in our own genetic makeup, they're kind of cousins. So that wasn't really too shocking. The fact that there could be Neanderthal burial. But the fact that something that looks like that, and is potentially at least 300,000 years ago. But more philogically, it's archaic. Kind of like we're talking about erectus. It's really archaic looking Homo naleti. It's short. It's about 4-8 to 5-2. It's slender and skinny. But there are features on it that look, again, like archaic. It could be at least a million years old, for example, or longer. So it's strange that being that archaic finds its way into this cave system and deliberately deposits the dead. So that was like a very controversial idea. It was so controversial that Lee didn't know what the bones were doing there. Because it just didn't make sense. And by the way, it's become the richest site for hominid discovery on the continent, and maybe anywhere. Because of the profusion of bones. They found like 1,500 different bones. I think it's close to 2,000 now. Which is really, really strange in paleoanthropology. So Lee was digging another site called Gladys Vale, not too far from this. For years, years. And typically what you find are animals. You find tens or hundreds of thousands of animal bone fragments and a very small percentage of hominids. So for example, at that site in Gladys Vale, he found a tooth and a pinky bone over the course of like many, many years. Which is not unusual. He comes to this right-hand-star cave system and all of a sudden there's 1,500 bone fragments. They're able to assemble what they think is like 15 different individuals. So 15 individual specific hominillady are being deposited in that denolated chamber. And they don't know why. And so they begin to look more into it. I want to show you how difficult it is to get in there, by the way. And why it was so difficult to believe it first. If you look at the cave chamber there, it was just up there before. It's on the next one maybe. Yeah, it's really hard to access that. You can see, so you enter at the top there. And this is what Homo-Nalady was doing, potentially 300,000 years ago. They found this cave system. They would descend there on the left, go down into what's called Superman's crawl, which is just 10 inches high. So they had to go on their bellies potentially. And so they think they drank the bodies through their schnical. They drank the dead bodies through the superman's crawl. So it's only 10 inches high and you could drag a body through them. It gets worse. So they not only drug it through that crawl there, they went up dragons back as you can see there. And then down what's called the shoot. You see the yellow arrow, the shoot. So the shoot goes from the top of dragons back into the dental-lady chamber. The shoot is like seven or eight inches wide, seven or eight inches. And it goes down like 40 feet from the top of dragons back to Dental-Lady. And inside Dental-Lady is where they found at least 15 bodies. How did they get a body through seven inches? Yeah. I mean, we can go there too. Like it's really so Lee avoided it for many years. He was able to actually make it down himself. There's a great document. You got to see the documentary. It's on Netflix. It's called Cave of Bones. If you look up unknown, unknown colon cave of bones, you'll find an awesome documentary that charts the discovery and what they call the underground astronauts who managed to get their way through Superman's crawl and dragons back and actually managed to get into the Dental-Lady chamber. It's like it's so captivating how they discovered and then through these bones. And so, okay, there's a bunch of bones in there. It's so strange that it doesn't make sense at first. So the working hypotheses are that it was some kind of accident or it was animal predation. Okay, animals killed these hominolady and animals drug them through that chamber complex into Dental-Lady. That was one. Or maybe there was a flash flood or maybe something happened or like it wasn't like an excursion party gone, gone bad. A bunch of people spelunking and they got trapped in there. But it turns out that that's not the case. It's not the case. It seems like they were intentionally buried in these holes. And so they found pits which look like graves. And again, against all expectations because only sapiens and maybe Neanderthal does this, this archaic being is deliberately disposing of their dead in ritual fashion inside this chamber, which is super difficult to access in the first place. It would take you at least 30 or 40 minutes to make your way through the surface. How would I even get in something that's seven inches wide? You have to see the footage for how to do it. You can make your way through it. I mean, it gets wider at parts but at very like at very, there's sections where it's really, really tight. And like league at stuck at some point. So the people who went down are really, really thin, thin people who can navigate. And like professional spelunkers, for example, it was that dangerous to access. It can be done. And if there's any earthquake activity at all, you're fucked. Yeah. It's something else to think about. You just have to imagine like what would motivate them to take this journey in the first place. That's why I mention it because it's not just the first discovery of the deliberate burial of the dead. By species that's not us. They go to great lengths to do this because they too were thinking about these cycles of life and death. And so if it wasn't an accident and it wasn't flash flooding and it wasn't animal predation. And this was deliberate burial ritual. Like why would they do that? And it seems like, and again, now you're speculating, but it seems like they set up this complex. Or they use this naturally existing complex to actually reenact a passage. Some passage from light into darkness. And sort of like the passage into the underworld, into death itself. And this has so many resonances with Elusas, by the way. And everything that we saw there in these ancient mystery complexes. Again, this notion of spelunking into the underworld and meeting the gods and goddesses of death. And really confronting death and mortality in a powerful way. Like it's happening in a different species 300,000 years ago. So what else are they bringing into these caves? It gets crazier. The documentary is fantastic. What they also find is fire. And so I mentioned that Homo erectus probably had fire. So that's not entirely surprising. But they figured out a way to illuminate the pet, which is pitch dark, obviously. And so they figured out a way to light fires along the way. We think at least for light, but they were also cooking down there. They found, I think they found Antelope or Springbuck, these tiny bones that were cooked in this fire. So they were manipulating fire. At least having some sort of like, I don't know if it's a funerary meal or something that could have been related to this ritual complex. So they're controlling fire. They're dragging bodies into this pit over different generations potentially, which makes you think about the possibility of language and how this ritual is communicated from one generation to another. And the craziest thing is that they also found just last year when Lee finally made his way into the Dinaldé Chamber. In the Antichamber before that, they found scratch markings, which I think there's some pictures in that file, Jim. They found like hash markings. So there you go. So the one on the right is Nellady. That could be 300,000 years old. The one on the left is Neanderthal. And you can see the crazy similarity. They took a rock and they just etched it into these cave walls. Homosapiens does the same thing in Blombos Cave, not too far away in South Africa. That's 80,000 years old. That's only 80,000 years old. That's as old as we get in South Africa, Homo sapiens. That's 80,000 years old. So Nellady is doing something that looks to the untrained eye very similar, potentially 300,000 years ago. Wow. So Homo sapiens, when do we first start appearing? The numbers are always changing. It could be like 300,000, 300,000, 400,000 years ago. So Homo Nellady and Homo sapiens existed at the same time. And so because of what Lee found there, some of his critics claim that actually it was Homo sapiens who are making these markings. It's so unbelievable that Nellady is dragging these bodies in there and making these markings and controlling fire and potentially having tools, by the way. It's so unthinkable that some scholars think that this is the evidence of sapiens finding these caves. Is it possible? Do they interact with each other? Do we have any understanding of whether or not they interact with each other? I asked Lee the same questions that they could have. We don't have any evidence of sapiens in the area. So we don't know for sure, but it raises like really, really profound questions. And this is pure speculation, but if they did come into contact with another, because we know we have this relationship with Neanderthal. We interpret with Neanderthal. We have no idea what our relationship with Homo Nellady was like. Did we interbreed? Did we exchange knowledge, communication? Did they teach us this pure speculation? Did they teach us about death? Did they teach us about these burial practices? Did they even know something that primitive sapiens didn't know? Did they pass it on to Neanderthal, etc., etc.? What could they possibly know other than how to do this? The mystery. Why are they doing it? Why are they doing it? Why does no animal do this? And again, Lee and the team, they can't answer this. But if you're going to those lengths to burrow your dead over successive generations, it raises the big questions that maybe they were asking, well before us, what happens when we die? Did they believe in an afterlife? Did they have a concept of God? Did they have a concept of spirituality? Did they look at the stars at night and wonder where we came from and how we got here and where we go after death? Did they have a special insight that death maybe wasn't the ending but the beginning of a new journey back to the stars and to this underworld who knows? We see this mythology pop up in our earliest historical societies, which goes back 5,000 years, thinking about the book of the dead and the Egyptians, the Tibetan book of the dead, the classical mysteries, I spend all this time researching. That's the essential question they're trying to answer is what happens after death. So to think that a species that precedes us was asking the same questions and developing rituals around it, like completely upends our notion of what it means to be human. Because if the way we approach death is not exceptional in the hominin world at least, then what else did that say about us? And how did that get started? Who was the first person to take a body and go, you know, we should really do something with us? And why would they do that? Yeah, especially during the time where you're basically spending most of your time trying to eat and avoid predators. Yeah. It seems like an immense undertaking to crawl through all that and deposit bodies and you're cooking and lighting fires along the way. It seems like there had to be some communication. Right. So Lee looks at all those data points and says, on a bash at Lee, there's something like a culture here, a non-human culture. And this could be the first non-human culture we found in paleontripology. It kind of makes sense, though, too, that it shouldn't be just human culture. It's the first culture. Like if you're experiencing these things that are, I mean, if you're experiencing the remnants of these things that were there before people, it's not like we're just like, I got an idea. Like, I had to know where. And we just, all of a sudden, came up with all these ideas. I mean, they might have been, I mean, how intelligent do we think this thing was? So I mean, that's the crazy part. So you couldn't really tell from some of the recreations and what we think they look like. But their brain, I didn't mention this, is the size of an orange. It's one third the size of a Homo sapiens brain. I kind of buried the lead. That's the shocking part of all this. Is that a being with a brain one third the size of ours figures out this complex ritual. But is that, should that still be shocking when we know so much about crows? Hmm. You know, crows are very smart. Like clever. They play games. They know how to solve puzzles. They know how to drop rocks into a water bottle to raise the level of the water so they can drink it. They do. These tools to extract food, they, they, they've, you ever seen crows make cats start fights with each other? No. They do it for sport. Like one crow will like two cats are on rival rooftops. And the crow will fly over and just be just close enough to the cat. The cat can't get him. And he kind of fucks with him and irritates him. On purpose. On purpose. And then he flies over to the other cat. Kind of fucks with him. And the cats get out of here, man. And so they're both like, aah! They're heightened because they're being fucks with by this crow. And then he kind of like coaxes these cats into a fight. And then these cats fight and they fall off the roof. Watch this shit. Watch this. Look at this. Look at this crow. He's getting close. He's like, hey motherfucker. What's up? Say, bitch. What's up? He just gets just close enough to see the cats like the fuck out of here, man. He's, he's fucking with them. And every time the cat tries to move on him, he flies away. And then the cat just jumps on that other fucking cat. And they start duking it out. Like look, and he's like sitting right next to it. They fall off the roof and the crow flies down with him. He's like, yeah, get him. He's still going. He's fun for him. He's having a good time. Like there's no evolutionary advantage to doing that. That's blood sport. Looking like they fall down that little... Mmm. The cats are just going to war. And that crow's like, yeah, get him. Kexas. Weird. They're very, very, very smart. They've done all these studies where they show that if you give a crow a one size tool, it will use that tool to extract a larger tool and it will use that tool to get the food. Like they've done all these weird little mazes and had crow solve them. They're very clever. The sneaky little fuckers, tiny little brains. So we're not exceptional. Wow, about octoply. Octopuses are very smart. And what the fuck are they? You know, they found that there's a poison is jellyfish that is very toxic jellyfish. But even though it doesn't have a brain, it has the ability to learn. That's something they just recently discovered. See if you can find that. It's pretty interesting. It's like some just fucking weird-ass jellyfish that stings your fucked. But this thing has the ability to learn, which is very surprising. It doesn't even have a brain. Okay, so all right, what's learning then? Where is memory? Are we wrong about where memories are stored? Scientists provide evidence that tiny Caribbean box jellyfish with lack, which lack a central nervous system can learn to navigate through mangrove roots. Yeah. It's interesting. That just came out. Yes. So what is learning then? Is it all, or do we silly by thinking it's in the mind? Hmm. Is the mind in antenna? Is there other antenna in the body? Is it gut feeling a real thing? You know, that expression gut feeling? Wow, why gut? Like what is that? Maybe we focus on the brain too much. Perhaps. But we know you shut the brain off the consciousness shuts off too. So it makes sense. You concentrate on that thing. And it is very big. It's very unusual, quickly grew. There's a lot of weirdness to the human brain, doubling of the human brain size. That's like one of the biggest mysteries ever. They don't know what the fuck caused that. Yeah, from erectus to sapiens, like we were talking about. Over a period of 2 million years. Yeah. Yeah. Double. But then you have these small brain creatures in the meantime, which are doing exceptional things. And so maybe the increase in the brain is in what we should be focusing on, at least not exclusively. If brainless jellyfish can learn and a hominid species with an orange brain can develop complex rituals around death. Yeah, but there's also clearly a correlation between the larger brain and much more ability to manipulate its environment. I mean, the difference between what a human being, a homo sapiens capable of. And we're amazed that they drag their body into a hole in the ground. We build rockets, fly to outer space. It's like a big difference in the weirdness of what the creative mind can achieve in a homo sapiens. Some of us. Yeah. Some of us. Sure. Yeah. Yeah, sometimes I'm not so much. Yeah. The brain has done anything from us. Diggers too. Someone's got a big ditch. Until AI. And then, you know, that's what's going to be interesting. And you said our successors take over? Our successors. Yeah. When President AI solves all the world's problem, we just give in. I don't know. I have faith in the human spirit. I give a talk about this in Paris a few months ago about artificial versus ancestral intelligence. And I happen to think that what Homo nalady was doing is among some of the most intelligent activity. Our species can get itself busy with, which is investigating this notion of life and death. I think that's what makes us human is asking these big questions and trying to figure out the nature of consciousness. And this is what all these mystery religions were trying to do. I think there was more science than religion. I mean, they're called mystery religions, but this was the process of our ancestors trying to figure out the secrets to the universe. And antiquity. And for the working hypothesis is that psychedelic drugs and altered states of consciousness had something to do with that ability to probe into these mysteries. And I think that, you know, the caves also have a lot to do with it. Like there were caves constantly being used by, well, predecessor species for sure, but then also ancient societies to enter into these profound states of awareness going back into the womb of the earth to really figure out that border between life and death and maybe navigate it. Maybe navigate successfully. This was the enterprise of ancient Egypt as being able to successfully navigate into the afterlife again, which is not a beginning, which is not an end, but a beginning. This is how the mystery religions always talk about about death and befriending death and confronting homoratality. I'm not sure if AI will be able to to to plumb those secrets, the way that we've been doing for all these thousands of years. That's interesting. I don't think well, why wouldn't it be able to? I mean, what it's essentially doing, well, all human beings, everyone that is listening to this and everyone who isn't, you're essentially writing on the work of the people that came before you. We're all speaking a language that other people invented. We're using mathematics, other people invented. We live in structures that other people invented. There's been just this massive sea of human beings before us that have innovated and created. But if AI can have access to everything they've ever learned and everything they've ever done, and have an understanding of biology and of subatomic science at a level that the the average human beings just are capable of. Maybe it could understand a pattern that we've missed. Maybe it could understand a code that we've missed. That this whole thing is like there's there's some sort of an underlying code to the entire universe. And that it all works together. And you're experiencing it as a human being, writing the subway, driving in your car, going to what you're experiencing. There's a very minute realm of this overall experience that is all working together through this code that's creating everything. I think AI can figure that out. I think we're very limited because we're talking about our own experience and we're talking about our own biological mortality. So we have this window of time to sort things out. What is that quote enlightenment as possible within your lifetime? We have this very small window. It's 100 years if you're lucky. And during that 100 year period you're asked a lot with this primitive monkey mind to try to figure things out. But if you didn't have that, if you didn't have that thing looming over you, you'd have a more objective assessment of what's actually going on. But what this species is actually doing. Like what it's here for. What's your take away on our biological mortality and what we're doing here in light of your most profound DMT experiences? Oh, it would be just guessing and talking shit. Yeah, I don't know. I mean for us in our experience, I think the best thing you could do is spread as much positivity as possible. In every way you can be as charitable as possible, be as nice as possible. Spread as much positivity as possible. That seems to be like a valuable lesson that I get from all those experiences. But again, where everything we're doing is based on the biological limitations of our consciousness and our life experiences. The same thing we're doing is based on like who we are and who we think we are and what meaning it has for us that we're here right now. But if you weren't burdened down by all these biological limitations, if you were burdened by this existential angst and this fear of death and this re... just desire to figure it out, like to have like, oh this is what's going to happen. We have this desire to have an answer, it's almost the unanswerable. But if AI didn't have those problems, it's just going to have information. It's just going to have just pure information with no ego, no desire to survive, no greed, no desire to reproduce, no envy. It's going to be a fascinating thing once it does happen because it might be able to quickly figure out a lot of things that we've been burdened by. But we're looking at these things through the limitations of our biological experience and through the ego which tells us that this biological experience is uniquely important. Everyone thinks that they are uniquely important. Be others all as evidence that you're not. You're a part of this very bizarre thing. This is very bizarre thing as it interacts with each other. It's very psychedelic. Like if you weren't a human and you didn't... you had no idea what human life is and you were some other kind of consciousness and you took a drug. And the drug led you to experience human life in a big city. You'd be like, this is crazy. What a drug. Have you just saw the lights going back and forth on a highway and how similar they looked to blood flowing through arteries? And you see these things that are getting constructed. It's like these growths on the earth that this being is creating. Like what is this? Fucking wild species doing. I think we would have a more objective sense of it. I've said this too many times, so I'll say it one more time. I think we're here to make things. I think our curiosity is all about innovation. The primary function that this species has. If you looked at it from afar, you'd say, what is this thing doing? Oh, it's making better stuff every year. It always does that. No matter what it does. Unless it nukes itself into the stone age, which is always a threat because the better stuff that it makes is often weapons. And it often gets better at making money by utilizing those weapons. So it keeps doing that, which you're seeing all over the world right now. But I think if you looked at the one thing it's doing, it's making better things. And it's so wrapped up in buying those better things. Materialism is so rampant. And everybody, despite what you have being more than enough, you want more and better in new things. And that fuels consumerism, consumerism fuels more innovation. And it's baked into the mentality. Sort of like, I don't know if bees know exactly what they're doing when they're making a bee hive, but they all make bee hives. They're all doing that same thing. And human beings, what we're doing is we're at least working towards buying these things that someone's making. Don't you think human creativity is what makes us uniquely human on top of all that, our ability to fashion things from nothing, to create music, and beauty, and art. Look at those scratch marks from 300,000 years ago. And then you go into the painted caves 30,000 years ago. And then you follow the production of art throughout our species. I feel like that's the kind of thing that AI won't be able to resolve for us. Perhaps. The process of what it means to engage in a creative act and to produce something that the whole species can resonate with. Well, the question would be why would it want to do that? If it doesn't have those kind of feelings that you have when you hear a great song or see a great painting, like why would it want to do that? And why do we want to do that? Why do we do that? Well, you talk about creativity. And I think creativity is the fuel of innovation. All things that we use today, whether it's a cell phone or a laptop or whatever it is, all of those things came out of the imagination. All those things came out of someone's mind. And I've always wondered, I wonder if ideas are life forms, like a type of life form, like a thing, a energy that manifests itself in the creation of actual physical objects. And that it gets into your mind and it interacts with your being and it talks to you into making a coffee pot. I mean, it doesn't make sense. All these things that we have, everything in this room came out of someone's mind. That's everything. See, that's where I think we have the edge on AI. And I think that we don't understand the genius, the divine genius of where that creativity comes from. I collect different quotes from, like, musicians talking about the creative process. Jamie, I sent you a couple. There's, in the email, there's one from John Frishante, who's the guitarist for Red Hot Chili Peppers. Like, I love listening to musicians talk about where music comes from and where inspiration comes from. Because I think it's like it's one lens that we can use to think about the creative act in general. Like, it may start with music, it goes to everything that's here. It goes to the art of a conversation, it goes to comedy, it goes to the way we make children, by the way, which is a very creative act. And something that comes naturally to most of us. Like, I think that's what makes us human, is this ability to translate something that extends beyond our physical bodies. And then to embody it, whatever that it is, Frishante calls it the force. And then to make something of it. That can resonate with the community. I think that's something that AI will be able to do and fits and starts. But I'm not sure that we understand the process. And that's why I think about the process of life and death too. That's why I think that the thing that makes us human is the way that we engage with those invisible forces. But I'm not sure that we understand the process and that's why I think about the process of life and death too That that's why I think that the thing that makes us human is the way that we engage with those invisible forces Hmm Yeah The way we engage with those invisible forces. Yeah, that means that's what it's unique about humans for sure on earth Jamie do you have that quote from from John? Yeah, but what is it? Is it saying it's a video? I don't know if you want to read it or play it or what thank you for it Is I expressing itself through our existence? I don't believe that a musical idea starts in your brain I believe it starts at a place before that that we don't have any direct contact with and I believe that everything that we do Everything that we create is nature expressing itself the same way that when a flower grows out of the ground or a tree grows Out of the ground. It's nature expressing itself and you might say that the tree is expressing itself by the way It's branches move out, but it's the force that drives nature the trees the visible thing that appears to our senses But I don't at all believe it's the source of why everything is perpetuated all the time, you know force that created us Hmm that makes sense. Yeah, well most comedians will tell you that jokes come to them like Like a gift Like your your mind just like a door opens up and like here it is And you're like oh wow. Oh my god. What a great idea like these ideas just pop in your head You see and sometimes you see things and you describe them and you like mmm And you the the idea will come from that but sometimes ideas just come to you They don't you don't you don't even feel like you don't feel responsible for them because it's not like you dug a hole Like here's the whole I dug you do right you sit down right right? You do fit the physical act of summoning The muse which is how pressfield talks about it in the war of art which is a great way to It is because it is that Whether or not the muse is real if you treat it as if it's real will show up Like if you show up every day and you write you say I'm from 9 a.m. To noon every day I sit in front of my computer and I write if you do that the ideas will come they will come to you That's crazy. Well, where are they coming from? Where is that? Yeah, what is that do you think a I can figure that out? I don't think I'm not sure if we can figure that out I don't know it's good question. It's a good question like what is the unique inspiration for ideas and our desire to pursue them like what What is it? I think that's part of what makes us innovate and that's part of like what you know? If you were looking at us from afar, you know, what is the species doing? It's making things and how do you make things without creativity? You don't you you wouldn't you would have No desire to so there's the question about AI's like can you program that? Desire to innovate into a thing without all of the primate characteristics That we possess we seem to have this innate ability to do it in a way that we know will resonate with people Have you ever like have you ever read AI jokes? Yeah? They're not they're not inspired but they're really young It's like a joke from a five-year-old. Yeah five-year-old tells you joke. It's like My daughter's really young. Whatever favorite jokes was what kind of tree grows in your hand? I go on and she goes a palm tree And she'd have this big long punchline a palm tree when you're five It's hilarious and I thought it was really funny and it doesn't solve a joke But like that's a five-year-old joke if you try to do that on stage at the mothership on a Saturday Neither like really, you know, so my point man. Yeah, so where do your jokes come from? But AI is young. That's what I'm saying. Yeah, is AI is a five-year-old telling jokes when AI becomes a PhD from Princeton You're gonna be dealing with a very different thing. You know as AI becomes I just can't imagine that the Whatever it is that makes creativity His creativity is absolutely inspired by our predecessors as well. There's a lot of I could speak to comedy there's a lot of styles of comedy that you go oh that guy's clearly a Richard prior fan Or that guy's you know, he's he's definitely been influenced by kennison. He's definitely been influenced by Jerry Seinfeld There's something that we carry with us from the people that and you see it in music as well You know Steve very Vaughn clearly influenced by Hendrix So you see this as well, but it's just Couldn't it just do that couldn't it just absorb all these patterns and then come up with unique patterns that it knows will resonate with people Now give you I think you could probably create some fucking jam-and-pop songs That are just entirely AI created and You you could use all the best voices because you would just be able to voice swap them that you could have you doing them You could be saying in the next Lizzo song It's you know it can do weird things now and some of those weird things are gonna resonate with people and become very successful And then it'll figure out what those things are Okay, so this Drake song that I made is with this got you know four million listens on Spotify So now we'll do this and now we'll make one like that and now I'll add this and now I'll do something the people have never figured out before Do that so it might be able to do the same thing it create creativity is capable of accomplishing But it won't be done with the same sort of spirit and soul so it won't be able to resonate with us the same way as say like a Janice Joplin song There's like there's something to like culture walls voice There's certain people that they have a thing in them like you can't You can't fake that what are the fuck that? There's a word for that they call a free song have you heard of that? No Free song it's the it's the term when you get like goosebumps From music or when music affects you in such a way. Yeah, I I'm not saying it's impossible But think humans at the moment are much better producing that effect than then than AI oh for sure You do know culture walls Jamie plate Kate McKenna there's this song Jamie turned me out of this song and This dude is singing he wrote and singing this song when he was 21 years old and You listen to you what the fuck? This it's very rare that I'll listen to a song and just go what the fuck but listen to this Any floats outside my prison window Walk you knows with there Any things to me real It's hell to where you go You didn't murder Kate 21 sounds like a 50-year-old rancher 60 This is the music video that's why I'm with it A dark hair daughter I went she and I did They're The girl in the whole down Holler They know good luck AI Yeah, you're gonna make this You never think of this that's the point. Yeah, that's not gonna think but why is this is this special to us? So well, we are special to us Because we are us But it'll be the next thing We had this knack for producing things that we know will resonate with us with our species. Yeah, and what are those things do? They motivate movement they motivate Creativity they inspire you They fuel you there. They're a strange drug. It's an audible drug an audio drug They could say great music is certainly a drug like you and I got to see guns and roses live That was pretty dope Have you told that story? I think I did. Yeah, I think it did. Yeah You came back to the table and you came back and you said oh my god. Axel roses here And I was like whoa Where's yeah, you're like is right over there. So you had to walk by and you know I tried to talk to him, right? Yeah I said I didn't go so well I saw him when I left to the bathroom out of the corner of my eye I saw Him with the with a woman and I felt oh that's that's that's axle And I went to the bathroom and I'd had a margarita and a glass of wine Pushing me into drinking over dinner My fault Look how For you you're a grown man So I made I made the choice to have a glass of wine with dinner And so I was feeling pretty good and so I saw him at the table so on the way back I'm thinking I got I got it. I can't not say hi and so like in my mind I have like a tuxedo and slick tear and a martini Assing Excuse me axle when we need to chat, but I think like it's not impossible that I said Mr. Rose like excuse me Mr. Rose and and the woman there was like Just I mean she just like she didn't say anything just wave waves me away I mean I would do the same thing if I were axle And so I went back to the table Dejected and let you know that axle was still sitting there. Yes And then my dilemma was do I say hi Because I'm like I don't know if he knows me. I don't know if he knows where I am Yeah, I don't want to be an idiot. Yeah, I don't want to hire a oxie. Look for God here I try to Especially with like my first time meeting axle Rose. I've been a fan of his for so long You got to I think I used to work out to welcome to the jungle in the 80s So that guy has been famous since I was like 21 years old I know 22 when how when you when did welcome to the jungle come out appetite for destruction. Yeah, what's that? 87 Wasn't I think it was 87 I remember very clearly being in the gym the first time I heard it I was lifting weights at this place and Welcome to the jungle. It's like oh my god. What a fucking song. 87 1987. Yeah, that makes sense I remember standing on the pool table of my neighbor Ryan down the street and playing with wiffleball bats and air guitar ring welcome to the jungle I So luckily he knew who I was he actually knew my comedy he was asking me questions about some jokes and I loved this bit I was like oh Thank god because you went in with confidence by the way you forget that part dude We walked in and like I did the wrong thing and you walked in with total confidence and you stuck your arm Into the booth and said hi like you didn't give him a chance not to say hi That's what I did I just got lucky you knew Full confidence with the Joe Rogan tattoos Right to his face and said hey man. Hey man And like he stopped for a second because it was odd and they's like oh hey man. Yeah, he knew you knew you immediately Who will relieve that was Because you don't know we don't know someone fucks with you. Yeah, you know it's weird So it's weird to like assume that this very famous person knows who you are he was super cool He was very cool and he asked what you were doing there Yeah, and you said I'm here with my family and he said oh this is your family pointing to me Like no, this is Brian you're very nice like he wrote this thing. He's a he's a writer And you told him the hypothesis and axle like he gave me the best t-shirt for the book He's like okay cool, so everybody got high and made democracy Pretty much pretty much pretty much Pretty much Getting invited us to the show which was super dope and But you know that what I was getting to is like when you hear like welcome to the jungle Your whole body goes wow, it's like a drug. It's a drug that human beings have invented for ourselves There's something about music that it's like music when you're tired like say if you're on a treadmill or something You're tired a good song comes on. Oh fuck yeah, it gives you an extra gear Inspiration through music is very much like a performance enhancing drug It does something to you motivates people to dance Mota, you know when someone hears a good song like fuck that let's get on the dance floor It's like music like does something to you you're being it interfaces with whatever the fuck you are and some very very special way But it only does it to us like why would the universe think that that's interesting? Like does it don't animals dance to human music? There must there must be videos of animals dancing to human music There's definitely some videos of dogs dancing Those wonder if they can train to dance Why does that make you smile? How could this cool? Cool see dogs dance. I wish my dog could dance But they you know Animals are so especially dogs in particular. They're so tuned into people And it's some weird way like my dog understands English Like I can say yeah, I was sure about them today But everyone's at the house. He was having fun. There's a deer in our backyard. There's a lot of drama today There's a deer with a broken leg in my backyard. Oh, man. Yeah Yeah, some poor little buck little young buck and I Was get it was in the morning like seven o'clock in the morning. Everyone's getting ready to go to school. I made a cup of coffee I I let the dog back in and he hadn't seen it so he's like chilling on the back porch and I let him in and I look over there. It looks like a fucking statue. It's a buck just standing there I mean like 40 feet from me And I'm like why is there a deer there and then I close the door girls girls girls can I have to check this out? And then I look at the way Stan and go ooh his back legs broken He's got his shin is fractured his back leg where your your shin would be it's bending back the wrong way It's broken and so we called animal protection and they didn't know what to do and so we're literally trying to find them in animal veterinarian to fix this deer's leg which is just so crazy because they shoot deer's and I eat them Do you feel bad for this one for that one? It's like he's first he's very young. I would never shoot him. He's a little young fella He's just it looks like a yearling like he's just got his horns for the first time and he's like really confused And he's hurt and he can't you know he's in my yard because I guess he's like safer there and so the dog Finally does find him and when the dog finds him He's he's like kind of jumping around. I'm a bouncing and like you want to play like what in the deer can't run So he's just standing there going him. You got to eat me like what's going on here and It was very interesting but He know like my daughter and he's like come on man cut the shit kid inside and he goes inside or I can say don't go out the store I'm gonna go the other door. Okay. He just goes to the other door like I can say things like that Like he knows I can say not that door do the other one and he'll start going towards the other door It's very weird like I say you want to watch TV and he goes into the TV room and like he waits for me to plop up on the couch Then he hops up next to me like he speaks English or he knows English. You just can't talk if they're golden. Yeah So animals whatever the intelligence that they have like whatever the fuck they're tuning into it's a Comprehension of language. I think beyond just like saying words That they respond to like you want to go for a walk The dog pops up. They're just recognizing the word walk now. I think they understand like speech They understand tone They understand what you mean they understand when you're in trouble there in trouble. Did you did you fucking shit on the carpet dude? You know like They know things But they don't seem to give a fuck about music You know dogs don't they won't they won't calm down if you play calming music Supposedly they do and unfortunately now that's in my fucking YouTube algorithm because he was freaked out because of the Thunderstorms that were happening. He was a war and so My wife said oh, there's this music that you can play for the dog and it calms them So there's YouTube channels so now every time I turn on my YouTube app I get calming dogs on How'd even if they work? How does anybody know if they work? Ask your dog. Yeah, he's not gonna answer. That's the problem but the the the act of moving the body To music is uniquely human. Yeah. I mean, what are the animals dance to music? It's fun. I know chimpanzees don't oh Thanks, so Boy, they're smart shit though. Yeah, they're spooky smart when you watch them solve puzzles for candy You know they gave chimps money They taught them that if they Take this money They'd this thing these tokens and give it to this person or put it in this thing. They would give them candy You know the first thing they did one they give it to the female champs and they had sex with them They like immediately engaged in Find this stuff. Oh, that's old. That's an old study. That's from a long time ago I've just been always fascinated by chimpanzees. I mean, they're one of the most bizarre Relatives to us that's still right. You've seen chimp nation. Yeah, on that for the amazing. Oh, my god So fascinating, yeah, but I don't think they dance Do you think they have rhythm? Yeah, yeah, they've been move around these videos of them doing some some ritual I think Ritual some rhythm So what is this look at these breakdowns? With that dancing time that's dancing is that what he's doing? Is there music plan? But is that real is that the real music? That seems like that's added out to the fact Yeah, these doing fast steps like how long his arms are that crazy It's just crazy that that's we come from the same Original route we it branched in a bunch of different ways. Yeah, but seven million years ago That's what's fascinating is that they're still here. They're still here in that form which is the dumbest anti-evolution Question ever if we came from monkeys why are monkeys still here Good question. Well, why are amoeba still here sir? Yeah Why is anything still here? Why are we still here? Yeah, well, but some things can some function in the state They are and they don't need to adapt. That's why crocodiles are they've been the same forever. You know sharks Existed before trees Hmm sharks predate trees So sharks are so old. They've been along for so they're I think they're 50 million years older than trees But trees are pretty able to begin with mm-hmm. Yeah I think sharks are somewhere in the neighborhood of like 300 something million years old and trees are 50 million years less. What is it? Yeah, there it is Sharks have been swimming our oceans much longer than trees have been swaying in the breeze on land The birth of trees on earth is believed to have occurred roughly 370 390 million years ago that makes sharks at least 10 million years old in trees. Oh, so's off by 40 million But yeah, older than trees Calling as an evolutionary bio not really no not just like interesting information That's especially about things like that, you know like sharks the cleanup crew of the ocean That's a like how do you manage? Just just vast literal sea of life that moves in 3d space It just moves all over the place and things are gonna die and what happens to them sharks this Massive beast that has to keep moving or it dies And it's so old and it's designed just for killing and eating and it has rows of replaceable teeth And the only bones that it has at all are this massive jaw bone and these Ridiculous razor sharp saws that just slice things in half and it just roams the ocean looking to consume Have you ever had a shark encounter? I've had sharks bite fish off my line. I've never like had a shark encounter. It's like chase us in a shark. No Have I seen them in the wild? I do not know. I don't think I have I Don't think I've seen a shark like swimming through the water Seen a lot of dolphins a lot of whales. Hmm. I don't think I've ever had a physical encounter with a shark Have you dreamed about sharks? Not really what do you us like Fuck us going to guys a shrink now. What happened? Where'd regular Brian go? I'm curious about your mind. I dream about wolves. That's uh, oh, I'm getting somewhere with this Yeah, I dream about wolves a lot really. Yeah. What are you dreaming about running from wolves? You're running from wolves? Yeah, why are wolves chasing you? I think wolves chase people a lot I think some people got away and I think that genetic memory gets imparted in some folks I have a high percentage of Neanderthal DNA You know when they do know that 23 and me. Yeah 57% more than regular people. Wow. Yeah See we're chased by lots of I think ancient people I think I think most ancient people that's what the big bad wolf and through Like little red riding hood all those ancient stories of wolves were all because they were killing people Like wolves wolves have always prayed on human beings. It's always been a part of Human existence until we eradicated them and now we're bringing them back To me wild Like if you guys thought this through like there's a reason why we were so scared of them forever But then we forgot to be forgot what it's like to be scared of them like oh, well, they did get too many We'll just kill them again. No, you won't. How do we domesticate them in the first dose domesticate wolves? I hadn't had big dogs. We're dogs come from bitch ass wolves That's what it is bitch ass wolves that we're willing to come near us in the fire And then we give them a little food and then they they realize that they could be our friend They can get food they don't have to hunt and then we use them to protect the outer perimeter And to keep bears out and things like that and cats away from people That if the wolves stayed close things didn't want to get near the wolves And so they would avoid us and as long as we kept that kind of a relationship You know they've done these studies with foxes Where they've had wild foxes and in a small period of time Every time they had an aggressive fox at all they killed that fox And they kept these domesticated foxes and over time their ears flop their eyes got bigger They became more appealing to us more submissive. They basically became dogs over a very short period of time See we find that fox study. It's very interesting That's probably what happened with wolves I think the wolves that realize like hey, you know, it's hard out there You know running a pack and being an alpha and getting cast out and like Maybe I could just get near these other things and I could get a little bit of their leftovers Like if they do really well like maybe they get a buffalo or something like that They kill a bison. That's a large animal. They're not going to be able to eat at all They're going to leave like a little bit for me and they're probably not going to eat the bones And wolves crush bones and so like maybe they sort of developed this sort of relationship Because wolves are very curious at people too and they come near people and they're fascinated by people but The problem is when they want to eat you and that does happen and it's always happened It's always happened throughout history in fact in world war one There was actually a cease fire between the Russians and the Germans Because so many of them were getting killed by wolves that they decided to stop shooting each other and kill the wolves And then go back to killing each other You ever heard about that one? Yeah Well because it's trench warfare right? So people getting shot and you know when you're getting shot You're dying in this trench and sometimes these guys would just get Overwhelmed by wolves like wolves would find them in there and just tear them apart So imagine you're you know you're in trench warfare in world war one and you're hearing in the middle of night people screaming And you're Just getting torn apart by wolves they would send out parties and like search parties and you know They would find no one would come back and then they would go out and they'd find a boot with a human foot and And what the fuck and they realized oh my god These wolves are killing people and they were in large packs because they were feeding on the bodies from the war You know the war back then it's just unbelievably brutal. It's very close range You know you're not dealing with long-distance missiles you're dealing with people like literally creeping up on each other and shooting each other with rifles Horrible horrible shit and they're not that good at killing people so a lot of times it kills you slow And so these people are dying and these trenches and getting eaten by wolves and the wolves decide their primary food source The wilder chase caribou and reindeer when I can just eat people This explains your strange dreams. Yeah, well, I think Human beings have always been afraid of monsters. Right. What is that like children that like Rupert Cheldrick is talking about this children that grow up in New York City are not afraid of Things that they probably should be afraid of You know they're not afraid of child monsters. They're not afraid of they don't know what that is They don't know what a monster is like a monster is in their head Like kids are scared of the dark. It's because it cats like we used to get eaten by cats all the time So like a giant part of being a An ancient hominid was probably avoiding predation from cats I mean there's been so many even eagles They found evidence of human beings that were killed by you like that was that big eagle that lived in New Zealand They think they the reason why that thing went extinct. I think it's called the host eagle It was an enormous eagle that they think probably preyed on human beings Which was like what a fucked up way to go a hand glider comes down. It takes you out This talons Like a bird the side of a hand glider. Yeah So I was looking up the Russian it's the Russian fox. Yeah experiment I was finding a bunch of articles about it like we've talked about before But then one of them I said said there was a new study which this has is from 2019 that might not counter it specifically but has a different Understanding of what was happening maybe hmm. I was trying to read through it. It just says that like what he is Final result was might not actually be what was happening with domestication But let's let's read this part right here. It says the Russian farm fox experiments best known experimental study and animal domestication by subjecting a population of foxes to selection for tainness alone Dimitri bellyev Generated foxes that possess a suite of characteristics that mimics those found across domesticated species This domestication syndrome has been a central focus of research into the biological pathways modified during domestication Here we chart the origins of how do you say his name? Baljev, do you think how you would know better than me? How would you say that name? Baljev Baljev foxes in eastern Canada and critical and critically assess the appearance of domestication syndrome Traits across animal domesticates Our results suggest that both the conclusions of the farm fox experiment and the ubiquity of domestication syndrome Have been overstated to understand the process of domestication requires a more comprehensive approach based on essential adaptations to human modified environments So what they did though that this is interesting The so they're saying there's like more to it than just this study, but what they did do in this study was pretty fascinating So starting with 30 male and 100 female silver foxes from the Soviet fur farms He selectively bred foxes who responded less fearfully when a hand was inserted into their cage The off-repeated narratives that just with just 10 generations of selection on wild foxes He produced foxes who craved human attention and exhibited a range of Unconnected phenotypes including floppy ears turned up tails Pie bald codes Die estress reproductive cycles and later shorter and wider faces But Turned up tails, pie-bald codes, diestrous reproductive cycles, and later shorter and wider faces. By Yev, that's right? Bel-Yev. Oh, bull Yev. Propose that the selection of behavior altered the regulation of multiple interconnected systems that produce the traits Darwin described. In 10 generations. Yeah, that's pretty crazy. So in whatever generations from campfire to poodle, campfire to Shibuya, from campfire to Chihuahua, we did that. Slowly but surely over time. But that's, you know, the root of all, I mean, they only found that out over the last few decades. They used to think that dogs were probably the ancestors of their ancestors, probably wild hominid, wild dogs, rather wild canids. But then they found out, no, no. It's not wild canids. It's fucking wolves. They all came from wolves. All of them. All dogs came from wolves. They were like, what? A pug? Yeah. Yeah, selective breeding over time created something barbaric, something like that. This is kind of necessary too, I think, to know. It's part. It's a misunderstood that he found these were like wild foxes when he first got them and they were not. Right, they're fur farm foxes. Yeah, that's what they were saying, right? What was the misrepresentation that people think that he'd found that he walked off the wild? Yeah, whatever. Yeah. Oh, so they were already bred for first. Purpose, yeah, purpose bred. So they probably already were subject to a certain amount of selective breeding, right? I mean, yeah, after trying to breed for a fur, then you're a participant coat and... Yeah, so they probably, yeah, they probably, yeah, fed them like domesticated deer. You're a seed domesticated deer just eating out of people's hands. Yeah, there's a weird thing with the domesticated deer world. Do you know this? No. I come here to learn about animals. So this deer right here, that's on the table, that is the first deer I ever shot. That's a wild mule deer from Montana. Yeah, that's for the Missouri Breaks wild country. I mean, like, it's where you see homesteads out there that are like from, you know, the 1700s and 1800s of people just didn't survive. And they had these just old buildings that were falling apart. They're littered out there. There's a bunch of them out there. It's a really fascinating place. But that is a typical wild deer, like a few years old, he's probably like four years old or something like that. They make deer in these deer farms where they feed them, these protein tablets. And so like a big deer, a really big deer is a 200 inch deer. And what that means is the antlers of the deer, like there's big bodies that'll be about 300 pounds for like a mule deer or a really big one. Their bodies are big, but then their antlers are this massive fucking structure on their head of bone that grows quicker than anything in the wild. Is the quickest bone that grows that we're aware of in all of nature is an elk or a stag or or even deer. This shit grows so quick. It's just a couple months and all of a sudden, they drop their horns at the, when, you know, they end in the winter. And then these new ones in the spring just, and within months they grow. So with these farms, they're taking these animals and then giving them these preposterous diets that would just never exist in the wild. And they have a deer with like 350 inch antlers like that. Just, it's gross. It's just weird. It's weird what they're doing. So they're selectively breeding for genetics. And then on top of that, they're feeding them this crazy diet. And then they're letting them loose in these high fence areas and people shoot them. And they hang them on their wall like a trophy. And almost all hunters have the same reaction. It's like, they're gross. It's like something gross about it. Yeah. It's like something about, but people who like, look at about 400 inch deer on a shot. Like people that don't give a fuck, that's what they want. They want the biggest antlers. So it's a very controversial thing in like the wildlife conservation community. And it's also a way that CWD gets spread unfortunately. Hell. Because these wild deer come in contact with these deer that have been capped and these deer that are captive may be carrying CWD. And then they put these deer out in the wild. They hop fences, they get out there and then CWD spreads. And it's a real issue, especially with white tails. And they're seen in a mule deer as well. But it's chronic wasting disease. It's what it is. And it's horrific. And there's saliva, gets on plants. And then with other animals, eat the plants. And they get it much like how bison give cattle brucellosis. Like cattle farmers have a real problem with wild bison getting onto their range. Because if the bison contain brucellosis, then they're entire. All of their flock, they could all have brucellosis and die. This is the thing with CWD. And a lot of it comes out of this captive deer. There's like farms that it's a whole business. This business of raising these captive deer. It's real weird. It's very unnatural. Because you do, and then they let them loose. Like there's these big stupid antlers. It's just, you know, have you seen an elk, a wild elk antler? So like that is there because they're fighting each other. And they're smashing heads. And the bigger the antlers, the more impressive they are for the females. And the more they can fight off the males. And there's an evolutionary reason for this is just some freak that's been given steroids in a bunch of protein. Hmm. Yeah. I don't know how we got to that. I'm maybe maybe I'm trying to figure that out. Yeah. Well, just what we're talking about. The mestication. Yeah. Demestication. And it's effects. Yeah. The wolf one is one of the most fascinating ones. Now that we know that all dogs come from wolves. Yeah. It's really interesting to watch how species will adapt over time and then wonder what is happening to us. Because clearly it's a very similar thing is happening to us. Yeah. And if anything should remind us or in any way, if we're similar to any animal in the variety of sizes and shapes, like it would be the dogs. Like human beings are very so widely. And we are domesticated. We're self domesticated. But we're clearly domesticated. And that process started a long time ago. Remember the Homo Nalady showed you. So what they know about them is they had acanines. Like you and me, obviously. But so in the primate world, the canines are much bigger. Mm-hmm. Obviously, because when you bear your teeth, you're meant to be threatening. Yes. Obviously. So what they realized about Homo Nalady is that they had smaller canines. Instead of using them to threaten others, what they realized is that they were such a size that they were using them to smile. Wow. So they were smiling. They were the first ones to show their teeth as a nice thing. That's a nice thing. They were smiling 300,000 years ago. Wow. Wow. So why wouldn't they have canines? Champs have canines. Gorillas have canines. And they kind of use their teeth to smile a little too. Champs seem to. They seem like when they're having fun, they're laughing. They seem like champs seem to laugh, right? Yeah. Oh my god. And they show their teeth. And it doesn't seem like they always show their teeth in a threatening way. All right. Like, you guys, that dude's smiling. For sure that dude's smiling. I mean, come on. Look at him. It's like a school of photo. He's 100% smiling. Yeah. Yeah. It seems like they smile. And they have canines. Yeah, they have canines. And they're certainly larger than ours. But it's also like, you saw that. Like, is that a smile? I mean, I don't know what the fuck that is. I'm getting out of there. It's ambiguous. Click on that one with the waist up right above you. Right? Yeah. Look at that. I mean, Jesus Christ. You imagine seeing that in the wild? You're like, oh my god. So fucked. That's terrifying. That's not as happy to keep fun dinner, I think. I don't know about it. Yeah. He's ready to fuck you up. Yeah. That's a crazy thing. That just, the fact that they still exist is we're so fortunate to be able to observe and watch these very human-like patterns that we see in terms of like, their social structures and how they manage them and how there is one leader and how they'll branch off into separate groups. They even wage war in each other and fight over territories and food. It's so interesting. It's so interesting because they're so like us, but then so not. Like that thing is like that show that picture again? It's kind of like us. But God, that thing's terrifying. I mean, look at this face. If he was mad at you, oh my god, that would be so horrible. And their eyes. And some of them have white around the eyes. That was something they showed in the, the chimp nation documentary, which is really interesting too, because he's got animal eyes. I mean, he's terrifying. This one right here. But some of them, they have almost like, you can almost like, you look into their eyes and you see like a motion. Hmm. Very fascinating species. Have you started at all the the Hobbit people from the island of Florida? The Florisiances. Yeah. That's another strange one. Like, come on a lady. Because it disrupts the narrative about the doubling of the human brain science, as if there's this constantly escalating trend in one direction. Yeah. And so as the ancestors in the lady occupy these these strange places, questioning whether or not it's the physical brain or something else that imputes intelligence. Yeah. Yeah. What about the hobbits? Well, it's interesting that they co-existed with humans. Right. Because they're fairly recent, right? What is the timeline for those? Definitely when sapiens was around. Yeah. What is the most recent carbon dating on those homofluor NCiensis? I think it's less than 100,000 years. And they think those things had tools. They think there was a lot of disputes to whether or not they were just misformed or deformed human beings. There was a lot of disputes to whether or not this was a unique branch of the human chain. But they think it is now. And they think that they're probably also subject to island dwarfism. Like mammals are. But for some reason, with reptiles, it goes the other way. What's the age of thrinxiensis? I've updated articles from last month. Yeah. So assisting. OK. Initial carbon dating of the sediment determined the remains to be 18,000 years old. Wow. Which is startlingly young, putting the previous unknown species closer in time to us than Neanderthals. The date was revised in 2016 estimating instead that the Hobbit was 50,000 to 60,000 years old. Interesting. I wonder what changed and wonder what they got out of the first one. The specimen was just wrong in about five different ways and unexpected to the point of people thinking like this can't be possible. Said Paige Madison, a historian of paleo-anthropology. And science writer is currently working on a book about the Hobbit titled Strange Creatures Beyond Count to be published in 2025. That's still pretty recent, though. I mean, the grand of the day. 50,000 is pretty recent. I wonder why they thought it was 18 and why they changed that. 18 is more magical. It's closer. That's magical. Yeah. That's what we'll read. Well, do you know about the Orang Pendek? The Orang Pendek is a mythical creature that the people have spotted in Vietnam and in some of the places of the world. And rejected name. What's that? They rejected it. They were going to use that name first. But they had to reject it. Florissianus? Yeah. I'm a flowery. And it's a flowery anus. Oh, boy. I can't say that. I wonder why they did that. But the Orang Pendek is a very similar creature that has been talked about by indigenous people and people that live in the jungle. And they insist that it's a real thing. It's a tiny, hairy little human that is very similar to these Hobbit people. And the speculation from the crypto zoology people is that this thing's still alive. In very small populations. Yeah. There's some bullshit. That's kind of like show one running across the road. You ever seen that video? It looks fake, right? Yeah. It looks fake. Do you think the Gimlin footage is real? Paterson Gimlin footage? 100% fake. Fake? Yeah. It looks fake. Everything it looks fake is fake. Is it a person in a suit? Yeah, 100%. Yeah. Why? It's guy walking. It's a guy in a suit? Yeah. 100%. Although I did get really high once, and I was convinced that it was really big foot, and I was being an asshole all this time. It's like, oh my god, what if that really is big foot? I just been a dick. Because somebody, these hardcore Bigfoot believers, that's their footage. The Paterson, but there's so many problems with that. First of all, Roger Paterson literally got arrested for writing a bad check to pay for the camera that he used to film that. They went there specifically to film it. The guy, Bob Haranamas, who says he was Bigfoot. When you see him walk, he's this big ol' gangly cowboy looking dude. When you see him walk, he walks exactly, like that Bigfoot thing. You think it was him? 100%. Yeah. They even have the receipt from a fucking grill suit that they bought. Have you ever seen him walking side by side? Find a video of Bob Haranamas walking side by side with the original Paterson footage. So they show the Bigfoot walking and then Bob walking and he like, oh, because he's, he's looking like a Bigfoot. Guys, the fucking, you know there's dudes, the big ol' cowboy looking dudes, the big ol' fucking farm country strong dudes. They look like Apish. They're just big ol' fuckers. And this guy was one of those guys, and you see him walking, and you see him walking, and he walks right, you know, they superimpose it, they put side by side rather. And when they do it, you go, oh yeah, definitely. What a disappointment. Do you wanna believe that it's real? No, I don't wanna believe. Did you ever believe it was real? When I was eight, yeah. Yeah. And when you're not in your, like, get the fuck out here. Yeah, but my God, there's people to this day, those hardcore Bigfoot people are cult members. They really are. They decide to shut off a part of their brain that critically looks at information. Aren't there any eyewitnesses who strike you as credible? I was talking to a less shroud about this. Do you know less? I'll talk into less ones about this, I think. Yeah, less, he's a very credible guy in terms of like survival tactics. He knows a lot about that. But he didn't see one with his own eyes. He heard something. And he heard noises that sounded chimpanzee-like. Or, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. Bears make those noises. All the time, I've seen bears make those. I've watched bears make those noises. They make them particularly when they're fighting with each other. They sound very much like a realist. They do that all the time. So if you were alone in the woods and you heard that and you heard smashing and thumping around, you're like, oh my God, this is a real out there. Oh my God, this is some kind of a primate out there. There have been people that have spotted things that are very eerily similar to what you would think is a large bipedal ape. The problem is a lot of these places are heavily wooded and populated by bears. And bears walk on two legs all the time. So here, there's Bob and there's the Bigfoot, right? I mean, case closed, right? I never saw that. I mean, look at that, dude. Is it anything like what I said, big old country dude? Yeah. I mean, we see that guy walking and you imagine him with a fucking gorilla suit on? I mean, it doesn't even look good. It looks like shit. I mean, look, look at that thing. It looks like a guy in a gorilla suit. And in my opinion, everything that looks fake is fake. I've never seen anything that looks fake that's real. I mean, I could be wrong. Yeah. I don't know what that is. But I definitely know that the guy, that there's a whole paper trail of buying a gorilla. Is that what he's saying? That's the suit. I honestly don't know. I've never seen this video. I was trying to find the side by side. I was having a hard time of finding it. And this is the one I picked in. OK, so he's saying that that's what he wore. But that thing does look like if you go back to that photo of where he's holding up that suit, that looks pretty fucking similar, man. Pretty fucking similar. And all you'd have to do is put that thing on and walk through the woods. And it's just too convenient. All of it's too convenient that the fact that the guy went looking for it and found it and filmed it. And the whole thing's corny. It's corny. Data matters. Data does matter. And there's no real data in terms of genetics. There's been a lot of goofy talk that they found like some kind of human DNA and samples of hair. The problem with that is all that DNA's been contaminated. I actually talked to an actual biologist about this. And we did an episode of Joe Rogan questions everything for the sci-fi channel on Big Foot. We hung around with Big Foot hunters. Duncan and I went out with them and looking for Bigfoot and camping with them and everything. And it's people that are just looking for something. And some of them have had experiences. Some of them have said they've seen things. But it's just all of it just wreaks of horseshit. And it's unfortunate because I think at one point in time it was real. I think almost certainly at one point in time, human beings did interact with Giganto Pythagas. It was a real animal about that. And Giganto Pythagas matches exactly like what people talk about when they talk about Sasquatch. It looks exactly like that. An enormous bipedal hominid that was maybe more than eight feet tall. And they found out about this thing by accident when a guy was looking at a polycary shop in China. And he found gigantic teeth that were clearly primate teeth. So where'd you find these? And they go there and they go to the site. They dig out jaw bones. They indicate it was bipedal. And so now they know it's a real thing that existed. And I think they date that to, I think they date that to 100,000 years ago. When do they date Giganto Pythagas too? Wikipedia says roughly 2,350,000. 350,000. I thought it was closer. That was closer to us. That's just what Wikipedia says. I see if there are other disputes or something. Yeah, see if it, because I've read that the carbon date that they did on these teeth, I think they said that that was somewhere in the neighborhood of 100 and something 1,000 years ago. So that would put it with semi-modern look in human beings. So the question is- Very modern. Right. And then the question is, how long did it survive? Just because you find something, you find, like you say if you find one that's 200,000 years old. Doesn't mean it didn't exist 100,000 years ago, or even 50,000 years ago. Like when was the last one? When did they die off? And when did humans encounter them? And if you look at their range, like if they found them in Asia, and then you look at the bearing land mass, and you look at where is it drop off? Well, it drops off in a Pacific Northwest. Like that's literally, it goes down Alaska, makes its way down the coast. Dense forest, which is where a thing like that. So proteins extracted from roughly 1.9 million year old tooth of the aptly named Gigantopithecus is a close relative to monorangutans. So protein comparisons, amongst living fossil apes, you just that Gigantopithecus and orangutan forerunners diverged from a common ancestor between 10 and 12 million years ago. But when did it die off? It's the same thing. It says they had 300,000 elate plastis in era. They only have this from the early part of it. OK, so it said the fossils date from around 2 million to almost 300,000 years ago. The sizes of individual teeth and jaws indicate that it weigh between 200 and 300 kilograms. That's a big fucker. Interesting. So that was bigfoot. So if humans did make it to the point where we had language and the ability to communicate ideas, they probably would communicate about all these creatures that they encountered. And that would be one of them. But the actual Patterson footage bigfoot, that's horseshit. There's just too many hunters out there. Too many hikers. Who would have seen something? They don't see anything. I've talked to many people that have spent, like they've spent months in the backwoods. I know multiple guys that do my friend Adam Greentree from Australia. Every year he comes to America and he'll do a remote wilderness elk hunt solo. And he live streams, and he puts it like pieces of it on his Instagram. And he was out there for 28 days. He did see a grizzly bear a couple years back, which is not supposed to be there. And he's standing on mountains of Colorado. But that's close to Wyoming. And Wyoming is a habitat for grizzlies. And it makes sense that grizzlies would go across the border and make their way in there. And there's been historical sightings of things that people thought were grizzly bears there, putting no bigfoots. None. Zero. You'd think somebody would get a camera footage shot of it from these trail cams or camera traps or something. I mean, nothing. And you personally never heard or experienced anything? No. Look at bigfoots. Yeah. No thing I would say that first. I mean, the first maybe I'll now jump. No, I've never even seen a wolf. I mean, I think I did see a wolf once in Alberta. But it was very, very dark. It was like it was getting dark at night. And I saw something run across the road that looked like dog size without possibly could be a wolf. But they have wolves up there. They spot them there all the time. That's not uncommon. The bigfoot thing is just one of those legends, like the Yeti. And we know too much about the world night. What's the problem? Can I have some? Yeah, please. We know too much about what's really in the world now takes to fall for something like that. It's my first coffee in a while. Oh, really? I think so. How long? At least a year. What? Yeah. Really? This is about going to be wild. Michael Pollan said that he took three bonds off of caffeine. And then the first cup of coffee he had was like psychedelic. But cheers, man. Cheers to you. Thanks to that. What kind of coffee is it? Black rifle coffee? How do you feel? I feel crazy. You're wild. Where are you going to a trance? It's been a while. I gave it up sometime last year. What made you just want to sit right now? Watching me do it. Peer pressure, just like a drink. Good morning. Drink. Like an apple. It was that margarita. Margaritas will do it. Margarita has been responsible for more bad decision-making, probably any other beverage. You don't drink that much, do you? No. No. No. I like a couple of drinks every now and then. You know, it's one of those things. It's just not good for your health. And I'm very conscious of my health. I realized that. Yeah. It really hit me last year. I got COVID last summer. And I'm not sure what the connection was, but just my body felt terrible for at least a month or so. And then I couldn't, I just couldn't get back to myself. And so I quit, I quit alcohol and caffeine. Coffee for sure. And I felt a lot, I actually felt a lot better. A lot better. So COVID really got you bad. It got me really bad. I was sick for, I mean, I was in bed for definitely a week or two. And then I had like just persistent kind of malaise for at least a couple of months. And that went on through most of last year. Wow. So when I stopped. So long COVID. What they call, that's what I felt like, man. Yeah, I mean, obviously I never had a diagnosis. But it's a weird term, right? Because it's kind of vague. What does that mean? You know, it's like people get wrecked by the disease. And then they don't seem to recover very well and return to their robust self. Why? Why does it get some people, how come some people get sick and they get over it? Can I ask you about your vitamin intake? Yeah, it's pretty poor. I mean, so after, so last summer, I started taking a lot more vitamin D and vitamin C and echinacea. But that's basically it. That's basically it. Yeah, that's not enough. I know. You know, you could take things that cover your bases. Like there's a there's a product called AG1 athletic greens. It's nice. Can you just mix it in water, little packet, poured in water or you get like a scoop of it and put in water and mix it up. Every day. Yeah, but it's easy. It doesn't taste bad, it tastes good. And, but you do need vitamin D and you should also take vitamin D with vitamin K2. It helps your body. But you should be taking a host of things. You should be taking colloidal minerals. You should be taking essential fatty acids. Like if you want to optimize your body's ability to recover and to be able to perform, you really need to supplement. And supplementation, I think, is something that many people have maligned that do not experience it. When you talk to doctors, all you need is a balanced diet. And those doctors always have pot bellies. And they look like shit. If you talk to someone who's a fit doctor, he's like really healthy. They'll tell you the value of not just good nutrition but also good supplementation. And you really should supplement. And supplementing with vitamin D is critical, especially to avoid colds. You know, that's the speculation about why we get flu and colds in the winter. Oh, it's flu season. What virus flu have a fucking season? Well, because that's when people are very low in vitamin D. Because they're not getting the best way to get vitamin D for sure is sun exposure. And vitamin D is a hormone. It's not just a vitamin. It's responsible for a lot of things in the body, including your ability to have a properly functioning immune system. And I think there's some nutty number of people in this country that are deficient in vitamin D. And out of the people that were hospitalized with COVID, I think the number was 84% of them were had deficient levels of vitamin D. How much do you take by supplement? Me? Yeah. You don't have to reveal it. What's 20,000 milligrams a day? 20,000? Yeah. Like, the each little tablet is like 5,000. I take four of them a day. Yeah. Yeah, go hard. Yeah. But I go hard with a lot of things. That's a lot of D. But I also am almost 60 years old. I'm 56 years old. And I push my body. I work out really hard. I work out as hard now as I do when I was 25. And there is possible to do. But you have to do it right. Like, you have to give your body the tools that it needs to recover. But those tools and the food that you eat and the supplements that you take, all those, they help your overall health, which helps your ability to recover from illness. You were telling me that in Athens, too. It makes sense. Like some sort of strength training. Strength training is critical. Like, first of all, it's critical as you age. Because you lose bone mass. You lose muscle mass. And there's a lot of people that look similar to the way they look 10 years ago. But they have more fat and less muscle and dense and less dense bones. And it's just for your ability to do things and to be mobile and that, you have to force your body to lift heavy things. And I know I mean really heavy. Like, the heaviest thing I lift is my body weight. The second heaviest thing I lift is 70 pounds. You don't do heavy weight? No. No. I'm going to do heavy weights at all. I do kettlebells. So what I do is cleanse and presses and swings and windmills. And I do all these things that make my whole body work as one unit. I don't do anything that's an isolation exercise. Everything I do is my, so it's all stuff where my body's forced to balance this weight and press it and then lean over and press it out. Exercise. Everything I do is my so it's all stuff where my body's forced to balance this weight and press it and then lean over and press it up or Turkish get ups where you lie in your back and you press it up and then you get up and you stand up on one knee and then you stand all the way up and then you slowly lower yourself back down. They're not glamorous exercises, but they're really good for a coordination of all of your muscular and all your entire core and your your whole system working together instead of like curls or you know tricific extensions. Those are good for isolating and developing specific muscles, but I don't do any of that stuff. Everything I do is just I use my whole body. How many times a week? I work at almost every day. Do something. I do something almost every day. I gotta step it up. Well, it's not hard to do. It really isn't. You just have to get in the habit of doing it. Like if you just get in the habit of doing a hundred push ups and a hundred body weight squats every day. That'll change your fucking life. It takes 15 minutes. It does not take long. You can do a hundred push ups in 15 minutes. I do a hundred push ups and a hundred body weight squats in 15 minutes. Yeah. I might have to work up to that. You just do sets of 20. Just do five sets of 20. So I do two in a row where I do 20 push ups, 20 body weight squats, 20 push ups, 20 body weight squats. Then I catch my breath, have some to drink. And then when my heart rate gets down a little bit, I'm ready to go again. I do another 20, another 20, another 20, another 20. So now I'm in two. You know, so now I just need one more. And then I do my last 20 and my last body weight squat. It's 100. Okay. It's all hard to do. I can do it, man. You just say this is what I do every day. And it may be able to take your half hour. But it's a nice little workout. Yeah. Simple. You can do it anywhere. I can do it on the road. I could do it anywhere. It doesn't cover all of your bases, but it's a really good base to start from. And then once you start doing something like that, then you can incorporate other things. Then you can incorporate lunges with like maybe dumbbells or chin ups or things along those lines, dips. You could most certainly get a really good workout every day with just your body weight. There's so many things you could do. And now with YouTube and all the resources that are available, you could just Google body weight routines. And bam, you've got so many different options that you could just follow along to some video and people do things like that. Super easy to do. Okay. Yeah. I'm on board. Yeah. But, but resistance training is very important. It's really important as you eat. What about cardio though? Because that's the one thing I don't have trouble with. I've been doing cardio in the mornings and getting lots of sunshine. Cardio's great. That's kind of that. That's how I feel a lot better. So when I when I got sick last summer, I needed to move a lot more plus I was sitting at the desk too much, you know, typing and writing and stuff. Oh, yeah. So that my back was all out of whack. I went into a chiropractor. I went for months to a chiropractor. And then I've been sleeping a lot more and just being more mobile more active. I mean, there were days I would sit down to research and write. I could go for hours at a time and like in the aggregate, maybe 15 hours a day, like when I was trying to finish the book. And that that caught up to me. bad man. It makes sense. So I pulled my back out a couple of times trying to lift the girls. Oh, that's that's when I it's when I realized I was like grossly out of shape. Do you use an ergonomic chair when you said? No, she used one of these killing this fuckers. Yeah, these things are amazing. Yeah. I mean, I'm sitting this thing three hours every day. And I used to have like a regular office chair. And after every podcast, my back, like, it hurt. But this forces you to have correct posture. I've noticed it's not very, it's it wasn't comfortable at first. It's a lot. But overall, it'll be more comfortable. If you get used to this, like I have the exact same chair at my home desk when I write Same chair. That lower back support. And it also it's just like the way it's it doesn't allow you to kind of like swamp in Like the way that I was doing. I was something over the computer like this and my spine was all I used to get a bad neck pain when I was writing too much on a laptop because you know, sitting like this full-time and that just this like head down in a bad office chair. Some shitty chair. I would get like Her and that's why I knew I had to stop sometimes I'd try to keep writing, but my neck would be irritated and like I gotta stop But this doesn't I don't get any of that anymore with this. These are what are they called? Kapiskos and that used to be the company used to call it be called fully, but I think they sold to another company now These are the shit. I've tried everything. I've tried the ones where you're on your knees. Yeah, you know when you're it's not really a chair Yeah, it's like you're all your way to sitting in those are pretty good. Those are pretty good I used to have one of those at the house Some people like a balanced ball. They sit on one of those boseu balls. Yeah, that was recommended too Those are good because it's the same principle Watch your posture the whole time. Yeah, but that's the idea that what posture is essentially is a constant static exercise Because you really want to do this and I have a I've used to have terrible posture I'm much better at it now, but it's because I've had back problems You know, so just like force yourself to like stay in this this how you body's supposed to be yeah It's very unnatural though. It is at least for me, but that's also like why wonder like why did those animals those ancient hominids? Why do they choose to stand up hmm like what what what facilitated that you know You're right, yeah, okay, okay with the coffee Moment there We were talking about this before but the reason why I brought up Kundalini yoga and I was gonna bring up Holotropic breathing and there's just there are some methods that people use yeah, and I'm saying this as someone who hasn't I've done some breathing exercises that did create a very bizarre state and Breathing exercises. I do have some experience, but I've never done the holotropic breathing Where they they have these you know like real rituals where they do holotropic breathing and people have what what they describe as Very psychedelic experiences. That was Stan Grough after some of his LSD experiences I think I think he created a holotropic breathwork as a way to To engage that the the same process Interest that he discovered through through LSD and then of course is John Lily who developed a sensory deprivation tank that also Makes you achieve a psychedelic state Indogenously just but but through an external mechanism of lying in the water that's we have on here Have you seen the one that we have here? Yeah, and they'll get one right here. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I'll give it a try because it's work Oh, yeah, yeah, it's pretty wild. It's really interesting. I used to have one in my house My wife got weirded out by it people got weird out when they come over look with the fuck is in your basement? Is that a freezer? Yeah, a body shoot is your freezer No, so it's but it's even weirder like you got a tank that you float in your basement like that You would do if you did it Once you do it you go oh my god. This is amazing. Have you had out of body experiences? In there. Yeah, well, it's it's essentially the idea that Lily came up with and he had a bunch of different iterations of it the initial one he wore a scuba tank helmet like a scuba helmet and He was sort of suspended by straps in the water and he had this helmet on and the water was the same temperature of his skin and so through this method he was able to Believe himself of most external stimulation because the external stimulation that you have right now or like obviously We're sitting at this desk. You see everything you hear everything your feet are touching the ground You're butts touching the chair your backside You're that's all sensory input and in the absence of any sensory input Lily's Suspicion was that you could achieve psychedelic states and so if you could free the mind and so He did a bunch of different versions of it and then eventually he figured out that if you just added a ton of salt to the water and he used What is like water bed heaters? So water bed heaters at the bottom you line it with plastic and then you get it to steady 94 whatever degrees and with that salt in it you'll float and when you do get in there the water becomes Impossible to different you can't tell the difference to where the air is and the water is Because it's just all the same temperature and so it's the same temperature of your skin So as long as you don't move you don't even feel the water and it feels like you're just flying through space And you don't see anything you don't hear anything your half your face is underwater So your ears are underwater a lot of people put like earplugs in I generally don't but then half your body like it's like above The surface and you're just lying there floating and it's very relaxing. It's a great way to for your body to absorb Epsom salt to get magnesium through that You know like even people take Epsom salt in their sore. It's magnesium. It's magnesium. It's you're just taking it through your skin I'm taking notes man. Yeah, I'm gonna incorporate all this but these are all ways that people have a Jesus how much got the book but didn't That's amazing. It's pretty good. I get literally like cut a line It's like crazy line But I won't so my question was is there any Historical evidence or any information that leads you to think that possibly they were engaging in some other kind of thing So your friend who doesn't believe right like maybe there are some other options that they were also doing when you think about these rituals, right? Yeah, that's a possibility. I mean we know there were there were cave techniques So I mean it's not just it's not just puppy pop and get it there other I'm gonna clean the coffee at the same time There were other scholars too who just aren't aren't big fans of The psychedelic hypothesis for any number of reasons But also it's like very unpopular and to recently to even Suggest anything about psychedel. I mean think about all the different people that their career suffered Right they did bring up psychedel. That's who I write about and yeah, as professor Ruck Yeah, who's 88 years old. He's still at Boston University. He was at Boston University in the late 70s When they unleashed that hypothesis and it it really impacted his career in the 80s and 90s and beyond so like that's You know that people are aware of that. They're aware of not just aware of that. Yeah for sure That's I mean it's at least part of the reason why I haven't tried psychedelics. Yeah, you know I wasn't I wasn't personally called to that experience Well, it's also you know From your perspective If you were a guy who did psychedelics and then you're reporting on psychedelics like oh this is confirmation bias This guy wants to believe this but instead you know since you haven't it's probably better for the overall You know acceptance of your research that you're you're looking at it purely from an academic perspective You're just looking at fact based evidence based historically based. Mm-hmm. I'm trying to find the data Yeah, like we were talking about I think Yeah, my experiences is meaningless compared to all that. You know, I just I never I don't know I managed to avoid it for so many years that when it came time to write the book it just seemed like It wasn't a priority. Well, I think you should do it eventually Because it's so profound you can't you're not gonna be able to believe that you never experienced it before But also one of the most bizarre things about The DMT state in particular which is something that we know is produced and dogenously in the human body That you've been there before like when you get there. You know, I've been here before it seems familiar Oh 100% like the first time I did it. I was like oh my god. It was it's so mind-blowing But also so familiar that you think oh I've been here before And I think you're there all the time. I think you probably go there to some extent every night When you're dreaming yeah, and we don't know we don't specifically know like we do know because of Rick Strossman's work Strossman who wrote DMT the spirit molecule and did the first FDA approved studies that they did with IV slow drip DMT experiences and these people I just Wild experiences with entities and realms and Apparently there's some stuff that's going on right now in London and Graham Hancock told me about this that there There's some really profound work that's being done That they're doing these studies where they're doing the same sort of technique. They're doing it for like three hours and That's imperial so it is yeah, it's an imperial. Yeah. Do you know more about it? You can tell us. Yes. It's it's long I'm not sure if it's that long. I think it's 30 minutes But there's another team in and basil and Switzerland. That's also experimenting with infuse. I think it's like 90 minutes and Interestingly, this is somewhat breaking news. There's a new study happening in the US so the the first the first US research on Extended state DMT is happening at UC San Diego, which is really cool actually Jamie There's a there should be a press release about it which came out earlier this year There's a team there being headed by a guy named John Dean Dr. John Dean He's talked with Rick by the way about his research And they recently got some funding to be the first US site to host these extended state infusions Enter really trying to try to get in the route. Are you interested? Yeah, I mean Well, I imagine it will eventually become something like ketamine therapy You know one of my friends Neil Brennan who's suffered from depression his life hilarious comedian He went to I guess it's a psychiatrist. I don't know who does these things but he went to Place where they give you an IV ketamine drip and he's like, okay, it's probably going to be you know Just relaxing what because oh no no no you you are tripping your balls off in a doctor's office Like hooked up to an IV bag closing your eyes and experiencing this like full blown ketamine state Which he said is like profoundly weird and very very psychedelic and some people it helps them alleviate depression Hmm, yeah, but it's also like super abused Requationally especially around here There's because there's a lot of people to get prescribed ketamine for depression. So they have like these nasal pumps of Catamine Cp people at night We had someone in the club that went into a k-hole. No way. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah someone in the audience The husband was like she did do much ketamine Because you're spraying this stuff up your nose and you know no one's stopping you from doing it 10 times Seems irresponsible That's what people do. I know but this is my that's my concern with some of these reps right that that is a legitimate concern But also that is a concern with food you can't tell you you can't regulate people's food consumption just because people get overweight Yeah, you got to let people figure it out and you got to give them the information and the tools that they need to make good choices And the only way you do that is if it's illegal and studied and people understand You know, what is the correct dose like what is the correct thing? What's the best way to do it? It's the most beneficial and least causes the least harm and treats it with the most respect Because one of the things about rituals I think and these ritualistic settings is that there's this heightened state of importance and significance of the thing that you're you're About to embark on this this journey that you're about to go on and The related to this there was a place that I had initially purchased Before I put the mothership at the ritz Before I bought the ritz. I was I didn't under contract to buy this one building that was owned by a cult and There's documentary about the cult it's called Holy Hell and it's about this guy who's a hypnotist and Also a gay porn star who started a cult in California and then moved it out to Austin and this guy would do this thing with these people Where he would call it the knowing it's a crazy documentary Because like all cult documentaries in the beginning it looks awesome in the beginning It's like oh, they figured it out. This is the solution to what ails us The modern society where people are disconnected. There's no sense of community These people are splashing around the water together. They're going on hikes together to do in yoga together They're eating together. They're singing together. God, it looks amazing amazing and He had this thing that he would do what was called the knowing and there's videos of him doing it to people and he would When these felt like they were ready and it took Fred some people would be very angry He's like you're not ready because it's just a comment But but what he did was convince them That when this thing would happen and he would touch them and give them the knowing that they would have this profound Experience where they would connect with God and it worked That's what's crazy when he did it these people and obviously these people are Deeply committed right? They're cult members. They're they've bought in hookline sinker and he's a hypnotist So he's doing hypnotic therapy on these people and When he does it to them you see them like oh Like and they talked about it like it was the happiest moment in their life and they were talking about it in This documentary in the context of describing how this guy was a con man And about his guy ruined their lives and they followed him for two decades now They're lost and 50 years old just trying to find their way in the world and they were just young people were trying to find a way They still talk about that experience being one of the most Impactful profound moments of their life and it was bullshit But was it it clearly wasn't bullshit if I mean he didn't really have magic powers But he did have the power of suggestion. He did understand hypnosis and because they believed in him so much They really did have this experience So what is it about this trick this placebo effect this this This thing that you can hit this switch that you can hit where these endogenous chemicals that we know exist We can make them Bust out of your brain and some profound way that makes you have this Complete transcendent experience. That's that's what that's what interests me about this research at UCSD I think they're in addition to the extended state infusions with DMT They're also setting up these volunteers to FMR eyes to really try and figure out how DMT is Interacting with with the brain how it's released or not and I think part of that that interest in that research is really trying to figure out the endogenous That's sort of the holy grail of DMT research. So this guy John Dean I think he's he's found it in in rap brains, but we've never actually seen conclusively I never measured the presence of DMT in the human body in the human brain. I think that that's part of his interest is trying to figure out if he can Endogenously identify the presence within these states of mind so whether it's you know someone in deep meditation or in or in dreaming or some other You know altered experience. I think that part of the they're really interesting part of the about the research there is trying to isolate Exactly how that gets triggered because if we're sitting on this incredibly potent Chemical and we don't know how to release or to control it. It's something that that deserves a little more attention. I think For sure, but the the Kundalini people think that you can achieve that state through Kundalini So that that needs to be studied then I think this is coming from people that I know that have done both yeah, yeah But my question is one of the things that does happen when you have a profound breakthrough experiences you don't have flashbacks really But you can have a dream and Mechana talked about this and in that dream you'll you'll smoke DMT and you'll have a DMT trip It's almost like a doorway gets opened up I've had dreams like that. Have you yeah? What are the what would they like? Yeah? Yeah, because I set up this boundary in my real life. It hasn't happened often, but I've had a couple dreams where I've I've imbibed the potion and It's very strange actually man. I Don't have I don't have visions there there isn't a breakthrough experience But there's this sense of like overwhelming calm and Serenity and so I'd never felt like I was hallucinating things that weren't there Maybe I got the wrong potion, but when I've had these experiences in the dream world. It's like the dream world wraps itself around me in a cocoon and I have this ability just to Also lucid lucid dream of this very rich dream life Have you always been able to lucid dream? Yes, since I was since I was a kid interesting Yeah, that's another thing that you would think that I would have practiced like it seems like there's actual strategies to lucid dream Right, and it seems like it's fun But why have I not looked into it at all You know I think about that with like earth your attention. Hall of Tropic breathing and I think about that with McKenna talked about that too, which is really funny He said because people were talking about all these different ways to achieve psychedelic states about psychedelics And he said it makes me think of this One monk who had practiced a city of levitation and One of the cities. Yeah, and he had practiced this for like 10 10 years and Buddha came to town and he said I have practiced the city of levitation. I can walk on water and the Buddha is like yeah But the fairies only a nickel Then the idea is like yeah, you probably get there endogenously But why would you when mushrooms are everywhere? Hmm, that was mechanics take on it like yeah, okay Maybe you can get there through yoga or whatever, but you can definitely get there through DMT or ayahuasca If you understand the dosing like like you mentioned if you understand yeah, how to grow them How to use them properly and I think that I think that's kind of what we're missing from the ancient past and so it's kind of fun I've had all these weird conversations over the past three years about like the application of the of the ancient ritual to today and You know my my feelings on psychedelics have changed quite a bit over the past three years And what I've realized amongst other things is that it's less about the the drug and I think it's more about Everything you just described. It's more about the ritual. It's more about the ceremony. Yeah The fact that these drugs are organic and they've been found on the planet and they're You know they're their use on every habit at continent has been cataloged is something worth reflecting on so they're there You can't ignore them, but throughout the long archivistry there have been Practices and protocols around their use which typically obtained within small communities Small tight-knit communities where people took care of each other where people knew how to Grow and and dose these things and I think that One of the things I talk about in the book is this the secret to pharmacology is postology The notion that it's it's all about it's all about the dosing and it's it's all about The ritual around which this experience is taking place and so like when you read a loose is for example Remember we went to you got to see a loose in person like if if this hypothesis is true Right about this this psychedelic potion, you know It wasn't it wasn't consumed in a dining room like in haste with no preparation like you would have prepared For at least 18 months if not longer To walk that sacred pilgrimage trail to show up there and to over the course of nine days by the way to Experience this right of passage which for many people was the culminating experience of a lifetime Yeah, and I think that That's something where just we're just missing today at least at least in the west I don't think we have that kind of sacred container. Well, it's illegal. That's a big part of it and You know, there's a lot of ignorance as to like what these things are and what the experience actually is and I absolutely Agree that ceremonies important and set and setting is very very important Having the proper mindset it making sure that you haven't eaten anything before you've done it But I don't know if ceremony is more important in the actual experience because the actual experience you could have with a bunch of Your idiot friends sitting on a couch if you do DM to you will fucking 100% go there and You'll be like how is this possible? How is it possible that this is literally 15 seconds away Like you take three giant heads and you You're gone and you exist in this realm that it's unimaginable That and it's you there. It's not you're seeing things that aren't there. It's you're there You're there in this thing because you're not just seeing things you're experiencing them It's like they're working on your brain It's very weird Whatever it is like you see you can sometimes see them like moving around They're like like mechanics like guys at screwdrivers and shit like Fucking around with your head. It really is very weird. It's very weird experience And unfortunately it's illegal and it's crazy because fentanyl isn't You know, it's like you could buy opiates at a pharmacy You can't experience Something that is probably the root of a lot of religious experiences if not most of them And there was just re if Cavanue some just vetoed something in California that was going to make Was gonna decriminalize Silasiben and a bunch of other psychedelics. What was that that he vetoed? Yeah over the weekend. Yeah. Why? Why in this day and age? Why why why why why less freedoms for people? That seems so stupid His written response was that it there was an absence of a therapeutic guidelines And that if they were formulated and then published I think I think he would have reviewed the bill differently. Well, that's fair Yeah, that's actually fair That's fair, but the I think the proper solution would be to Come up with guidelines right California should immediately begin work to set up regulated treatment guidelines Replete with dosing information therapeutic guidelines rules to prevent against exploitation during guided treatments and medical clearance of no underlying Psychosis's all those the goods. That's over actually very good. That's better than just okay. So I take back what I said It wasn't that it was stupid like maybe they should have had that before they attempted to decriminalize it New some statements said unfortunately this bill would decriminalize possession prior to those guidelines going into place and I cannot sign it That's actually fair but That means that they should just get together and put together some guidelines and the problem is in order to find out what the proper dosages you have to run studies and They have to be approved and they have to be you know, it has to be legit But they should do that and if they do do that they should pass those things and and also I think this is important they said to Keep people like like what was the specific language they used about rules about Can you hold it up again? Is actually what we're talking about with grew prevent against exploitation during guided treatments the guru thing The group about and the cult thing it's a big deal man. It is if you're very I mean not that I know but but one I mean one is very vulnerable. Yes in that position and I think that I always look back to the way Psychedelics were spoken about in the 50s and 60s right one of these famous lines is about psychedelics are our non-specific Amplifiers and so what you just make bear the unconscious right and to someone who hasn't done a lot of depth work into the Into the unconscious and those processes. It can be very traumatic man and screening for psychosis It's another very good point about his rejection of it because That's an issue. It's a giant issue and people that struggle with normal consciousness really shouldn't be fucking around with these You talk about this with cannabis by the way 100% yeah, that's Alex Baronson's book and it's also me personally Having experienced it with multiple people. I've seen multiple people over the time The loss are fucking minds and one thing a lot of them had in common was their heavy pot smokers Mm-hmm and including some one friend of mine who lost his mind and came back He quit weed and he was like dude. I thought the fucking FBI was following me in the sky with drones and like I was freaking the fun And there's no reason for him to be followed. It's not like he's a criminal or even a bad guy or even a Even a fucking person of note Just a guy who is freaking out because he was smoking too much weed and it was literally making him psychotic He was or at least gets a frantic like he was hearing voices Stop smoking weed came back to normal. Hmm. So I think there's certain people But that's just like everything there's certain drugs that people Cannot take certain food So I think there's certain people but that's just like everything. There's certain drugs that people cannot take Certain foods people cannot eat. There's certain people have allergies. They have sensitivities to things There's we've we vary biologically so much like the idea that everyone should do a certain thing is kind of crazy Hmm, cuz you some you know, there's people that are allergic to red meat Friend of mine got bit by a tick the lone star tick gives you something called Billy Rubin. Oh, no, no, no Billy Rubin Alpha gal alpha gal and it makes you allergic to red meat, huh? And it's fairly common happens a lot so it tick bite and for him It was like a whole year for a whole year is allergic to red meat. Mm-hmm weird You know, so it's like you can't tell people like everyone should do a while ago No, no, no, no, no, some people shouldn't do anything ever So yeah, some people should take whatever medication. There's like I just has given them that's keeping them from fucking jumping off a bridge Right that's another thing. Yeah Contraindications and people on medication. Mm-hmm. It's very very complicated men. Oh sure especially people on medications I know people that suffer from anxiety and they're on anti anxiety medication They would like to try psychedelics, but they cannot while they're on that medication So there's just like weird little balancing act what to do. Yeah, it's a big deal I think there've been a lot of studies on MDMA and psilocybin over the past 20 years Less clinical studies on on some of the other things obviously and I think that as governments engage We'll see policies develop that you know really try and an account for all that safety You know knowledge around dosing and therapeutic guidelines ethical considerations And I think I think that's all very very important It is very important, but it really is important for us to get an actual understanding of like You know kilograms per body weight. How much body weight? Like what is like what's the effect of dose for a person weighs? 140 pounds versus is it different does it vary? You know, I don't think it varies With some I think that's one of the things about DMT is it's not specific or maybe it's still sibin not specific to your body weight Which is interesting still subbing is I think is that yeah, but it is that what it is I think so Okay, so that's weird right like why isn't DMT specific to your body weight like what why wouldn't the dose for a 500 pound man be You know way too much for you But we have to know we have to find the only way to know that is to study it and to get accurate research and data That's on the on the medicinal and therapeutic front And but I do think there's lots of other good work Around transcendence and consciousness studies and psychedelics like outside the medicinal realm And this is that that's kind of you know That was my interest in writing in writing the book was trying to to suss out like this a sidal implications of this the historical implications of this Well if if it really was Psychedelic rituals that led to the birth of democracy that seems pretty important We should we should be looking at that. It doesn't it kind of make sense though like who else is gonna say you know everybody should I was saying You have to be tripping if you were like the whole world was essentially run by dictators back then Why why would anybody vary from that strategy? Because it seems like that's the default mode of people who don't do psychedelics I would imagine all about all the world leaders that are currently involved in horrific things all across the globe How many of them are doing psychedelics probably zero? Probably zero and this idea that psychedelics could fix the world like I wouldn't say it that way, but maybe You know it might it it'll have it would have a profound impact on just the consensus of Like the general population just most people that have done them what the way it changed the way they see things and That alone would change the way they think and behave and vote and and what they accept and don't accept from their leader Hmm what they accept and don't insert like the dangers and the harms of censorship and propaganda They would be much more aware of that. Oh, you're like literally like creating mine viruses and shaping the way people think to benefit your own good Yeah, I think I mean that's all the more reason to I think to try and study the way that we engage these things in the past Yes, and so Since the book came out I mean there was this you know there was all this pandemic Space that opened up and so I was on zooms a lot with different people and one of the one of the projects that came from the book which I'm pretty proud of is This guy Andrew co I mentioned in the book quite a bit. He's an archiochemist He was based at MIT when I was writing the book and he's one of the few people who really looks into these ancient containers to try and figure out What organic compounds were left behind? It's a really cool science. You also need to be a good class assist to do this You need to be able to to read the ancient languages and compare them against the chemical data that's coming up You need to know ethno botany It's you know it also helps if you can build out these sort of like paleo Ecological habitat maps, you know what was growing where and when and why so like it's it's kind of this mix of the art and the science and He was one of the very few people doing this and over the past couple years He was invited in into Yale to continue doing this work at the ELP body museum Which is one of the world's most prestigious natural history museums And they've offered him the opportunity to continue studying this as part of the Yale ancient pharmacology program Which is really cool? That's very cool. There's like there there are professionals in the world who exist Amongst other things who are taking into account these kinds of questions about the the ways that that these beverages or these compounds Impact at the growth of civilization the birth religions etc. Like this this wasn't a field before And I think it's been it's been really cool for me to have conversations with folks like Andrew and his colleagues at Yale and elsewhere who are taking this Like pretty seriously. That's very cool and can I ask you this like they how many vessels have they found that contained ergot and they Have they found anything other than ergot that may be psychoactive Thirad antiquity. Yeah, we found all kinds of things the the only positive ergot finds were the ones from from ponto's and how many different vessels did they discover that contained it? So to the best of my knowledge they found Around 10 miniature cups and and for some reason they only test it one So only one came up positive for that ergot in addition to the beer sediment So it was it was ergot mixed with mixed with beer and this was all done archaeobotanically So there was no chemical analysis this was them using like scanning electron microscope and optical microscopy to look into find that and so in addition to the cups The ergot also popped up in in a tooth in a in a job on that was also discovered on site Which adds credence to the hypothesis that there was intentional consumption because within this little domestic chapel where that those vessels were were found What they what they found were were two mills for like either grinding weed or maybe even like fashioning a beer And they didn't find any ergot in the mills so the fact that it was inside this ritual vessel Which is the the shape and size of the kind of cup that were used by the devotees of Dionysus in this Hellenistic domestic shrine of sorts combined with the evidence in the jaw I mean really led the archaeologist to believe that there was something Strong there, but I haven't seen an ergot find quite like that anywhere else Do they know of any way that they would cultivate this ergot? Is there some sort of a theory as to how they because it's a fungus? And they know it grows on wheat right? Yeah, it's more common on rye But it happens across the cereal grains and as far as we know It's been happening as long as we've had agriculture, which is at least 12,000 years So the big question is is what spawn that that revolution the agricultural revolution? Was it was it to start baking bread or to start brewing beer? It's actually pretty good debate that goes back to the 1950s between sour and braidwood these two professors did we did we first settle down into settled life and start growing grain to make bread or to brew beer and there's there's good reason to suggest that maybe it was actually The beer and this this religion of brewing that brought people together in the first place and if if you're brewing Then it's pretty it's it's it's foreseeable at the very least at ergot would pop up on that agriculture now does it go back 12,000 years We don't we don't know we don't even know brewing goes back that far. I think the oldest evidence for for beers are places like I like go in tepe which is like 3500 BC and we have some evidence for some kind of brewing at go backly tepe for example ninth millennium BC And then we have these mortars these stone mortars in Israel That were dated to around 13,000 years ago For where at least there's evidence of malting and mashing if not fermentation So we know that grain goes back a long time The question is how far back does the ergot go with it and when Did we discover that ergot had these other These other capacities because it's not a very pleasant experience I mean even to this day if you're brewing beer you want to avoid ergot for lots of reasons Well people have died from ergot poisoning, right? Yeah, there's a whole village in France that accidentally got ergot poisoned Yeah, the Pontus pre yeah, and there was an island Ali Kuti that that's a great one. There's a great vicer article about that About the ergot poisonings and people people seeing witches and people swimming on it Yeah What a weird fucking thing that some fungus that grows on your food Causes you to wildly hallucinate think you're losing your mind Might have been responsible for the sale in which trials Hmm, yeah, it's possible. Yeah, they think that that's endless speculations. Yeah, make sense There was late frost apparently or early frost rather which apparently contributes to the growth of ergot on rye The rye wolves you know they're called the rye wolves by the way the rye wolves. Yeah, it was they were thought to be There's a mythology around where the where the ergot comes from and there's other in German There's a lot of different words for it They call it like after corn and toton corn like like death kernel and the mad the mad kernel And they think that it was The the the the the mad wolves running through the fields leaving behind this. Oh wow He's hallucinatory fungi That's how much they were scared of wolves. I see that made wolves responsible for tripping too Well, I imagine back then if you were paranoid in tripping you would really think about wolves You know I Mean back then that was a real primary concern if you went on a hike Your by yourself and all you had is like a single shot musket We're gonna go down another wolves rabbit hole. Yeah Did they have the ability when when did they have the ability to recognize what ergot was I wonder like when did they recognize that oh? It's this particular part of the grain that's giving us an issue This thing that's on the grain. I mean we figured out Ergotism, I mean at least in the middle ages. I'm not sure how much further than that but throughout the middle ages There were lots of bouts of ergotism But were there bouts of people using it recreationally? Not that no not that we know of it was usually accidental That that's why it's such a strange fungus. Yeah, and and why the history of it's of the chemical synthesis of LSD is so strange because You know Hoffman famously was not looking for LSD right? He was working in obstetrics and gynecology Um, he was looking for something to do in douce labor. Yeah So it was kind of an accident and didn't realize until years later what he'd what he'd synthesized until 1943 So before that I mean outside that that medicinal context. It was typically seen with lots of lots of suspicion It was I mean it's it's toxic dangerous stuff. Yeah, and if it poisons your whole village never starts freaking out What do we have any art work or anything else that would indicate that there was possibly Mushroom consumption. I mean I know that exists in some ancient religious artworks and depictions of mushrooms Is there any of that from the any of the ancient Greek periods? um, I never really saw convincing evidence for for mushrooms Among the ancient Greeks, but there are I mean there's like neolithic evidence for for mushrooms both in in North Africa And then also in Siberia is a famous pictographs the mushroom pictographs the the pig T-mail Where's that inside in Siberia? The fact that pig T-mail pictographs I wrote an article about these 1500 BC or Other the if you look up I wrote an article for big thing Um, with that track some of the the better data that we have across time for this stuff. Can't wait to see that Got something He found it Interesting. Oh, so they have a mushroom over their head. Yeah, that's kind of wild Oh And they're looking they look at the trim balls That's wild and there's mushrooms in the ground there. Look at that Animals in the mushrooms I'm sure we I think we talked about this before McKenna's stone-daped theory Which is very fascinating that that picture is crazy though. So that's from Siberia. Wow Very interesting That those people from thousands of years ago made those drawings of a human figure with a mushroom above its head They're old too. I think it's it's it's bronze age. I mean they're they're pretty old There's there's an older one in North Africa It's called tesili tesili najir So if you tesili and then end apostrophe a jj er That one's even older could be Neolithic So we're talking several thousands of years even before the pig team. It's through this beheaded wizard priest It's one of the most famous images That's it Yeah, that's one of the more famous ones Wow, look how cool that looks So that was found in an painted gallery there and he's got handfuls of mushrooms Yeah Imagine tripping and seeing that guy Maybe he's there for you, but it's crazy thing is that image Especially the cleaned up version of it. It really does look psychedelic like it the geometric patterns It's one of the things that you do see in the psychedelic states as these Interconnected geometric patterns that are moving. They're always like in motion like this. Yeah, you would definitely could you definitely could see something like that Hmm Mm-hmm elsewhere in the badlands is a rock painting of mushroom men running in ecstasy amidst geometric shapes Where's that one? What's that one? Oh, I see if I can yeah, see if you can find that one Wow The Talisi to silly to silly not sure shaman so that's six to nine thousand BC Wow, fucking cool. That's that's one of the oldest ones Well, we know that still assignment existed back then and you know that people experimented with food They tried things to see if they're edible. Mm-hmm again. That was the basis of McKenna's theory That ancient hominids flipped over cow patties. Yeah, when the rainfare forest receded into grasslands They tipped over cow patties looking for grubs and beetles in that these mushrooms had grown these cow patties and surely they would experiment with them Wow, yeah, that's elsewhere in the same region look at that. That's why it's pretty cool. They're just running tripping They look like they're tripping too. Look at their heads Yeah, and this look at they look like they're in an ecstatic state and they're all holding mushrooms Wow, so there was a long debate about the the relationship between these kinds of images and Shamanism and the ritual consumption of psychedelics like among like rock shelters and cave art and Graham our Graham Hancock wrote a lot about this and it's my favorite book of his it's called Supernatural. Yeah, yeah It's really he looks at all the different cave paintings Going back 30 40,000 years and so there was um always a long debate about whether or not there were there was actually some kind of relationship between Those painted images why they were why they were left behind by the The priest class of the time and kind of like what engendered them and so It's funny just after the book came out in the fall. I think it was of 2020 There was a discovery in California Related to rock art and it was it was hailed as the first Unambiguous evidence for the consumption of psychedelics in connection with rock art It's called the pinwheel cave It gets it got so much press that you can you can find it pretty easily. I think that Nat Geo covered it It was it was headlines for for for weeks called the pinwheel cave There you go It's called it's called that because of the the image that's painted in red ochre On the ceiling of the cave you can see him looking right there that's that's it's thought to be the unfurling flower of the datura Which is this very very potent very visionary flower in the nightshade family datura Datura is a weird one. Yeah, we kind of talked about Datura and about how he had a stop taking it because it was Too weird that he was having a conversation with a man in a market And he realized in the middle of the conversation that the man thought that they were at home in his living room that it was it was so bizarrely transformative in terms of like the way it interface with reality that it was just too strange Like you would be sort of semi functional But thinking you're in a completely different place than you are and thinking that it's actually happening This again, this is why the history matters like you know a lot of the focus over the over recent years has been on the medicinal Therapeutic value of psychedelics and to the extent they can relieve suffering I understand the need for research and the need to The need to assess safety, right? When you look into history, yeah like but there there are other ways of using Datura that seemed to have survived Through in the pinwheel so that was used by by the two mesh people for example And they had a very specific ritual a ceremony around the use of Datura that they left You know explicit evidence for that that doesn't go back It's not prehistoric. It's only about 400 years old to the 16th century But they knew what they were doing with Datura and they're not sure exactly what but they say there's these great papers written on the two-mash Saying how they would use it in in order to to look beyond the surface of things and in some cases to communicate with dead ancestors And you see that a lot communication with with with the ancestors And so whether was some sort of puberty ritual or initiation right they clearly knew The dosing and correct administration of Datura and they weren't alone by the way There were other folks in the Americas My friend Danny Newman has done some awesome research around something called the black drink You have to look up the the black drink from the Mississippian Indigenous communities and there were some studies done a few years ago that tested these vessels You're asking about about evidence and so there's a you know beyond sort of the pictographic evidence I love looking at the archochemical evidence so in addition to the pinwheel site first unambiguous Chemical data for the connection of of rock art and psychedelics a couple years ago. There were some studies Gas chromatography mass spec studies like real proper chemical studies done on the black drink have you heard of the black drink? The black drink was was used like I said in these Mississippian sites and there was a paper dated Some of the fines from like 1100 to 1700 AD so Century's ago and they came in the the the this drink was prepared in these special vessels And sometimes they take the like these anthropomorphic Visuals one is called like the old woman And so within within these vessels they found the evidence not only for Datura like we just saw the pinwheel cave But for the yaupon holly. I think it's the only it's the only plant native to North America That's naturally caffeinated It's called the the yaupon holly and so it was this this this this caffeinate beverage That definitively had traces of atropine and scopolamine in them And those those are the active alkaloids in Datura the same alkaloids they found through chemical analysis of the pinwheel site So no pole means a wild scopolamine. Yeah, that's a wild one. That's that's wild. That's the the zombie drug That's the drug that they can literally blow in your face and get you to do their bidding You've heard about that. Yeah, Colombian drug lords just use it on people. Yeah, it blow it in their face. Yeah They think that is the root of the the concept of zombies That you know these people just oh Yeah, Wade Davis has written some some cool work on you know what it's also It's also like when you get one of those little patches to avoid seasick. This is drama mean. That's copolamine. Mm-hmm. That's crazy But see under the right circumstances right right right? Yeah, you're not trippin, but if you took those drama you patches and put them all of your fucking body I don't think that's recommended no, it's not. I don't recommend it But if you did I bet you trip walls. Yeah, um, but it's um, I think if you're thinking about these tribal communities and how life was very difficult in these especially hunter-gatherer communities living off the land You needed people to have their shit together You couldn't have near duels when you have 50 people that rely on each other and they all have very specific tasks Everyone is responsible for something and you cannot have a responsible consumption of something that's so profound So it makes sense within their their best interest to create a real framework Like the correct way to use this and also this recognition that this is a very profound and powerful Experience is not to be taken lightly at all. Correct. This is not at all recreational This is something that you're gonna do because you're gonna It's gonna you're gonna have a transcendent experience. Correct, and that's what we like today That's what we like and the more you study the ancient past whether it's an ancient Greece or A lot of my book focuses on paleo Christianity the more you see this kind of ritual Can I can I show you some images of paleo Christian ritual? Yeah, okay cool I love talking to you okay cool. You got Jamie. There should be a folder called Cersei Cersei like the lady from Game of Thrones like the lady from Game of Thrones. Yeah, and she's my favorite Then you'll get to know her a lot better. Great character. You'll get to know her a love shame shame What am I looking for you? It's it's in my my Google drive. Oh, no. No. Yeah I have the folder. What do you want me to pull up? Oh, just a few pictures or just yeah Just from the just from the first one. Yeah, we can start with with we can go into the pictures I my point. I've just my point. It's just words. Those that's fine. Okay. We can we can move forward from there So what I'm gonna show you are some images from a hypogeum and I don't think we got around to this last time But a hypogeum was this underground chamber and it was the site where most of the early Christian ritual took place So if you if you think back to pillow Christianity between the death of Christ and Constantine which is 300 years later give or take You know Christianity was this illegal cult. It was this underground religion and some cases literally So the only the only places where you would celebrate the Eucharist and the proto mass were in like small and private homes and this Agape meal and then sometimes you'd go underground into these like necropolis like the these places of the dead and that for some reason was the place where the mass was celebrated and so as part of my research for the book I went into some of these underground chambers to see What the earliest Christians would have seen and some of the evidence that was left behind in in in terms of like frescoes So there's no botanical chemical analysis of what was happening in these places But we do have images we have frescoes and we have the idea of what the early ritual would have looked like and a couple weeks ago I reached out to the Vatican specifically To ask them if I could show these images to you today and they and they said yes All right. Thank you very much They're actually back all the shit They're actually they're great research partners It's the Pontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology So it's the archaeological team that is responsible for the preservation and conservation of all these ancient sites And I think it's it's an aspect of a really Christianity like very few people know about and so What was happening underground if you want to go back to the first slide just just quickly There was this Yale professor who sadly died in recent years and was Ramsey McMullen and what he talks about are these underground These underground chillouts they were called the Gilea the Latin word for them is refrajarium where we get the word refrigerator So they were like underground chillouts where Certainly the Romans and it's believed the earliest Christians would have gone to celebrate The dead with with sacramental wine with celebratory wine that they would have a wine ceremony and these dank chambers underground To like usher the dead into the afterlife or bring them bring them refreshment they were called referejaria And so it's it's kind of unclear when the referejaria a pagan Roman ceremony Became like a proto-Eucharistic Christian mass like the line again the line is very blurred at this period of time Which I call the pagan continuity hypothesis this notion that the the the the older Wine drinking consumption by the Romans the Greeks before them Somehow influenced at least in some in some cases the earliest celebrations of the mass and so I just show this quickly to show That you know in these wine parties Ramsey has this great line saying that this was not just picnicking at the bottom there said this was religion So even though it looks like a picnic it looks like they were gathering Over like kind of like almost like a Mexican day the dead ceremony like they would meet by the graveyard to To remember the dead and the ancestors Yeah, there was there was wine and food But this was this was religion to the ancient Romans and I think to to the Romanized Christians who followed them in the first first century second century third century so the next slide is That that's just a bunch more text from a Catholic encyclopedia by the way from 1907 if I'm not mistaken and it talks about how the celebration of the dead and this funeral banquet You see right in the middle there this notion that the funeral banquet is really kind of at the core of what the early mass was Even if you go back to the gospels it was you know Jesus asking for the commemoration of this event You know do this in memory of me as you do this in memory of me remember my life death and eventual resurrection This is this is sort of the prototype for the mass and so it's important to remember that the funeral banquet was there to Bind those together who remain faithful to the memory of Jesus after after his death It's very similar to this Roman River, jarium So I give that all that was background just to show you the first couple images from the hypo gym So if you skip to the next one or may so that's what it looks like when you go underground There was it was discovered in 1919 I think as as a fiat shop around the corner was trying to expand into a sunken garage They came across these These monuments which which is not uncommon in Greece and Italy Yeah, and around the Mediterranean so they found this this hypo gene which dates to the third century AD so we don't have firm dates. It could be anywhere from like 220 to 250 AD So this is the time period we're talking about So these these it was these were tombs their rock cut tombs in the hypo gym here if you go to the next one One of the first things I saw when I went into the hypo gene was this Which you know it's a little strange because again you're trying to figure out if this is a Roman pagan Refrigerium or if this is a Christian celebration of some sort of Eucharist because again this site is controlled by the Vatican the Vatican has preserved this for for reasons and you know it's been said by the Pontifical Commission that these are some of the most explicit and concrete evidence for the origins of Christianity So this is you know whether this is purely pagan or Christian said by the Pontifical Commission, that these are some of the most explicit and concrete evidence for the origins of Christianity. So this is, you know, whether this is purely pagan or Christian is sort of a moment of debate. But, you know, if you just look at it, what's odd is that you see 12 people gathered around the table. And when you think of 12 people gathered around the table, you think of something like the Last Supper. And so it's pretty clear that what's important to this dinner is the chalice that's being lifted by the servant there. Or maybe it's a priest of some sort. So it's clear that whatever's happening, wine is important to this gathering of 12 people. The interesting part is the woman who's appearing in the back. If you look closely, there's sort of like this effigy of a woman descending exactly. From the background to the foreground, it's thought that she is Aurelia Prima. And Aurelia was one of the dead women to whom the hypogeum was dedicated. And so what they think that's her, this is one of the Vatican's interpretations, is that that's her emerging from the world of the dead to take place in this funeral banquet, in this ceremony. So we're not really sure how to interpret that. Because she's not seated at the table. And because what they think this is, is that whenever, especially because of the place that we're in, which is underground, that when wine is being served at a referendum, that the Romans would habitually do this in order to commune with the dead. Not as a picnic, but as religion, as Ramsey McMillan says. So this was their religion for keeping alive that relationship to the dead and refreshing the dead in the afterlife. And when you went there to celebrate them, they would appear. And Ramsey has this great line in his scholarship. He says, the dead themselves participated. One of my favorite lines in his research, the dead themselves participated. So that's already a participating in a funeral banquet. That's happening underground. OK, so if we go to the next slide, so again, unclear, if that's Christian or pagan. And then you see some of these images. That's interpreted as Jesus as the good shepherd from the Gospel of John. You see the goats down below. So that's either interpreted as Saint Paul or Plotinus. Plotinus was this Neoplatonic philosopher who lived around that time in the third century. And so it's unclear if that's Saint Paul or Plotinus, or maybe it's Paul using the image of Plotinus to call up the imagery. And again, everything's very ambiguous because Christianity is illegal. So you don't go down there and paint very explicit images of Jesus or the last supper or Christian elements because you could get in trouble for that. Obviously. And so there's a lot of ambiguity in these frescoes. So if you move past that, this is the most important one, which is kind of mind-boggling. So this is just to the right of that banquet scene. And it's called the Homeric Fresco. And it's called the Homeric Fresco because it seems to portray a very famous scene from Homer's Odyssey. And it's when Odicious is stuck on the island with Cersei, the witch Cersei, the prototypical witch of antiquity Cersei. He's stuck on the island with her. And the three dudes you see there on the bottom to the left have just been transformed from pigs back into men. It's one of the most famous scenes in Book 10 of the Odyssey where Cersei delivers a potion. She concocts a potion. And in Greek, it says that the verb, they use for concoct the potion is Kukkyo. Like she, just like the ancient potion, Adelusis. This is one of the mythical precedents for what would become the actual Kukkyon that was used in the early St. in the Mysteries. And so she uses this mythical Kukkyon in which she casts these drugs. It says that she puts drugs into this potion to transform the men into pigs than back to men. And so it's a very, I mean, like of all the 27,000 and changed lines of the Odyssey and the Iliad, it's a particularly strange image to evoke from Homer because Cersei amongst all the many things she's famous for is for being a witch. And for having this profound knowledge of the botanical world and potions and things that we might call psychedelics today. And so it's a really strange image to have there. And so the Vatican produced this monograph over a decade ago where one of their scholars, Alexia Latini, goes over this in great detail to demonstrate why exactly this is this is Cersei. And up above, that's another image of Cersei with all her animals on this magical island. And what they found there exactly was with Cinnabar. And during the conservation process, they were able to identify the Mercury sulfide that had been used to paint this red image of Cinnabar around the house, which is a very telling detail because there's a line just before this in the Odyssey where it talks about the fiery smoke coming out of Cersei's palace. So between the fiery smoke and the Cinnabar and the web down below, there's a lot of certainty that this is probably Cersei. If you go to the next slide. What is Gnae asking? What are those people laying down? If you zoom in on Cersei? Yeah. Up above? What are those people laying down? Yeah, that's what's represent. That's the interpretation from the monograph is that that's some sort of funeral beer. So that could be dead people. Yeah. Which is also strange. What's that? Satan. Those are Satan. That we can't make out. So the loom was another telltale sign. So there's the fiery smoke at the palace. And the loom is another telltale sign. So this is if it were just this, you would think, OK, maybe, maybe it's just Cersei and a loom. But if you go to the next slide, there's a, and the next one. Yeah, there's a manuscript at the vat in the in the Pope's library called the Vergilius Vatikanos. You can find this online. And the Vergilius Vatikanos manuscript, which is from about 400 to 430 AD, there's this picture of Cersei and the loom, which corresponds to Cersei and the loom on the right. So they know for sure, you know, with relative certainty, at least, that there's some image continuity between Cersei and the loom. And she talked, she's talked about in the ancient literature as always being at the loom. So the confidence is rising. And for folks who don't know what a loom is, it's how you create cloth with threads. Some people, yeah. So with this, for your just listening to this, what she has is like, if you've ever seen people make cloth in a traditional way with a loom, she's got the, why did they depict her with a loom? Why was she known as a person to make cloth? Because that's what Homer says in his epic poetry. And that's what Virgil also says in his epic poetry. So Homer writes the Odyssey centuries later, Virgil writes the Annead. And that's sort of the mythical founding of Rome, the main character, Anneas. And in both versions, there's a Cersei character. So this Cersei character survives for centuries in the ancient world, from the Greek to the Latin. And in both cases, the loom is mentioned. And also what's mentioned in these passages are the fact that Cersei uses potent herbs. And the Latin says potenti-boosted edabies. So she's using potent herbs and mixing up potions to transform these men into pigs. And vice versa. So like it's a very strange idea to have a pagan witch in a fresco that's been preserved in this paleo-Christian monument. Combined with this, this refragarium, sort of eucharistic celebration of the dead. And then in the last few images, what it depicts is a woman being initiated into these high mysteries. So things you don't normally associate with early Christianity. Jamie, just in the last slide real quick, I just want to show you that this image of the woman. So there are three different chambers in the hypoagium. If you go back a couple, and I'll show you these two in a second. Yeah, there, that's fine. So that circle, that's on the ceiling of one of the final chambers. And there was a German scholar, Himmelman, in the 1970s, who attempted to interpret that image. And he says it's some kind of initiation, typical of Dionysian or Elleucinian initiation. He says, the way the wand is held is typical to what you might find with the God Dionysus. And true enough, if you look around at different artifacts, there's the Borgeses-Vos on the left, which is from about 40 BC, it's now in the Louvre. If you see the Thursus, the wand above the head of the initiate, who's dropped his sacramental cup. And on the right, that's the Bill of the Mysteries in Pompeii, which goes back 2,000 years, obviously. And again, you see this notion of the wand over the head of the initiate. So you have a female initiate, which is calling forth images of pagan, Elleucinian, Dionysian initiation. Next to an image of Cersei, a pagan witch, next to this image of this refugerian banquet. And it's all very ambiguous. Why would a Christian descend into these chambers to celebrate these wine mysteries with the dead? And as you go outside the Hopogeum to other catacombs around Rome, I mean, just quickly, in 30 seconds, I can show you other images of different women consecrating the wine. Yeah, that way. And the next way, that's perfect. So you see in Latin there, it's written Agape mischae nobeys. So they think that's Agape's the woman's name. Mischae nobeys is mixed it, mix it for us. So what they're saying is not pour the wine for us, but mix it up for us. Agape's a very Greek word. It means love. And so you find all these Greek connotations, despite the fact that we're in Italy. If you look at the next one, it's very similar. It says, Irena de calda. Irena could be another Greek name. It means peace. And just like mischae nobeys, mix it up for us. You see, de calda. We don't really know what calda is. But if you go to the next slide, there was a scholar. Yeah, there's some great text here. He tries to interpret what calda is. It's not certain. It seems to have been more than an infusion. Apparently it was a mixture of hot water wine and drugs. Wow. So the question becomes what kind of potions were being mixed in these underground chambers? This is at a different catacomb of macheliness and Pietro. I showed you the hypogeum. And so these were the places where wine was being consumed by paleo-cricians and antiquity. And I think it's fascinating. It is. And it raises lots of questions. A lot. But it only makes sense. We know those compounds existed. And we know that people take those compounds and have these profound experiences. And when you had no explanation for that, and you didn't know how interfering or interacting with the human mind and what chemicals they were, and of course you would lean on those. I mean, that would be the primary source of some sort of attempt of understanding the great mystery of the life. And that makes sense. And the dead are participating. That's what I want. It's a funeral banquet. And you see this time and again in these ancient mysteries, this notion of a funeral banquet and the ritual consumption of powerful compounds. McKenna believed that when you entered into psychedelic states, you'd enter into a well of souls, some baddies souls. Or those, at least theorized. That was like one of his thoughts. Like that's what you were experiencing. Yeah, it's the same with Dionysus, actually. And this notion of sort of the Greek Halloween was called unthestedia. And there was this ritual of uncorcing the wine jugs. And out of them, you would see different spirits and entities fly out. So there's something, there's something. There's some dead. The dead themselves participated. So I find the iconography really interesting, like having gone to Catholic school my whole life because you don't really hear about the hypogeum. No. You don't hear about Pilar Christianity much, actually. Well, what is the source of the Eucharist? What's the original Eucharist? Body of Christ. I mean, well in the book, I explore the potential Greek origin of that, at least in some communities. I mean, the notion of consuming the body in blood was, that wasn't born like 2000 years ago with Jesus. There even the blood of Dionysus, the wine of Dionysus is called the blood by Timothyus of my latest 400 years before Jesus. So this notion that wine is blood and should be consumed in the sacramental fashion. I mean, that was that had been around for a while. And this notion of theophagy, right? You see this in lots of different world cultures, the consuming of the God to become the God. And in the Greek world, theophagy really takes its place with Dionysus and these mysteries, much more so than the Elusinian mysteries that we talked about. And so for the ancient Greeks, like to imbibe the wine was to imbibe the God, the God Dionysus. So the question becomes was was Dionysus the God of wine or was Dionysus the God of intoxication, right? And psychotropic plants are fungi or poisons or medicine. Because the wine of the time like we've talked about was routinely mixed with different plants and compounds. And so the enthusiasm that resulted from drinking that wine was, it's been described as like the central aspect of Greek tragedy, for example. Like when we saw the theater Dionysus on the southern slope of the Acropolis, they think that that wine was consumed there in another way to experience communion with Dionysus. The wine at the theater was called trima. And trima in Greek means like rubbed or pounded. And Professor Ruck, for example, thinks that it's, it signified the different things that were pounded rubbed into the wine to create this sort of mass possession that took place at the theater. Between the live audience and the actors, between the actors and the dead persons, in some cases, that they were acting out. Remember, I mean, we take it for granted now, but to stand on stage and spew out lines up along to a dead person is closer to necromancy than entertainment. So that was a trippy thing to begin with. So you combine that together with this tittemo wine and it's very sacred ritual. It goes well beyond the bounds of entertainment. Like for them, there was a religious purpose to the theater and to comedy and to tragedy. Wow. It's so interesting. You would love more concrete evidence of what they consumed other than this one vessel, which is very interesting. It makes sense that one vessel contained ergot and that this would lead you to believe that this was a part of what they were doing. Yeah, but it's not enough for me either. I mean, that's what I've been doing with my time in the past couple of years. Yeah. Thank God you do it. I'm not convinced either. I'm not convinced. I'm, I try and be a real skeptic about this. That's good. I try and be a genuine skeptic. There's this incredibly compelling piece of data from Spain, from Hellenistic Spain, what is today's Spain? 2,200 years ago, I would love to find something in Greece. I'd love to find something at Allusus. This was part of my presentation for the Allusus symposium a couple of weeks ago. What kind of artifacts do we possess or do people possess from Allusus? I asked this question of the archeologists on site there of the government folks. And now there's an American School of Classical Studies, too, which has been excavating in the area for decades, obviously. So the last time I went to Allusus to ask Poppy about this, they have a lot of different vessels, actually. I'll show you. Jamie, if you want to go into the Allusus file, I think it's the first file up there. And I think we see an image of you, by the way. And then they'll be some vessels we can look at. OK. So there's lots of different, there's you first. First me. That's me at that site. I was freaking out. I kind of was. I remember walking around and just feeling so strange. Yeah, what was going on that day? Well, I knew where I was, which you always have to take into account. I knew that this was supposedly the site where these people were not supposedly. This was the site where these people had these experiences. And there was something about that site. Whether or not you believe that places have memory, they certainly feel like they do. And that place felt like there was a memory attached to it in some strange way. Like a lot of memory. Something very profound had happened there. But maybe that was because I knew something very profound had happened there. But there was quite a long moment, like five or 10 minutes. I was just standing there under that thing, just like feeling it. Yeah, that was the plutonium. So that's the mouth of hell, where Persephone would emerge from the underworld. And you were locked in there for a while. I was just trying to empty my head and just try to figure out how much of this is just suggestion and bullshit. You're a good skeptic too. Well, you have to be. Otherwise, you're buying your own nonsense. And I was trying to figure it out. What is this? Like what's this feeling that I have here? It was very intense. But it's also an incredible place to be, just to even if the feeling didn't happen. Just to know that you're there in this place where these people have these experiences and the wonder of what was it like could imagine. If you had the ability to travel back in time to any point in human history, where would you go? I can only choose one. Yeah, just one. Maybe the crucifixion of Jesus Christ. Ooh. Just to find out if it really happened. What if it didn't when you tell anybody? Haha. That'd be a big trouble. Yeah. I think I would choose ancient Egypt. What do you want to see? I want to see the construction of the pyramids. I want to see why. I want to see what was civilization like back then. I want to see what's the real timeline. What are we really looking at? Are we really looking at 2,500 BC? Are we looking at 10,000, 20,000 BC? What are we looking at? They don't really know. It's a lot of guesswork, especially when you're dealing with carbon-date stone. But just knowing the construction, the expertise that was involved, appears the use of some sort of a drill. There was some things that cord stone, some things that cut stone. I have no understanding of how these people were able to do this. Just the scope, just the scale of the construction, the massive stones, the obelisks, these enormous things that were cut from quarries hundreds of miles away. And somehow another transported and assembled into this thing that we wouldn't be able to do today. No matter what anybody tells you, certainly we wouldn't be able to do in a human lifetime. 2,300,000 stones, some weighing upwards of 50 to 80 tons, hundreds of miles away, carted through the mountains, no clear roads. How do you get them down? What are you doing? How'd you get them? What'd you do? That's to me the big one. Have you been talking time there? No. No, we're supposed to do both in this one trip. That's too much. That's too much, yeah. You know, you have young kids, you know, what the fuck are you freaking freaking out? I'm going to go home and see my friends. You know, you don't want to drag kids away from too long. But I think it was important for them to see the ruins, you know, to see Delos and to see all these other different places and to just take into, just see a place where people used to live and thrive and then they didn't, you know, now you're walking around these areas. And, but to me, Egypt, it's because it's so, it's so above and beyond everything else that exists in terms of just the scale of the construction. What did they do? We see the great pyramid of Kiza. It's just like, what did they do? How did they do this? Who, who, why? What was the purpose? You know, there's been all the speculation that at one point in time there was a burial chamber for a pharaoh, but there's no evidence of that. So what is it? And why and how? Put it on the agenda for next summer. Yeah, and even then you're just going to be walking around freaking out. Which I think is great. But I would, I would, if there was a place that you could go back in time and see one thing, that's the cool thing that I would see. There was a, there was a recent study on a psychedelic potion out of Egypt for the first time. Remember we talked about some of the first unambiguous evidence for psychedelics and rock art and this Mississippian site. I think it was only, was it, earlier this year actually. Jamie, if you want to look up, that's a great Google term, psychedelic blood cocktail, psychedelic blood cocktail and maybe Egypt. Oh, there it is. They drank a gnarly brew of hallucinogenic drugs and human blood. Whoa, the drink also contained a few secret ingredients like vaginal mucus. How do you know that? Look at that, dude. That looks like the kind of guy you'd see if you drank blood and psychedelics. That's best, BES. That seems like the dude. BES was the giver of oracles and dreams and it was thought that you would consume this beverage and go into an incubation at his temple. Which is not, not too different from Greek incubation temples. Look at this, he was described as part dwarfish part feline. Yeah. Whoa, BES followers believed he could provide protection from danger while simultaneously averting harm and being able with his powers to prevent evil. Hmm. So like all cults, BES heads were required to drink some gnarly stuff rather than the classic poison kool-aid though, the members of this sect guzzled the mysterious liquid from ceramic vessels decorated with the effigy of the, or the head of BES, known as BES vases. The BES figure was revered as a protective genius. It might be assumed that it's liquid drunk from these mugs might be considered benefit. But efficient, interesting. So what do they find that's in these things? Well, it came from Tampa, which is crazy. Like there wasn't, I mean, at some point it was in Egypt, but they had this vessel sitting around in Tampa, Florida. In Tampa, Florida. Oh, whoa. From the second century BC, which is why this science is so interesting, these can be vessels that sit in museums for decades. And they still preserve these compounds. So they did liquid chromatography, tandem, mess spec, this chemical analysis. And what they found a number of different things, the mucus was because they did proteomics as well. they did a human protein analysis. And they found something that was either mucus or other human body fluids. That's why they called it the second drug cop. Why they think it was vaginal mucus? Because that's one of the possibilities is either oral or vaginal mucus. Why would they go with vaginal mucus? Because it's a good headline. But it seems like spit would be more likely. It would say spit. It seems like, I'm going to say spit more. Getting the vaginal mucus is like, that's a big word. But was there any indication of why they chose vaginal, why they would even say? Not that I know of. Beyond the proteomic analysis. Because that seems like, I know, it's weird leap. He find mucus like how much different is mucus from spit to vaginal mucus. In addition to mucus, they also... We know that people spit and fermented beverages. Right. Right. Like there's certain alcohol beverages that the women will chew up certain things and spit them into a vessel. And then people drink it. It aids in the fermentation, right? And that could have happened here, too. Is that they found evidence of fermentation probably grape. So this is some kind of wine cocktail. And in addition, they found the chemical signifiers for nymphaya carolaya, which is the blue water lily. And they also found peganum haarmala, or seeds that either came from like the Syrian rue. Seeds from Syrian rue were going to harmala. Harmala. Isn't that an MAO inhibitor? Correct. Yeah, correct. Harmala. Yeah. OK. So they were taking something. And then it so was very similar to ayahuasca in that regard. Because an MAO inhibitor would be something that would allow at least dimethyl chirp to me to be orally active. If that's what was happening here. But I think blue water lily is orally active. So it's unclear what the... Maybe it made it more profound. Maybe. So blue water lily, what is that supposed to be like? There have been some recreations of that. There's a great YouTube called Sacred Weeds. If you ever look at Sacred Weeds, it's a lot of fun. Yeah, it's from... So many rabbit holes. I know. So I know. It's amazing. There's so many to go down. Also five terrifying detourra trips. You have to look at some. Sure. That's one of my favorites. Yeah, detourra. So this water lily, what is it supposed to be like? I don't think... Again, this is where dosing comes in. The Sacred Weeds here was a series in the UK. They tried to recreate this. And obviously they got the dosing wrong. So I think... With the in effect, it was always saying, obviously they got the dosing wrong. Yeah, because if you look at the participants, it's really funny. They get kind of giddy and euphoric at some point, but they don't have anything hallucinatory. Did they take it with harmulah? No, no. They weren't doing the psychedelic blood cocktail. They were just doing the... Just the water lily. Just the water lily. Maybe the water lily has to be taken with harmulah to have the profound effect, the M.A.O. inhibitor. It makes sense. This is why the science matters. Yeah. And the data matters. Not because we want to recreate blood cocktails, but... Of course. What we do. So it seems like there's a lot of vessels that could be tested if we're aware of these vessels. Everywhere. Yeah. And they haven't been studies. Some are sitting in museums in Tampa. Some are sitting in new, fresh dig sites. Some are sitting in museums in Greece. And Italy... Oh, look at that. That's the best vessel from second century BC. Can I get a recreation of that on eBay? Does somebody make that? That seems dope. I want to drink my coffee out of that. Someone's got to make Joe a best vessel. Fuck yeah. For coffee in the morning. That'll be a way to start your day up correctly. He's spitting the drink out of that. No, I want to drink it like I said. Drinking out of that guy's head would be pretty fucking cool. So with this blue water lily and the... So they know that those two things were in there. Harmala and blue water lily. Was there anything else other than fermentation? So presumably some alcohol. There was some alcohol. We're not sure in what amounts. There was just some evidence of fermentation. Aside from the Harmala and the blue water lily. And maybe some honey. And which was also used as a preservative for psychedelics. It was one of the ways that they preserved mushrooms. They had preserved mushrooms and honey. Yeah and that shows up a lot in some of these ancient potions. The combination in fact of potassium glucinate is the chemical signifier for that. They often find that with tartaric acid. It shows wine and calcium oxalet which shows beer. So you see these... Pat McGovern did a few studies on that which shows sort of like this beer wine. The meat concoction. And he famously recreated one called the Midas Touch with the dogfish head brewery. The Midas Touch. That was the rosy. That was it. Yeah that's great. That's great. Has there been any talk of these vessels that we do know are available of running studies on those? Yes, so this is at least part of what Andrew Crow wants to do at the ELP Buddamuseum. I mean he's already sitting on thousands and thousands of samples. Yes, this is at least part of what Andrew Crow wants to do at the ELP buddy museum. I mean, he's already sitting on thousands and thousands of samples from all over the Mediterranean that haven't been properly acid and within. But they're all filled with drugs. I mean, I mean, boy, that would rewrite everything. Yeah. No matter what they're filled with. And again, his job's not to look for drugs. He's looking for ancient organics. And so good academics. I love how you bring a pack down. No, I'm just joking. Focus. Focus. Thank you. Thank you for being here. Thank you for being here. Science. Thank you. Appreciate you. But it could be fragrance or medicine. Sure. Yeah. Let's find out what's in there. Incense. Keith, he incensed his famous Egyptian incense. He famously found that the Telco Bri wine and they announced that in 2014 from Galilee at Telco. It was wine mixed with all kinds of things. We talked about last time, I think, like honey and store acts and terribin, cypress, cedar, cinnamon, all kinds of fun things. So like he's been able to show that wines of the time were routinely mixed with different things. You're seeing the blood cocktail. You're seeing the detour use at Pinwheel. And you're seeing the black drink and the Mississippian sites. I mean, this is all relative stuff. That too deeply was the black drink made with Datura. And Yaupon Haile. And that was the caffeine. What does it look like? This Yaupon Haile? Is it a fruit? Is it a leaf? It's a plant. It's a plant. And it contains caffeine. Yeah, I found something. I was trying to bring it up, but I don't get to it yet. It's a scientific name. It's something interesting. Elex, bomitoria. Oh, which makes it puke. Yeah. Yeah. It was interesting. It was a purgative apparently. Ooh. Right. Like a lot of these are. Yeah. So this experience. Interesting. Interesting. So Datura and caffeine mix together. Is it a high dose of caffeine? It's like six times as high as a cup of coffee almost. Whoa. It's the only caffeinated plant found in North America. I think it's what I read too. Right. Is there any history of humans using it other than that fashion? Like people eat it. The Yaupon Haile? Yeah. Like they do when they chew cocoleives in order to get energy. You can find YouTube videos of people making like a caffeinated tea today. Or no, how to manipulate. Sounds like you fucking kill yourself. They're kind of caffeine tea. Right. But that's what it looks like. So it's a little berries, huh? Yeah. Plants. So is the fruit of the tree what gives you caffeine or is it the leaves? I used to leave. It's like it's like North American Mate. Oh, interesting. Have you tried this? No. It says Yaupon Haile Drink for sale. Yeah. Oh, you can buy it? I would imagine someone knows that you could black drink with your computer. Yeah. Go shopping. Just go shopping for Yaupon Haile. Interesting. There it is. Interesting. So you can get it as a tea online. I wonder if it's legit. Because it seems like that would be like super potent. Like they'd have to tell you. It's like a monster energy drink in one little tiny cup. Right? Wouldn't it be? What does it say there, Jamie, for caffeine content? Looking at that. That's what I was looking forward to say on that part of it. It says it makes a half gallon. That little thing is it could concentrate like cold brew, most of them guessing. Oh, interesting. So you make a half gallon out of that one little thing. You have to mix it up. So it seems like we have a wealth of things to test for, but a scarcity of tests that have actually been run. And a scarcity of testers, which is why Andrew Coz work is so important to support. And as a result of conversations like this and the book coming out, we're launching a foundation called the Athanatos Foundation, which means immortal in Greek. And part of the genesis behind that foundation is to help to support different work like this, which is largely unfunded and unacknowledged. So there aren't many archicamists doing the work that Andrew is doing, which I think is super important for reconstituting some of this really cool history. I mean, a lot of which is just emerging in the past couple of years. A lot of the things we're discussing are things that came out after the book was published. So there's a lot of cool work. And again, between the sciences and the humanities, people who are textualists and like to compare this, folklorists, anthropologists, there's a lot of disciplines that can converge on these studies. And in addition to the work at Yale, there's been a lot of interest at Harvard, too, around psychedelic studies, outside the clinical setting, which is really cool. So not only at the Harvard Divinity School, but Harvard Law School and the faculties of arts and sciences, they have a humanities center there. And I'm just about to launch actually a series of fellowships together with Michael Pollan, between Harvard and Berkeley, to continue looking at these kinds of questions, again, outside the clinical setting. So looking with the lens of the social sciences and the humanities, historians, anthropologists, cultural criticism, and you name it, like taking a look at these kinds of studies from very different lenses to see what we can learn about the ways that our ancestors interact it with the natural world. So speaking of Michael Pollan, how's the caffeine treat? Did you anything for you? I definitely feel it. I feel it differently than you used to. I mean, I'm much more awake. I'm much more awake. I've been feeling very sleepy recently. Yeah, I feel much more awake. I'm going to get you healthy, Brian. I know, man. I'm going to put you on a schedule. I'm going to change your diet. That's what's most important. Yeah. Yeah. People think of the diet as just stuff to eat that tastes good. I think you really have to think of it as the literal foundation of your structure as a biological organism. I mean, any nutrients that I do get are fully thanks to my wife. If it were up to me, I'd be absolutely excited. I mean, yeah, because she's a great cook. She's very concerned about nutrition for me and the girls. If it's just me, I would eat peanut butter all day. That's not good. I know. I know. That's the problem with a lot of intellectuals. They spend so much time thinking and not enough time thinking about their body. You think of the mind as being separate from the body, but it's not. It's all one thing. And if the body works better, the mind works better. Yeah. All right. I'll get on the regime. Please. Please, why keep you healthy? When I hear about people taking so long to recover from COVID, the primary thing that I was asking, do you take vitamins? That's almost always no. At the time it was kind of a no. I take more now than I did, but even though you're not taking them out. No, not really. You got to get you into that. So what's interesting also is you took a long time to write this book, the immortality key. You took a long time researching this. And I know that there was a lot of questions about how this would be received and whether or not. It's like a, what it would be commercially successful, but it's been so successful that they ran out of copies like really quickly. Right. They fucked up. I'm not sure if I can say that, but yeah. Let's just say kindly, they underestimated the demand. I think the demand was underestimated. Yeah. Following our conversation in September 2020. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't expect that either. And there were lots of issues with printers and the pandemic. Yeah. It was hard to get copies out. And so a lot of people actually turned to the audible for that reason. And to this day, like the audible is outselling the hard copy, like almost two to one. People like to listen. Well, you're very good at it. The Audibles excellent because you're really good. Thank you. It's really good. It's a fantastic. I've read it twice. Really? Yes. Thanks, man. Yeah. All the way through twice. Thank you. It's been very compelling and detailed and fascinating. And it really opens up people's imagination to the roots of all these things. And like where this all came from and what these people were experiencing. Thank you, man. It's fucking awesome. It's been very humbling to go through this. And what's cool? It's got to be great for you because there was a lot of uncertainty of you going down this path. Yeah, man. I quit my job. It was no plan D. Well, yeah. Sometimes that's what you have to do, right? Because it worked out. Yeah. Spectacularly. I felt like I was losing my soul at some point. I was always, I mean, I love being a lawyer. I went to law school for a reason. But this is the stuff that always kept me up at night. You know, like this was just a fun passion project on nights and weekends. And then it became a book and a thing. But like that wasn't the purpose. And to this day, like I still want to know. That's why I say like I'm not satisfied. I want to know the actual answers. Of course. To this stuff. Yeah. Oh, we all do. Well, I'm very hopeful in that there is like real research being done in a real attempt to test all these other vessels. And I think that would be wildly ambitious and really fantastic to see it all come. Like to find out what the results are. Maybe it's nothing. Maybe it's like rare. And there's very few of these things contained drugs. Maybe they all do. Which is crazy. That'd be the craziest. There's drugs everywhere. Yeah. I think that's probably the case. You know, we were very fortunate. I went to Chichen Itte once and I had this really good guide. It was a really interesting guy who was a local professor in Mexico. And he would give guides of the mind temples. And one of the things that he openly talked about was the psychedelic consumption. That there was some area of one of these temples where they would take this thing that had a very LSD-like properties to it. They didn't totally understand it. When I went to Chichen Itte, so we're talking about like 2000 and 3 or something like that. Okay. It was quite a while ago. And, you know, to have this guy explain that to me, it was really interesting. So I think it existed in so many. I think wherever they could find it, they took it. There was another, I hate to keep bouncing off all these headlines, but there was another headline from Peru around psychedelic-laced beer. Which you can see it in CNN, also in that geo, I think. If you look up psychedelic beer, Peru, it'll probably come up. And this is research. And this is also recent, just in the past, in the past couple of years. Wow. Like you would never, I mean, when I was researching from 2007, this book, which came out in 2020, never did I come across a headline psychedelic-laced beer. Right. If I had it, this would have been very relevant. Ancient Peruvian's party-d hard spiked their beer with hallucinogens to win friends. How do you know where they do it? Win friends. That's a leap. I don't think you needed that part. You know, lacing the beer served at their feast with hallucinogens may have helped age-improvium people known as the worry. Is that correct? Worry. Worry forage political alliances and expand their empire according to a new paper published in the journal antiquity. Recent excavations at a remote worry outpost called, I said that, quilt kompa. Quilt kompa. Quilt kompa. Quilt kompa. Quilt kompa. Quilt kompa. An earth seeds from the Vilca tree. Vilca. Yeah. Vilca. That can be used to produce a potent hallucinogenic drug. The authors think that the worry held one big final blowout before the site was abandoned. Hmm. Wild. So the Vilca is another nantra. Another nantra, either kolubrina or pedagrina. And that's been here a while. There's evidence of the use of that going back thousands of years. Just after Christopher Columbus actually came to the Caribbean, one of his associates writes about, it's called Yopo, Yopo or kohoba. That was in use around what is today like the DR and that part of the Caribbean. So it's been around a very long time. As soon as the colonists arrived to this part of the world, they found drugs. Wow. Yopo. Um, last but not least before we get out here. Yeah. One of the things I found out about you when we're on a little trip together is that you're interested in UFOs. Is a giant UFO behind here? Yeah. Like, well, anybody that's really fascinated with it, I have to bring it up. What's your take on all this UAP disclosure stuff and all these reports and these fighter pilots that are seeing these things and defy our understanding of propulsion systems that are currently available? What is your thoughts on these things? Um, there's probably something to it. I don't know what it is. I don't think anybody knows what it is. But I don't think you can contradict the pilots at this point. And, uh, friend of mine Leslie Cain has written a book about this, which is sort of a gold standard in the field. Um, I saw UFOs. And, uh, I don't think we can really ignore it. Uh, we were able to ignore it for many decades until relatively recently. And now you see congressional investigations and you see, uh, different witnesses coming forward. So, I think it's a gigantic mystery that kind of like these ancient mysteries that fascinate me can't really go ignored much longer. I'm not entirely sure what's being witnessed are like extraterrestrial craft, like physical things being pouted by like flesh and blood beings from, you know, vast stretches of the cosmos. I think, I've said this before on the record, I think there's something like far, far stranger about it. I don't know. I don't know what it is. But when I read like Jacques filet, for example, I love the hypothesis that these things, you know, fit better into mythology and folklore than they do into, into science and engineering journals. Uh, because there have been sightings for as long as we've been around. Um, and not just about things in the sky, but things that interact with us. And so, uh, passport to Magonia is a really cool book that talks about the interaction of, you know, what these could be today and what they looked like in the past. And, uh, I just think it's, it's a huge mystery. It's a huge mystery. That's really all you really can say, right? That's all anybody can really say. And, uh, except maybe some people that work for one of the defense department contractors that actually has a UFO story in the case somewhere. It's not a mystery. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. To them. Yeah. To them. To them. It's not a mystery. Yeah. But they're keeping their mouth shut. Unfortunately. Yeah. I was sitting at NASA taking an interest and, um, I think that the conversations in Washington are really wild. Yeah. Yeah. About the new, the new interest and this stuff. But I don't know something in me tell just something in me is not drawn to the engineering side of the conversation. I'm drawn, like with the ancient misters, I'm drawn to folklore and mythology. And I think that, you know, to understand the root of that phenomenon will tell us a lot about ourselves actually, which is why we talked about homo nalady. I know this, this ancient homo nan that I think that discovery tells us more about what it means to be human. You know, if it's on our brain size or we talked a lot about creativity, you know, like I think questions about the deep past forces to ask questions about who we are today. And I think this phenomenon, whatever it is, is the same. Like whether or not we're alone in the cosmos, that's one question. But like the relationship between these sightings and our psyches and consciousness, I think is a far more profound question. And again, some of the questions that the early researchers like J.L. and Heineck were asking about this phenomenon. He says something that like when the long awaited solution to the UFO problem comes, I think it will prove to be not just the next small step in the March of Science, but a mighty and unexpected quantum leap. To understand this issue is to understand something very profound. What's that with that? That's perfect. Brian, you're the man. I appreciate you very much. It was really cool hanging out with you in Greece and it's always great to have you on here. And your book is now available on paperback. I'm assuming they made a lot of copies this time. We will find out. We will find out. Okay. Thank you very much. Bye, everybody.