This is a great collection. Yeah, these are all from Plastis out look even the sunglasses come off on Wow. Yeah It's pretty dope John Wick and his pit bull which is awesome. Yeah, I got Kanye Bruce Lee But the glasses of biggie is amazing. I know this guy's amazing Shout out to the phone from Plastis out. He makes him dope shit Yeah, he's amazing Not as amazing as that shit you did in the green room, man David just did some card wizardry that It's one thing that you see when you see that shit on TV like nah, if I was there I'd see some shit I know what's going on, but when you see it in real life you're like What is happening here? Yeah, it's way better like in person than all. Oh, yeah Well at the end I don't give it any way, but the end And literally a man is holding one of his wrists and another guy's holding the other wrist and he still does the car trick And we still can't figure out what happened When did you get started? I hold you. Um, so I was about five years old when I started playing with cards But I didn't know what what they were for really so I just had a deck of cards that I carried everywhere But I liked the way it felt, you know just like it felt like something cool So eventually a librarian was like oh we got this like magic Self-working card trick book in do you want to learn something and I was like yeah I wish of course and she shows me the m- that's silly self-working mathematical trick That's a long process to do, but it's still a cool outcome like oh I found your card, right? And my mother I used to wait for her at the library and she'd come get me when she was done and When she came I said can I show you this trick and the librarian was excited for me to do it to her Which is what I do to my friends kids I teach them a trick and make them really good at it and then I'm so excited to see them do it, you know, right? Okay, so my mother comes I do the trick and my mom goes crazy Like it was a best thing ever And so like but that began the love of wanting to learn new tricks because I wanted to keep making her you know react You know, so that was basically the fundamental start of it and then also she would take me to Kony Island all the time and You know on the site on the boardwalk there. There's those weird freak show performance So I'd watch those guys and to me it was all like magical so that that was kind of the beginning of it So isn't it funny how one positive experience when you're young can ignite this chain of events? Yeah, that changes your whole life By the way and also so then the librarian when I would come She would give me books and I would start looking at that little magic section that was between like games and puzzles I thought I always wished magic would be like not there like it should be like an art or so, you know Just it was always like when you want a magic book. It's always like that silly like kids jokey thing But there's like so in that section I Pulled out a book and I was like six years old and I see a guy chain to the side of a building staring out looking like death is upon it And that was who Deeley and I didn't know anything about what that old man I looked through the pictures and he was hanging upside down and stuff like that But when I went to sleep I would have these dreams of this guy chain to the side of a building and that began my Curiosity and love of Houdini and then that began my curiosity of like Not just like the magic trick stuff, but like this stuff. That's to me. It's more like real Yeah, how do those two worlds collide? Because some of the things you're doing they're they're just insane endurance and mental exercises and then other things you're doing are what you would consider magic Right, so so I love both Separately like independently like I always love like I had a karate teacher at the YMCA that used to make us all run barefoot The snow and the winter and Brooklyn and they'll all the kids away. You know, we're young we're like six seven All the kids like ah, you know in a afraid they were gonna cut their feet on glass or whatever And I would run in it and I felt like I could do this because I wasn't good at other things physically like I was born my feet turned in and stuff like that So I felt like this I could do these things so then I learned how to hold my breath and the reason I learned how to hold my breath was simply because I was on the swim team at the Y also and the other kids would swim back and forth And they destroy me because my feet didn't function perfectly well and what I learned is that if I didn't breathe If I just swam it would save me time because I didn't have to move my head dip it out and you know Hmm, right, so I would just swim and the coach would gallant me But suddenly I was no longer in last place I was like now second and sometimes first and that began my like oh god You can actually do what the coach doesn't think is possible you could swim there and back without breathing and then the older kids would come to see me do that And I would like challenge them. I'd be like Let's see you could stay under the longest and you can go up and down five times I didn't understand the physiology of it that like going up and down doesn't help It's more effective to just sit through the pain or just kind of chill But I would just sit there and they'd go up and come back down at which makes it worse That they'd be out and I just make it worse because The breath holding thing is all about like a CO2 buildup in your bloodstream and it's about a tolerance level to it So if you relax and efficiently keep your oxygen and not make this CO2 buildup more extreme You can actually hold more efficiently. So when you have that feeling everybody has that feeling where you need to breathe Yeah, it's not an O2 deprivation It's a trigger from a CO2 buildup which is giving you an alert that for example in 20 minutes from now you will not recover and I didn't believe that either some magician friend of mine who's amazing and and one of my like heroes in life He He told me a story as I was doing like buried a live only saying he said you know You know the Navy seals, you know they black them out underwater So they're not afraid of drowning and I'm like that can't no way like because it seems so abstract to me, you know So but it stuck in my brain and then when I wanted to do the water tank stunt and I started learning about free diving and stuff like that I suddenly Realize blacking out is pretty straightforward like you black out and then you get your head above the water and if you supervise You're fine So when I went to San Diego at the seals I watched what they do and I actually did it But I didn't black out I went back and forth a few times and pulled But they have that viewing pool and they rope the seals up to some 45 pound weights And they have to walk across the bottom of the pool and the instructors are swimming above them and When the when the seals black out they cut the rope bring them off to the top and they're fine But what that teaches you is that you do not need to worry about being underwater because if you're with a team And by the way, I know they should try this, you know There is extreme dangers to shallow water blackouts which lead to death but if you are in Somebody that's training and you have a team and you want to push it as soon as you black out It's like getting knocked out. It's but it feels better. It's not like getting knocked out with a punch It's like you get to know it's your four no, but no, yeah But it choked out as you for right yeah exactly except this one's even better and then you have all these dreams No, no It's not exciting That part of it whenever I wake up from a black out I'm like Whoa, that's how people wake up when they get choked up really the same Yeah, when people get choked out they wake up almost like they were dreaming like sometimes they think they're at a disco Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's amazing They're like wow, and it's not the best thing in the world for you, but it's way better for you than getting knocked unconscious Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah choked out. Yeah, choked out. It's just it just shuts off the blood to the blank Right right in the brain shuts off. Yeah, and then it comes back online But there's no trauma right yeah, but it's not yeah, so it's like a shit blacking out under blacking out under water thing Probably not a good idea to do too many times though, right? No, you could do it I mean, I've blacked out underwater a lot. I mean By the way, so okay times I don't know like between 20 to 30 I mean I thought wow by the way You guys are talking about me on the thing about the breath hold there. Yeah, yeah one time I went 20 minutes and two seconds I almost did what you were talking about the length of a show But I did 20 minutes and two seconds and I had telemetry there and I had pulmonary experts and everything like that and my heart rate dropped to eight beats per minute Holy a shape and they pulled me up because they were freaked out. Yeah, but back to what I was saying is the reason besides a Navy SEAL story that I knew that it was it made sense was because you hear about the kids in the news like in 1984 whatever It was a kid was under an icy river for 45 minutes. Yeah With Nothing blacked out unconscious underwater for 45 minutes They rescue him out pull him back recover him and full recovery So there's something that the body does that we don't understand it But if you actualize so because he blacked out because it was so called the blood shunting occurred We're all like the same as when you get called the blood rushes away from the extremities and protects the vital organs and Because he didn't inhale the water because it was completely out of it When they recovered him they didn't even have to get water out of his lungs and he was perfectly fine Wow So but but that just shows you that there's like certain levels of of what the body can tolerate that We have no idea so you In learning how to swim and learning how to go all the way back and forth and holding your breath This started this idea of holding your breath for an extreme long period of time Like what had been the record before you had like 20 minutes and how many seconds two seconds? Yeah, that's what you did Yeah, but that's what you done So what have you done before that would have been your record? Okay, so when I was a kid I heard as I start reading about Houdini his like proud record of his lifetime And he's the underwater escape king for a hundred years ago and he had he was around the best swimmers and he had access So and he got up to three and a half minutes. So by the time I was like Teenage Earl Earl Lee teenager. I got to three and a half minutes Did you think that that was a barrier that couldn't be crossed? Well, I came I blacked out as I came out But I didn't know what that all meant right so I blacked out was that size like okay that three 30 seems like the edge but then When I started working on the actual concept of like how long can you hold your breath for then I started looking into and I'm like Oh, wow, there's like people that can do five minutes six minutes seven minutes and then there was a hypothetical record of of a hypothetical 13 minute record but no evidence of it and that was on puro two So it was a hypothetical puro two record of 32 when you say on puro two was here It that flushes everything out so you start to make sure to yeah, hold on a puro two And then I go I'd heard really hard on puro two so Which is like hypervent which gets rid of the CO2 and gives you more room for oxygen and by the way I just went up to 25,000 feet in an airplane ascending at 500 feet per minute Doors open and everything no oxygen and I was with Luke akins who jumped from 25,000 feet with no parachute land in that he was with me and two other the pilot and two other guys We just right under 25. This is 24 seven with it and um He's I said let's see who goes hypoxic first right so no no no But we had no, but you have to take the octa the O2 you have to take the O2 monitors if the Be on them right so And I was already in a hypo barric chamber with the FA at Oklahoma City and I started purging just to see what it would do and my Level my oxygen level shot up which nobody believes is possible So I get into the airplane and we put the monitors on and everybody's around the same I was actually lower than Luke. I was like at 90 whatever five 96 He was at like 90 70s like oh, what a good you know jokey really and as soon as we cross 15,000 feet His slowly is starting to come down and I start doing the breathing technique the Purging out like I said right my oxygen levels and we filmed all this shot up to 98 and then 99% is I went up to 23 plus Thousand feet now these guys think I'm a magician so they're like yeah I ha like fake dudes that's what he wrote other paper next to the levels because he was recording it So I took his monitor off of his finger and he took mine I put his monitor on my finger put mine on his Bang his was dropping around 70 and mine was 98 99 Then I switch with they I switch with everybody on the plane and the oxygen levels with the breathing all the way up to that altitude And I'm not recommending this because I haven't tested enough in it, but they did stay up at 98 99 And so my evidence for that was you hear about all the sharpest it go up to the top of Everest up to 29,000 feet And they're not bringing oxygen. I get it. They're acclimating six, but they're still at 29 plus thousand feet so they're doing something that's allowing them to rewire their ability to not go hypoxic So this breathing technique you're essentially exhaling more than you're breathing in so you're breathing a small amount of And And then I fill up everything Full but I mean full like top the bottom hold for a second and then Exhale slowly and I like for example if when when we're done here if you have 20 minutes I'll get you up to four and a half minute breath hold in 20 minutes And this is just through these breathing techniques when we're done with this I'll show you how to do it and you will get up to four plus minutes For sure and how did you so you you've learned that you could go three and a half minutes or three minutes plus right and And black out and then How did you have it in your head that you were going to eventually get to 20 minutes? Okay, so you really want to hear Yeah, yeah, it's a long. Oh, let's go. Okay, and I forget where I'm going. Okay. Okay. Okay. See you might after a mind me where we're going. Yeah, okay I know the process because you know, but it's a long position by trade Well, but first of all I like Houdini so I love magic But I like Houdini and Houdini was like king of yours as well But he's a guy that's doing real thing right and then I like guys that are like as I go I go to the museum abroad casting because there was no To or whatever so I'd look at like these Matt you search magic and I'd find like guys It would like drink a gown of water drink a leader of kerosene He would float all the kerosene on top of the water and then he would spit out kerosene out of his mouth look like a human dragon and then put the fire out with a gallon of water So it's that it is magic, but it's a it's art. It's mind blowing. Yeah, it's an art It's a performance piece. It's not like it's incredible now look there's guys that are card guys that are like that also Like lots lots of people I love and they do the cards in a way that's like But but that act to me was what pressed a button. It was like whoa Like how is he converting his body to do a trick? And there's a guy today performing called Stevie Star who's called the human regurgitator, but he swallows crazy things Like so he combines magic with his ability. So he went on Jay Leno I think was that or Carson was He takes a you know the little film canisters that used to drink So he puts a film canister empty. I close is it for the you know You get the 35 and then he goes and then he swallows it so it's in it's yeah It's gone and he goes like that's gone then He would take a bunch of water Drink that and then there'd be a cup with a goldfish in it Drinks the cup in the goldfish and then he have Jay Leno sign the cap the the lid thing to the Thing with the piece of tape and sign it right then he'd take that go Everything is gone then he does these weird sounds and movements, which is part of his show right and then he brings it up spits it out and The film canister is sealed and it is the water and the fish and it's sealed with the signature So to me that's like the coolest magic because you take Because when you see a trick you know like oh, that's cool, but it's a trick So it's like you're being removed from being able to like absorb But when you see somewhere somebody's doing something crazy and it seems like a trick But it's also like wait This is real because he's really doing this. It's just way more exciting. You know I understand I understand it's just Do you know how he did that one? Yeah, I talked to him all the time. Yeah, I love Steve Stevie Star You know how it was done, but you can't reveal that right? Yeah, and okay There's another guy Tom Molika who he passed away and he was This guy he's the first magician ever so he did a simple cartridge and I was crying I said good tears. I was like oh my god But and he passed away and I filmed that and and he's I'm gonna do a really amazing piece of that because he is incredible But he also was on like Johnny Carson and he shows what he would do Is he would take a pack of cigarettes throw them into his mouth one at a time like them on fire Bring them back out and then throw them into his mouth one at a time eat all the cigarettes. Yes There he is And watch he's like wow that's great how fast they pull the above It's not day. It's young Jamie. Oh, it's you. He's a wizard. Yeah He's a wizard. Yeah, look, so he takes by the way this act killed him So that's how dedicated to his crafty is really yeah, look He he was eating a pack of cigarettes every night on stage And wallows one like cigarette yeah, and then but wait he also throws him into his mouth like oh my god So now he's chewing him what was he chewing? He's just amazing, but holy yeah, I get to where he's throwing them into his mouth too. Oh Boy, yes, he throws him into his mouth one at a time there lit. He chews them up swallows and his mouth is Look at the lady. She's so what the fuck am I doing here? Oh my god. Look at that stack He's mouth and then look the whole thing goes in by the way He also throws him one at a time does all that puts a paper in oh Jesus Christ and swallows it all oh Oh my god. Yep. He's so how did this kill him? Every single night just one there's a night at a bar doing cigarettes in your mouth on fire eating the swallow a good boy Dibody die for cancer. Yeah, yeah boy Yeah, but wait so so he spits them out eventually or he just swallows him I'm not gonna give away his genius In the video to the hour come out. No, no, no, you got just yeah. Yeah. Yeah. See that's the thing. It's like I guess is a guy that died for his art Yeah, yeah, wow, but then so another the guy was talking about that's like my favorite card Magic the guy that taught that showed me the Navy seal but just an amazing jig is a library He um, he's like this genius that if he came here But he never would because he would never show anybody anything But if he did and he showed you a couple of moves like the first move He showed me was actually a card move called ascension where he makes the card float right through the deck and like the greatest Magician of all time like card magician said it was one of the greatest tricks ever done You won't be able to find it anywhere because it's not but but he um He only does it to a couple of magicians so he performs for like, you know a handful of his friends He shows the move and it's mind-blowing and luckily he showed me so far as young but He'll never ever perform. He's like does it paint or paint so he can show people it does a paint or paint to paint But whenever you're on the phone with him. You just hear cards like he's like And he's doing it. He's doing I'm telling you like 13 day long 13 hours a day He's doing card moves alone and I said but as like Bill, what do you do? Do you like do the trick to yourself? He doesn't believe that it's not to him. It's not a performance to him It's it's just about the technical love and feel of that Well, that's not there's a Japanese phrase for that about doing something Over and over and over and over the exact same thing over and over again to you achieve a level of perfection That is almost physically unattainable to mere mortals By pass what a person thinks the the body would be capable of doing. Yep. Yeah That's that's that's what he's doing. That is the thing or if you can You know James Nester is yeah, of course breath of a d yes. Yeah, deep is amazing. I don't know deep But I've got a book for a thief. Yeah breath is the one that I read and I had him on the podcast He's an amazing. We're talking about this month that was literally meditating and doing breathing exercises all day long for 30 years And could do these insane things with his body like very the temperature from one hand to another change the blood flow Change it literally from one finger to the other and that yeah You're the only way you could get to that place is you have to be that guy sits in a cave and does breath work All day long for 30 years and most people just aren't willing to do that But if you do do that there are some levels That you can reach that are just unattainable to a normal person and even If you would talk to but I agree with them It isn't doctor. No, but it isn't a normal people because When somebody gets paralyzed or something right I've seen people that the doctors say you're done. You have no shot and they spend all day of every single waking moment trying to get like a little Just like a tiny bit of movement in their little toe and eventually if they do what you're saying if you yes So it it is that yeah, it is that it's but most people are not willing to get to that place Most people are not going to sit there shuffling car 30 hours a day like your friend Yeah, but there's people that can do that like when I was watching you move the cards around It's interesting like you ever watch a movie where a guy smoking a cigarette You know that kind of doesn't really smoke you can kind of tell by the way he's holding the cigarette You're moving these cards around like your your edge detection like you're understanding of where the edge Very interesting to watch your fingers move because they're so they're so educated You know because of all the commentary that I do with martial arts and my years in martial arts I'm fascinated by how different people move and they do the same thing It looks different when other people do it There's certain people that'll throw a punch and you just welcome your your Jesus There's something about the fluidity of the motion that's stunning even to this day And that was this what I was watching you move your fingers and watching you move the cards like this motherfucker Shuffle a lot of cards there's a weirdness to the movement of your hands But I think it's what you're saying. It's like the punch thing. It's like there's yes. Yeah, yeah, but it's uh it is But it's it's the You the mind forces the body into moving over and over and over again You know you do it to this level of perfection That you for a person like me who doesn't know anything about cards. I don't know anything about card tricks I don't know how they work. I can't shuffle if you watch me shuffle you fucking laugh at me But I watch your your hand movements. I'm like oh That's amazing It's amazing, but now there's guys that I'm around that I wouldn't even pull a deck of cards out of my pocket if they're near me Because they're that guy that does it 13 hours. Yeah, like like like the guy Just that's fascinating though, but yeah, but there's also different aspects to it So like you know, there's also guys I'm not gonna go into details. Okay, but I met I think I shouldn't even say this, but it's fine because it's fine So I met a kid once Who moved to Las Vegas when he was this is a crazy story to tell Damn But it's a good story. Okay. I won't go into details. So he moved to Las Vegas when he was 12 He moved there because he wanted to meet a specific person who is considered the best card sheet ever Meaning the guy this is a guy that the reason that Vegas has Those instead of like the dealer peaking the The down card they have to put it into a machine and push a button He's the guy that the movie casino was built around with the computer in the shoot like he was the the best Card sheet ever But among magicians he's like a phenomenon because he's working on moves not to entertain anybody He's working on move, so he doesn't get his hands smashed up against the wall opinions Right, so he's working on moves, so he's not gonna get killed survival. Yes. Yeah, so he's right. So This kid at the age of 12 knows about him moves to Las Vegas and buys a crap stable He puts the crap stable Tim and his mom, right? As my the single mother and him they live in this small apartment very close to The man I was talking about and this kid throws dice 15 hours a day on this crap stable by the way, they're a little bit as like under the tape You know, I mean it's a small space and it's a real crap stable like a nice one The only thing he does is repetitiously throw this and he can helicopter spin the dice So you can't see them doing this if such force going around this way that when they hit the wall One die won't break the number and he can throw it exactly to this part of the of the table Missing this from across the table so that one day locks and every time he can guarantee that number He did that every day for almost a decade until he could throw dice better than any other human being in the world Then he went and got a job at one of the casinos that text for car cheats and worked in the craps tables It's all he did and as soon as he turned 21 He went out travels the world and wins the exact amount of money that he wouldn't playing craps where you're not detected But but you can what is exact amount? I mean I'm under you know 100 million. Yeah, I probably a few million a year. So I'm saying it's not like he's going in and getting ready It's it's very smart and structured Yeah, and that's only different places And he can throw dice like I've never seen anybody throw dice It's crazy. I know that they take people that are really good at cards like my friend Dana White has been barred from casinos Because he wins at black. He's probably just counting. I don't know what he's doing. Yeah He's counting but they've kicked him out of casinos because he's won a lot of money But he's also lost a lot of money Which is bizarre to me that you can go to a place and do really well And they're like you're doing too well. You got to get out of here Well, they also it says mine everything we have the right to refuse anybody Which is important because do they do that with dice is the question? Get to how they would do that with cars. I don't want to hear it. Thanks. Yeah, but this isn't me doing magic This is luck. Okay. Okay. So I don't believe it. It is. I don't like the way you passed But it's a series. I know but I'm saying that because I'm trying to be convincing. Okay. Okay So because I'm telling the truth, but anyway, I go to the palms. You know the Okay, and um they had a bet on the crap stable called the fire bet and it was like a Game where you have to hit all the numbers opening clothes without butt-crapping out so when I walk up to the table right away The the pit boss and everybody to make a big deal like you can't touch the dice and they're like I said You can call up. I can touch the dice and because you know they invite me so I can touch the dice and uh Because I wanted to throw right. I don't want to just gamble on a rant so anyway I you know because even though I'm not cheating. I still feel like you know Maybe I'll get it. I have a little bit of an ability that's given you know what I mean Not a cheating ability, but maybe I'm a little better than a random person right go so The pit ball they make a joke and then the woman papal scum's actually says well If you take your shirt off, I'll let you throw the dice joking. All right So anyway, what I do is I bet for everybody at the end this I go to the low stakes table always so the high stakes It's super ball team right over there and they're like aah, they're all crazy, right? Like all excited with these big bets. I'll hear with this table. We all have a little bit Did I say let's put a fire bit down for everybody so I put the fire bit down for every single person at the table including the dealers the pit I mean the pit ball, you know the You know with the dice and uh I'm throwing the dice throwing the dice This goes on for two and a half hours. I keep throwing the dice I didn't hit us. I didn't crap out. I hit sevens in between each number I don't know on craps work so you have to roll like a for two and a half hours. I keep throwing the dice. I didn't hit us. I didn't crap out. I hit sevens in between each number, which you can't craft for. So you have to roll like a five, let's say. And then I'm like, oh, no, I need to roll another five, which is statistically much more difficult than a seven because seven is the most common number to come up. So if you roll a five, you're like, uh, oh, that's hard because you can only get a two, three or three, two on both dice or a one, four or four, one. So you have a four out of 36. So it's a one and nine. So you're probably going to crap out before you get the number. That's why the game is to their favor. So I'm going to dice and it's two and a half hours later. And they stop everything. And they're like, you're fire, but just hit. And the table goes, what does that mean? They go, well, you all just one, like 10 grand each. And they'll go, everybody's go, they gave you the taste of everybody's gone nuts. And we hit the fire, but would save now remove from the piles, by the way. But it was, it was a pretty unheard of like the odds of hitting that bet is pretty rare. But it's just luck. Nobody should hit that bet. I mean, statistically, it's unlikely. And I wasn't cheating. So yeah. So do they, but the question is for sometimes I'm lucky with dice, but I'm not, but I can tell you I would be if I was great with dice. I tell you, it was great. By the way, I actually have a die on why do you want to be the story for this reason? Do you have a die? Do you have you practice with dice? No, yes, but I'm terrible at it. So I do have a die. But it does make sense that if you look at what that is, that that's a physical thing. And then if you develop a touch, you develop a feel, you do something over and over and over again. Well, this is different. But here, look, take the die. Okay. And can you like put it between your hand or whatever? Like, and can you mix it like that? And then squeeze it when you're done. Or keep it hidden, but put it on the table, but make sure you can't see it. And I can't see it. You greet like no one could see that. Right? No, you sure. 100%. Do you want to do it again? Try it again. Just no, but because it could be weighted. So just or you're done. You're good. You're good. Yeah. Okay. Say a number between one and six, like pick a number of six. Okay. That five is what I said on the crops table, right? But I already know that it's a four. And the five is here, basically. How do you know that? That's uncomfortable. You do that again? Probably not. You know, but stop whatever you want. Yeah, because it could be like a weighted die. By the way, that's how people cheat with dices. They also take the die and they flip it and they want it to be, you know, so it's like you throw the numbers. So you said you wanted a five, right? Yeah. Good. Yeah. It's five. You can't have boot away from me. Fuck is that. That's so weird. There must be a rush for you though, just to blow people's minds like that all the time. But see, so it's not, you know, I don't think of it. So what happens is the digital fixation part of like the love of just like learning something new and exciting. That's like really the stimulus is like that that fixation almost. It's like the meditative thing that you're talking about. But but as a magician that is performing and trying to make tv shows, it's really difficult because you have to like keep coming up with new things, which is that's hard to do. How did you first get on television? How'd you convince someone to let you try this on television? Well, it was so back in those days, the only magic that you could see. And like I said, it was pre you couldn't go watch it or get it or any says, no way to see magic. And if you were me with a single mother and Brooklyn or whatever, how are you going to go? There's no magic show. I never went to a magic show. So what happened was all those worlds greatest tv specials were playing and they were called worlds greatest man and I would watch them and they were like the opposite of that. They were like not that they were like hard to watch, you know, it was like glossy big, like dynamic and illusion is so far away from the whole thing. So I'm like, there's nothing magical about all this. And then I'm so okay. I think about it and I'm like, I go up so but I'm doing magic everywhere all the time. So one of the ways I'm making money is I'm going into those fancy restaurants in New York City like those upper park Avenue. And I do magic to the, you know, to the manager. It's this. And I'm like, if, uh, can I do magic to the table? And it's like what I did to you there? Like do the magic. Oh, that's great. As I could I do magic to people eating and I won't ask them for anything. I bought like a nice suit at Century 21, like a hundred dollar jacket was tat, you know, but anyways, I go up to these tables and that's a hard situation because it's very difficult to approach people that do not want you near them and try to figure out how to win with magic. It's a comp and it's like even on the street wherever you do it, it's like a complicated scenario. Once a camera comes up, it changes it because now they're like, oh, yes, a camera. It's fine. Right. But you'd have to walk up to a table of a people, a bunch like us were sitting there and some like, you know, sketchy magician kid, right, comes up to us. Like, hey, can I show you a car trick? And you and I are going to be like, nice to them probably, but not really whatever out. So what I had to learn quickly was like little things that are so important, like distance, like how close should you be to the table or how far? And then you start to really understand the psychology of the magic is way more important than the tricks, right? So if you're too close, you're like over, they don't want you near them. So you're like, they're like, no, thank you. If you're too far away, it's easy for them to say no, thank you, right? So there's like a balancing point just on where you stand and then who you do the first trick to and then what the first trick is. And so by doing all of this, I started to really figure out how to get reactions from anybody really fast. So I could walk up to anybody anywhere and just do magic. Like, one time I was in central booking because I jumped the subway thing and they were sweeping everybody up. And there was four guys sitting in the middle playing spades, the only other like kid that looked like me that was in there got the shit kicked out of him, right? And I'm like, I'm going to get my ass kicked, right? Because I was with a button up shirt like, you know, anyway, so the guys are sitting in the middle that were playing spades. I grabbed it. I go, let me show you guys something. I take, they'll come on, I grab the deck of cards and I start doing magic to the fourth toughest looking guys in the cell, right? Within two minutes, they're erupting. And once they're erupting, the whole everybody, because it's central books are moved here. Everybody standing around going, nuts, and then all of a sudden, the guards are there. And now everybody's watching together. And I'm this is what the magic show needs to be. Whether you're like here at this, whether you're this, that, whether you're young, old witch, poor black, whatever, everyone's the shit. No, no, everybody's got a good side. Like there's, I want to show the people are all the same, you know, like sure there's some that are horrific and do horrible. But at the core of everybody, there's like an innocent kid somewhere, maybe you got really far lost and magic just pulls that out of people. You know? And that's why. And the people say, oh, well, how could you do magic? I do magic to anybody, because whether it's like visiting underage kids in prison that like, you don't know what happens, them. And you see them come walking up with their eyes down. They don't want to look at you because they don't like anybody there that's authority, right? That's a ruin their life. And then as soon as you do these tricks, suddenly they're like, little happy sweet kids. You get up, you get that. And that's what, and that's magic that originally to my mom, like I would do it to her and she'd be like reacting. And even if she had a terrible day, you know, she was working three jobs, it was a, this made her happy. Wow. That's a, that's a cool origin story. And it makes sense that that feeling that you get, like when you show some minute, like in like the cartridge, you did in the other room. And everybody was like, oh, that, that, oh, the, oh that you get out of people, that, that rush. That's, that, that is because at that moment, no one's thinking of anything at that moment, they're like, what the fuck? How did you what? Oh, and by the way, I've walked many times when people were fighting about to erupt into big fights, I walked into the middle of those fights started to do magic in those fights. No, I know, and then the fights were done. Done. Everybody's like, what? Do you want to hear the funniest, not magical magic? Sure. Sure. Okay. So after the TV show kind of stuff like that, I get more known. By the way, it's a world's crazy. But then I was like, okay, let me do the opposite of that. So I called it street magic. Because I was trying to come up the lowest name. Like I was trying to come up with expectations as low as possible. Right. Because we're all greatest. So I do do like that. So I cover, I'll do like card tricks. Right. But anyway, so I'm like driving with my friend that is, uh, what are those, those smart cars in New York. And it's like the coldest day in New York. It's like for reason, like a February, like 12 degrees out type situation. And um, we're stuck at a red light. And there's a car with these four people outside of it. And there you could see they're like struggling like they couldn't get the door open. So they realized they and they didn't, they lost their keys. They couldn't figure it out. They couldn't get into their car. Right. But I know that that's not what's going on. Like it's freezing. So I understand this cycle Doug stopped one second. And I walk up next to these, this group, walk up to the car, pull the door open. But I like it made it look like I'm just pulling it. But I was giving it for the door opens up. But it looks like I did nothing. It did I get back at the car, leave it. I think that's the best trick ever did. It was just opening up a door at a frozen night. Because I knew that it was just frozen. But that's the same as what magic is. Right. It's like, and went and so that and the whole so that there's a book called magic and showmanship is all about like what makes magic effective. And it's called like the ham sandwich. He says if you just said reach near pocket right now there's a ham sandwich. That's a good trick. But if you were like, man, I'm hungry. I would love a hand sandwich and I had already put it in on like reach near pocket. And then there's that's real magic. So it's just context. That's where it's so baffling. Because then when people walk away, how the fuck did he know I was going to say ham sandwich? Like the folded car that you somehow another shoved into Jeff's wrist into his blow is watch. We're all like, okay, what? I mean, I know there's something to it. I don't know what you're doing. but that oh, the result to oh is pretty poepet nominal. But in that moment, no one's thinking of anything else. Yeah. But it's sure. No, but there's also a lot of people that are trying to figure it out. Yeah. But they're still going, oh, they're not thick. Even if they're trying to figure it out, they're not thinking of anything other than that trick. That moment. Something. Yeah. It might be trying to figure it out, but they're still they're not thinking about, oh, I gotta feed the dog. They're thinking about that. And they're like good friends of mine. They're bad. They're like, I can see the normal. But that's it. Yeah, we can all get to a custom to things. Yeah. So you first get on television. You first do these things and then your magic evolves and your magic goes from being just magic to some of the more insane things you've done, like standing in a block of ice for how long did you do it for 70, 63 hours, 63 hours? I'm always late. So I showed up late. So I missed like what I the length of time I was supposed to do. So that's all. But I'm always late. I made it here on time. They didn't I? You were early. Yeah. Yeah. Perfect. But I wrote the motorcycle here was the lying because I had to make I wanted to be in time. So you were on time. Yeah. Um, the ice thing, why would made you decide to stand in a block of ice, 60 plus hours? Well, so I'll tell you that the so you were saying, how do you go from the magic tricks like to the stream physical endurance and so my deanie and all that stuff. And then there's a poster of who deanie that I loved where he was he was buried alive. But he never did the stunt. He died before he got to do, but he was going to buried alive underground on a coffin. So I I stare at I love that poster since I was a kid. It's like in the magic books, you see that poster. Yeah. And anyway, so Bill again, the guy told you about Bill Kalouse comes up to me and he's like, what about this? And he shows me an image of a in the infocure that was buried alive for a month. He's like, what if you pretend to be buried alive in Central Park will sneak you out and you'll come back a month later? And I was like, I always wanted to do like, who deanie like things, but I never wanted to copy. But that one he never did. So I was kind of like, well, that's interesting. But what if instead of doing it the way he did it, what if I did it and everybody could see that I was buried alive? So what if I was really just buried alive? Like it can't be that hard. He's like, yeah, you can't do that. And I was staying at his place. So we got a coffin from Queens where actually who deanie was buried at bought a coffin. We brought it back to his house and then I would just practice sleeping in the coffin and suddenly I was, yep, I know that then suddenly I realize you don't eat food. And then if you have a little thing to go to back, then I did four days like nothing. So I'm like, okay, I can do a week. And that was it. And then then I pushed the idea of doing the buried alive and convinced people that let me do it publicly. And what's funny is like firemen and stuff like would come to the start in the middle of the night. And they would shine like holograms at me and their lights and stuff. And they, that's the ice. But and then they would assume that I wasn't actually in there. Okay. So here it's a back to this one. Well, let's go, but let's let's not jump around. So the buried alive thing where did you do it physically? Where? That was in New York City on the west side. Trump had like this bunch of properties that it was developing. And I was like, I want to be buried alive on one of your properties. Is that possible? He's like, sure. He's a sepneest driver and I went around and that's where I did my first thought. And how could they see you though? And then Jimmy, I'm not aware of this one. I do. Who'd like to. Oh, there it is. Yeah. So it was see through. But right now, and then we put six tons of water on top of it. So that's basically it. And then so is there. And how are you getting oxygen? That's true. Well, there was all see those two big holes. So the oxygen was being see the holes above my head. So the air was being blown in and out. But it's pretty straightforward. Like that one's not to mean not that impressive. Like if I said to you just laid there for a week. Yeah. That you know what the hard part part. I mean, sure, you body and the loser and I was like, but the hard part of it is um, and you wouldn't, you would never anticipate this being the hard part. But if you're not used to like peeing while standing in front of lots of people staring at you, it's actually really hard. So so I'd be very alive and I had the truckers to bond and all that stuff, which is like a con with a cat or whatever. And um, and people are there the whole time. Like it suddenly became like an event. And so there was never like, and I was, they were like, oh, we'll cover it. So no one can see them. Like no, then people are going to think I'm sneaking in and out. So I had to learn. So I would close my eyes like when you were a kid sleeping, you'd have those dreams. I'd have matches. It would take me hours and I'd finally be able to pee. Right. But that and by the way, it didn't eat for a few weeks before. So I had no food. So that was the other. Wasn't it? But um, what happened by midway through the stunt, I'd be waving and smiling and pee. And it was like, nothing. You know, these are things that you don't consider when you're practicing in your often in your house. So you didn't eat for how long two weeks before? Yeah. Yeah. But I was always into fasting. I read Siddhartha as a kid and I had done like a week with just water and you know, knew all that knew the bodies really good with that. So you were comfortable with the fact that you were able to fast and that that wouldn't be an issue. Yeah. And you were comfortable with the fact that you were getting air and where you drinking water from? How you getting water? I had like a little bit of water in there that I could suck through a thing like that. And that was fine. It was like, it was enough. How much water you think you drank over the week that you were in there? I don't know. They always say it was like just a little bit, but it was a good amount. It was like, I don't know, probably like the read leaders a day or something. Oh, okay. Yeah. They say he did tablespoons or but no, it was it was like a normal amount. So in that by the way, I did 44 days with nothing but water and I did nothing but pure H2O. So it's not even like it had minerals in it and body was full recovery. And my starvation expert was like one of the top guys in the world in London. My doctor at the end thought that I was cheating. So they put me on and I just dilled water. It was a company called H2O and their things. It's just pure. Yeah. Exactly. Just right. So I had right, which, which is irrelevant by the way. But so I had nothing but pure H2O for 44 days, lost 60 pounds, BM, biomass index dropped, 63%, yeah, people are concerned. That's what I was getting at. No, no, it wasn't good. But doctor thought I was cheating because he's in the kitchen. By the way, my friends that were with me that are, you know, magicians and the guy building, they're like, you need to take these vitamins and they hand me a handful of sugary vitamins. And I'm like, no, it's just because I'm going to do it. I want to like actually do it, right? And if I would have taken those vitamins, I feel like my metabolism wouldn't have gone into starvation. And I might have had a reversible damage from it. So the fact that I actually did it, I went into starvation, the body protects itself. But what I was saying is the starvation expert that now I have a paper published in the New England Journal Medicine with them, which I'm pretty proud of it. But he, he didn't believe me. So he put me on an IV and right away, the phosphate levels reacted. And I almost went into shock. So I almost actually did die when they refit fed me. So his paper is called the refeating syndrome. They say like after World War II, when they rescued the from the from the camps, the Jews and everybody was starving in the camps. And a lot of soldiers gave them like candy bars and stuff and all of a sudden, their systems went into shock and they died from not being refed the right way. So what is the correct way to refeed someone if they have any in the levels? It slowly bring them back so that you don't have what happened to me, which is phosphate levels go all crazy. So very small amounts of food. Yeah. But then two days later, I somebody sent me a trunk from Harrods full of food in ludded like a friend and I was giving it to all the nurses and doctors because I knew I should eat it and I was trying to write the like in the middle of the night. I woke up and had like a bag of potato chips. And then I'm a bag of a creature and I was wrecked. It was like the most piece. I also didn't go to the bathroom for a month and a half. What? Think about that. So how long does it take you to recover from one of these things? That one, I feel like, I never fully recovered from, but I don't know. I wouldn't recommend anybody does that. Like it goes like super, super long with no food. But by the way, so the recovery you don't think you ever recovered. My body always goes like this now. It's always confused when I like train and I go up down really quickly, easy and it was since that. Because you're about to freak down because I want to see a little. I feel like that. Yeah. But there's no way to prove that. But that's a common thing though with people who cut weight for fights. Really? Yeah. They get to a certain point. They have kidney failure. Yeah. And then they're. Exactly. That's what happened to me. And I keep having problems with my kidneys. Yeah. Yeah. And I have a spot on my kidney right now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a real common one with guys. Daniel Carmi. I actually had to drop out of the Olympics because of that. I didn't know that. That's kidney's failed. Yeah. Kidney failure is a big one with fighters. Kidney stones too for a lot of guys in Conway. So that was probably in your opinion the one that damaged you the most or left the most residual. So the most difficult one was the ice by far. The the ice was a monster. And the reason why it was because and now there's also something great about it. So it was a warm November. So the air coming through was like, you know, it happened to be a 68 degree three day spread which led to the ice keep dripping the cold on me and it's radiating this way. But I'm also standing up in one spot completely still and you can't sleep because if you fall asleep and you present the ice you get frostbite if to cut your skin off. Right. So I'm staying completely awake the entire time. And it's a difficult situation on our 55 exactly. I look back at all of it. My friends knew my eyes just go out. And I'm now hallucinating like you could never ever there. No hallucinogenic drug will ever give you those kind of hallucinations. I won't. What was it? At first, well, it's amazing. But it's also when it goes into that nightmare part. It's scary. But there's also that amazing part of it. And if you have people after that stunt now whenever I hallucinate on stunts, I have friends there that I say I'm going to start hallucinating. Just talk me through it. But so here's when I started realizing that I was hallucinating because you don't know when you are right. And by the way, the one stunt I never did was sleep deprivation. If you remind me, I'll explain that whole thing. But I won't, I'll forget. But so, so what happens is when I started realizing it is I need to know like what time it is because I'm done at 10 p.m. because it was live on A.C. So I'm like, I need to know how much longer I got to go through this. Like, because it's good stuff. So in that it's there, by the way, and my dormant would come and like news or whatever Fox News said David Blaine is not really the I think that a special on it. An hour long special. I'm foxing that I was never in the ice and I had a double of me that was in the ice. I'm switching up and down with them. Well, it burgers and reading Fox News. Yeah, no Fox Fox TV station. Yeah. Yeah. So they did, but they did a one hour special that I was never in there. So my dorm room. How did they get away with doing that? I don't know. I don't care. But listen, so my dorm man who comes to this is the funny part of the some my dorm man that comes to see me. He, he's um, he does me so well. He was a buried alive and he's so nice. Right. So he comes to visit the New York and he walks up to the ice and he sees me and he's looking at me all weird. I wasn't hallucinating. So he got me all weird. Then he leaves. It did. But I go back. I was like, what's up? He's like, that, are you sure that that was you a nice? Could that have been you? Has like, what do you mean? He's like, okay, well, it's, you know, so he we go on that special airs. Now he's convinced that it wasn't me and I especially is why you're still in a nose. That's after. But he already thinks because he doesn't believe it my friends, my best friends when I was buried alive, they didn't think I was really doing it. They thought it was a trick. Right. So so he, he asked me. He's like, there's an, was that really you because they said that you were a double of yourself and you were switching it. And I was like, Eddie, but you looked at me like, how could if I have a twin brother, like, where is that identical twin brother? Why, why would I switch up? It's anyway, but it's so back to the back to the, when I get to 55 hours. So I'm looking around and I need the time. So I go like this, like what time is it? And the guy goes for a two. Yeah. So he shows me for a two. So I'm like, okay, that means we have like another six hours or whatever it is. Right. By the way, my time estimations says, I like a way, or it might have been two hours away, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, and I'm in door, it's hard. I'm like, things are moving, everything's weird spiders walking up. People are like sitting in the ice. I'm waiting, waiting, voices are talking to me. I'm talking back to, right, but I'm waiting, I'm waiting and I wait for like a few hours before I ask anybody the time again. And I see somebody and I'm like in the guy, in the guy goes for, oh, three. Oh, no. That's when it all crashed out. It was like when that, when I, that connection and then the hallucinations were just rampant in my eyes were all crazy when the drill was when the chain saw was coming through. I tried to grab her. Yeah. So yeah, see, look at that. Oh, you're gone. But okay, but sudden, but now that I've learned that sleep deprivation is one of the most amazing ways if it's controlled to go to another place. It's like that. But when I want to get to that, before we get to that, like while you're in there, what are you doing to occupy your mind? How are you, did you have, were you using meditation? Were you just thinking? Were you just winging it? Like so. Okay. So for some of them, when I do a big, first of all, yeah, a lot of things, you get to your free time to think like there's no phones or distractions aside from the visit. But, but the one thing that I use with everything is kind of like a breakdown of numbers. I'm like, okay, this much. I have to get to this point. Then when I get to this point, even when I run on a treadmill, I'm like, okay, I have to get to this point, which means let me get to the halfway point. I'll consider that when I'm holding my breath, I do same thing. Like, okay, I need to get to mid- it. So let me get to seven and I'll start at seven. Then at seven, I'm like, okay, I'm at seven left. I have to get to another three and a half and three and a half. And then what I always do is whenever I'm training, I always go past it. So it's the same thing. So like when I'm running a treadmill, I'm like, if I have to do, let's say like, you know, three point one, whatever it is, I set that as my target. But then I always go like another half a mile past it because I won't, you can't quit before because then you'll be in the mindset that, okay, I can stop before. So like, anything that I do, I use numbers to get there. I get halfway. And then I push the goal further every single time no matter what, which is so it's a mathematical system. So you're, you don't necessarily have any sort of meditative techniques. You're just concentrating on the numbers. Meditation for breath holding all the time. Every time I do a breath hold, not all the medias. Now the ice was kind of, there was like a breathing thing. And I didn't really know much about it back then. But I was like more like fighting it. Like what is it like on your ankles or your knees and your back? Everything swells up like a demon really bad and all that stuff in the pain is excruciating and unbearable. But yeah, it's, I mean, you're waiting. And you didn't have any residual effects of that. Just my ankles and legs were really swollen. Just for a few days or so. Yeah, longer than that. But yeah, yeah. Now, is anybody ever tried to break that? I don't know. I hope not. And then not because I don't care about how long I just don't want anybody hurt themselves. But I would imagine like someone does something so high profile like you did that that people would be like, hmm, I'm gonna try that. I mean, I think it's too weird. So people aren't really like, oh, I want to do that. There's billions of people. I would imagine that someone would step in and try to emulate that. Obviously it was so. I pray not. And that's why I pray my daughter never becomes a magician, even though she's so amazing at it. Because if she started doing these things, I like if she's is gonna bump her knee of like, I have a heart attack. You know, that's the problem with being a parent, right? Yeah. The things that make you amazing are your ability to overcome adversity. And then you shelter your children. You know, it's all my favorite people are all, they all came from a very tumultuous childhood. They all came from like turmoil and no one wants that for their child. Do you want to protect your children? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's very weird. So what are the ones of you done where like while you were doing it, you were thinking, what the fuck have I done? Because you committed. There was one that don't don't pull this one up. Don't pull this one. It was called the dive of death. And I started to get cocky. I done like the thing in London. I done like the water tank. I've done so I started to get too cocky, right? I ain't gonna have time. And maybe see one to show really quick. I was like, okay, I'm gonna go upside down for 60 hours, three days, whatever, right? I was gonna be upside down. And then in the night, some guy was in a parachute upside down on a tree and Italy and he was in the hospital because he was three days upside down in the tree. And I was trying to speak to him. But he was like, not didn't want to talk at all. And then they were like, it's his situation's really bad. So it kind of like set the tone before I did the thing. The situation's really bad. Like from being upside down for that long. What happened to him? I think you've, the blood, I think it does. I don't know because he didn't, I didn't get to ask, they wouldn't tell me. But he wouldn't also engage in like, it was bad. That I know it was like in the news, it was bad. I don't know what the permanent repercussions are. But so when I did this thing upside down in New York, I didn't practice it. I thought I could just wing it. My stunt guy who taught me to jump off the pole. He's like, you can never ever just go wing something and not dial it in and rehearse and figure it out. You can't just go do it. It's a, you can't hope for luck. And that was the first one. can never ever just go wing something and not dial it in and rehearse and figure it out. You can't just go do it. It's a, you can't hope for luck. And that was the first one ever and last one that I was like, okay, let me just hope that I can do this. As soon as I went upside down, remember I said you could never prepare for certain things. I had that catheter hooked up in the first time I peed it just went upside down all over me so this way and I was like, I'm done. So the whole stunt went down over there. That was like, that was a great learning lesson because I learned you never just dial it in. Did you make it through that one? Yes, but it was terrible. It was a garbage stunt. Yes, but you were asking me like what things. So that was one that was like, oh, you're, but all the others, they were amazing. The team that working with the best people all of it and this one is the most amazing. Like I have a team that's the one you're doing right now. I have the most amazing. I've never been able to have a team like this. This is a balloon one. Yes. Okay. Explain this. Okay. So I went to YouTube with crazy idea who by the way, this is YouTube and they've been a blessing beyond beyond. So I'm like, okay, here's what I want to do. Like I want to grab a bunch of balloons and go floating up into the sky and disappear. Like, okay, great. Okay, sure. That's so now I needed to ascend. This is all hypothetical. I'm not like a sky diver like that has a thousand or 10,000 or 20,000 junk. I'm not a balloon pilot. I have no experience in any of this stuff. I just know that I want to do this and I've wanted to do it forever, but I had drawings of it made 15 years ago, but now you have to get for real. So there is a guy that flies balloons and there's a guy like launch air larry that went up on balloons with like a Lord chair and a bunch of beer that was his ballas and he like pop balloons with a good. So there are examples. So it's not like a complete hypothetical. This one has like, okay, so what if I could take the balloons that idea and just have the innocent image of a kid like we all dream of just holding the balloons and drifting up and into the sky. Here, I'll see. What's that one from? Who's website is that Jamie? Right. So that's that's my balloons. Is that you up there? Yeah, we did. We did short flights, not big in public. We kept it small. Can I show these to Jamie? No. I don't know. I, well, it's yeah, to him. I can show, can show the people. I'm not sure. I don't wait. That's my balloons. Yeah. Oh, well, that's fine. But that's, that's the end of it. I am doing it. Right. So this is, but I think maybe maybe not. And, but anyway, so, so, okay, so it starts with just the idea of that. But now I have to go get a hot air balloon pilot license. So I go meet with the best hot air balloon pilot instructor and also flyer. But isn't that the different situation in a hot air balloon because you don't have the ability to control? You have to first get your hot air balloon pilot license. So you have to learn how to fly in land balloon, which is amazing. Right. It's like so app. And then you have to take that written test. And I don't have time because I'm trying to do some virtual. So I have to cram study the whole written test in eight hours with a guy helping me. I studied the whole thing went to the airport to the test. Got that. Then you need to go get your gas restriction lifted, which means because and very few people even ever bothered to do this because who's flying hydrogen or helium nowadays? So I went and met this guy, Bert Padelt, who's the best gas balloonist in the world. He's the one that built around the world in 80 days. He's built every balloon that's done the longest fights in the fly. Now a hot air balloon, you're like, ch ch ch ch right. You have to control it. And it's a helium and hydrogen. You're just part of the wind. You're literally just floating away. And it'll keep going up to 84,000 feet until they pop there. Like you are just floating like I can't explain that feeling of floating. Anyway, so I had to go learn how to fly in land hydrogen balloons and use hydrogen because helium is more expensive and stuff like that. Now we have to go test the whole rig. So now and at the same time, I have to also try to get us close to 500 jumps out of an airplane because I need to be really comfortable in the air. If I have to jump out and land, I need to land safe. Jesus. Right. And when you're up at 25 plus thousand feet, you don't know where you are. Right. So yeah. So now and by the way, the video, did you see the video I made for you? You didn't see it. No. You made a video for me? Yeah, because when you did the thing post and you're in post, it's like he's not real and you were defending me. I was like, not that I was different. Hold on. I made a video. I sent it to Matt. I texted him. I didn't get a video. He didn't show it to you. You did a video? No. Hold on. I made you this video. So this is me yelling from the the plane. And by the way, this is after the wingsuit guys jump out of the airplane. So remember, I'm also crushing lots of jumps really fast. That's what I ran into a fence and almost killed myself. And the Luke who's the best in the world that has 25,000 more jumps jumped from 25,000 feet without a parachute and landed in a net. So yeah. So he's a guy coaching me. So he's the one filming this and he landed at the state troopers patrol thing because we were so far lost and I ended up trying to make it back almost hitting the trees really, really close. And then crashing into a fence. My legs are all bloodied up. Ripped through the thing flipped over landed. I was fine. I was recent. It was like, and the reason why is because I was making you this video, I complete true. But I'm going to explain it to you to make the video. I had to wait till the wingsuits were out of the plane because they're last, right? But that means. And by the way, the conditions, you'll see what they were like in a second. So the plane's moving really, really far away. Right? Because it's still going. That means the drops on his way over there. And I made the video on it was longer than I said it was going to be. And then when we jump, we're like lost in the clouds and I see the only hole. So I fly through the hole. And now because I flew through that hole were so far away from everything. And I should have filed Luke and went to the state patrol thing. But I was like, no, I'm going to make it just back. And but so here's the video I gave you though. Can we play it for other people? Yeah. Once you air drop it to Jamie. Oh, yeah. Okay. Hold on. So let me hear it drop. Isn't that funny though? It's pretty wild. But you don't come down that I didn't get this before. Oh, well, yeah. So I was going to like post it or something. I asked him if I should. And he's like, well, wait, because maybe he'll just do the show. So I think that's why he didn't maybe or something. Like I don't know. Maybe you got lost in the email or something it might have gotten to one of those. The email dumps get pretty big sometimes. The point where I can't keep up is it young James. Young Jamie. Young James. Okay. So that's that one. But then I'm going to show you the rest of the shop. But you might have the scroll through it to get to it. But I'm sure you'll. But by the way, it's the most amazing. So I'll show you the rest of that shot. And then you'll see where he landed and where I landed. So I'm going to send you first the pretty version of it. You guys can like cut through or whatever. Sure. Okay. So I'm going to edit. I'm going to just send you like the full and then you'll look through. So here's another one. When is this one supposed to be in two weeks and two weeks? Yeah. And do you have to take any consideration? The wind, the like what the car. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And that's why we can't like confirm a location because we're in the term and everything. So even though now it like, you know, almost 400 jumps, the wind still decide where you go. Oh, here. All right. Here we go. Did you get that other one? I don't got one. This one makes you this way. I'm going to play. Well, that's the first one. So we I can Okay. Yeah. Come back. Sure. Okay. Okay. Check this out. Okay. But so you see the clouds down. Hold on. This one's going to come. So you're hanging on to a plane. How high are you there? No, that was just I don't like 13,000. Oh, nothing. No, but I went to no, but I went to 25. No, I remember you tell me. Yeah. Yeah. But still, but still 13,000 feet off the air hanging onto a plane and you jump off. Maybe it's another one. Maybe it's this one. It's hilarious that you're like, oh, it's only 13,000 feet. Hang on to the wing of a plane and then I let go on video. I know, but you need to see that I can I can't play it here though, right? And show you like this. We have to air job because it's going to drop is better because it's going slow. Why just want to send this one that shows like how spectacular, but I could just say that was pretty fucking big. Which explains what's going on. So hold on. No, which one because there's three young James, the map of pro Jamie, but there's three. It doesn't matter. Just click one in which work. Now, when you decide to do something like this, do you get an inspiration and then you consult people to see if it's feasible? Like, well, how does it so so that's where it's lucky? So I was saying as I come up with the idea and then I find a guy, his name is Jonathan Trapp. He's one that tried to cross the Atlantic with healing for balloons. And but I mean, he has it's like a full system. He has a basket. So it's like a real balloon, like a hot air balloon system with, so nobody's ever done it where they just float where their bodies are the basket. You know what I mean? So he had the whole system and then he came and test out and I was like, could I go try it like this? And he's like, no, we're not ready. You'll kill yourself or whatever. You're hanging onto the rope? Yeah, but I'm going to make sure that I'm not going to have a parachute on. And I'm going to all have a system so I'm completely secure. So I'm not going to fall off. But I'm not going to wear the parachute because I don't want to be, I want it to look like a kid just holding onto balloons. So like that visuals, the important part. So the parachutes up in the balloons. But once I get above like a thousand feet or so, I'm going to put the parachute on in the air. So you're going to put the parachute on while you're up there. Yeah. And then I want to see if how high I can go. See? How high do you think you can go? Well, so the highest thing on earth is Mount Everest. Right. So that's kind of my goal. But I have to be careful because if you if you don't come back down, you're dead. So if you can't get down from there, that's that zone is like the death zone. So from like 25,000 to 30,000 is very, very dangerous. You can black out like this. So I'm going to do a couple more hypoxic tests and see if I'm right. I'll have emergency stuff up there like oxygen if I need it. But I don't want to floating around with you up there in the balloons. Yeah. We have like the way it's not dude. You're loved ones panic when you start plotting things like this. My daughter asks question nine. And she asks great questions. And that the plate, the tail number, the plate is for me in her. So it's N for number, but nine for her age 47 for my age. And then DB for me and her were both deaths in David. But um, which is the balloon that has I mean, this has to be a registered aircraft. So we had to get it registered. We had to fly it up. We had to prove that it's completely safe. We had to land it with nobody on it. So the body, one time that I went wasn't me, it was sand that weighed exactly what I weighed. We had to remote dump the sand. We had to use squibbs to remote pop the balloons, fly it over. And this is at 22,000 feet. And what is what is what is controlling it? What is it? Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Okay. I have the whole team helping me that did like Allen used this one. He jumped and Felix Bumgartner when he jumped from the edge of space. So we have Don day, the best meteorologist. He did have to weigh you before you get on to the precision. And then so we had to fight all the way up to 22,000 feet as proof that this aircraft is actually completely doable. And then remote land it exactly where Don day predicted we were going to land it. And we've done that multiple times. We've flown it. We've deployed the the imitation. I've flown that I've been on a time involved in constructing one of these things and orchestrating it at time and team and team is everything. So it'd be like you when you have like the best trainers. If you have like your five best in the world, like tweaking your before fights like that. So when when you plan on doing something like this, did you bring this up to to these folks? And these are the first people, the people that you're doing it with. These are the people that you brought it up to the first time. Yeah. Nobody said get the fuck out of here with us. Nope. Went straight to YouTube. And I was like, I have this. He went to these guys and did he hesitate at all? No, they're they're amazing. That that's crazy. That's right. It is also crazy. It's just a hypothetical idea that's insane. That's true. And they did let me like, but there were stages I had to prove each step. So I had to prove that number one, the balloon is doable. Number two, I'm not going to hopefully kill myself. Number three, I can actually get the Oh, and then for the skydives, by the way, because I had to get 500 jumps really quick. And this is all during the last year, right? So insurance wouldn't cover that. I mean, they would cover, but it's not affordable. So I had to do five almost 500, 400 jumps or so with no insurance. So that's a whole separate thing that's not related. So I had to go do them from my own as fun and do everything through my own. You see these crazy. It's all nuts. Because you think of skydiving and think like, oh, you have the best coach. It's fine, but they're still like, when you're trying to do 15 jumps a day, it's like, you can do what I did, which is try to avoid hitting an airplane in a hangar and turn to low and come whacking down. And why did you come up with this idea? I mean, I think it was like inspired when I was a kid. I think like the idea of like the little boy drift and the balloons. I think it was like, but I never really thought of it as a reality. But then 15 years ago or so had drawings made of it. So I started having, I'll show you the drawings. I can't open it on there. So when did you put it into motion? It was never even possible until YouTube said, okay, we'll back this because the idea is like, all of my other stunts, there's like the budgets pretty, very, you know, you couldn't afford to do something like this. This is to build, test the flight, build an actual aircraft, fly it, land it, get all of the jumps, learn how to do everything, get all of the skill set, have the, so this is, but that's the first drawing. Oh, wow. Yeah. So you drew this when you were, I didn't draw someone else to. Yeah, Mark Stusner who's an amazing artist that did my poster for this thing, which I'll show you so that was, can I send this to Jamie? Yeah, it's not working, but you can draw here, jobs, not working. I know some weirdness happening. I was trying to do it. I can, but maybe the picture will go. If not, I can restart the phone and maybe it'll work. Was it showing up for you, Jamie? No, right. Let me restart the phone. There's a lot of, uh, okay, now it's as it's waiting. There's like so many Macbook pros. Yeah, there's three of, oh, went. Yeah, someone went through. Okay, then I'll also send, oh, but wait, so she also showed you the poster that I had made, which is okay. Um, so you come to YouTube powerful YouTube. They come up with the side. I mean, they are just amazing. That's the original, but this is the latest one. So do you send that one to him too? Yeah, I'll send it to you, Jamie. It's coming through right now, supposedly. I think I have to accept them for some reason. Does it just go? Is it showing up for you? No, I think I should restart the phone because those videos to it want to send. Okay, how did you get it together? Which one did you press? I don't know. There's so many of them. Doesn't make any sense. Your phone is being monitored by the government. They're calling. Hold on. I want to try to send this video, so I could explain making your video. That's possible. But did when you, oh, now it's preparing it. So now it's going through. Now it's going through. You have it coming right now, because it says it's converting. So it might be coming. We're waiting for an accept on this. So, okay. So you bring this to YouTube on how long ago was it? Like a year and a half ago or something. They say, yeah, let's do it. We're fucking crazy. And also, it's probably going to have 100 million people watch it. So it seems like it. I don't know. I don't know about that. Oh, I do. Yeah, I don't know. You'll float around in a fucking balloon. I don't know if that's true. Oh, I'll bet on it. But this one by far is my favorite that I've ever done. It's the most visual, the most colorful. It's the first one that I've ever done where my friends are like, I want to do that. They're not like, why do you do that? You've got to be holding on. But you know, all the other sense, I do, people are like, like, that's it's great that you're doing it, but that's crazy. Or why you're doing it this one, they're like, I want to ride the balloons. Because it's just a childhood. Yeah. There you go. Like, so it'll be like that. Wow. That's pretty cool. So it'll look just like that. And how is it? Are you harnessed? Yeah, it'll be like a little thing that connects at my wrist, which like the way the aerialists have a connection. Connected to your body, your torso somehow. Yeah, it'll be connected somewhere. Yeah, hopefully it's a nightmare. Yeah, something. Yeah, because when you get up to like minus, you know, 20 degrees or whatever, you'll be non functional up there. So you can't just rely on your hand. No, I could, no, no, no, no, I went. No, no, I was practical. If I had to do this up to like, you know, two to 3000 feet, I could, because you hold it on. Yeah, yeah, you can ascend. You can also do what, you know, just put something around your foot like the wires could come down. Okay. So something around your foot would just be so just a take out of the way it'll help. Yes, it's doable. Right. And then, and then how long can you actually hang though? Like, I mean, it's really hard to hang really more than a couple of minutes. It's hard to hang for more than a minute. I think like the record is like two minutes, but what would one of them? Yeah, with one hand, but this has to look the whole, this has to look like the one handed image of a person. Right. It has to be exact. Right. You'd have to have some freaky problems. Popeye. Yeah. So I'll have assistance built, but I, so I won't have a parachute or any of that stuff. That'll be above me. So it'll look really clean, but I'll be supported. Now, if there's a balloon failure or something like that, obviously, I'm in trouble. Obviously. But once I get the parachute on, once I get to 5000 feet, then we know, okay, he's not going to die. He has a parachute on. I can get away. And now the big challenge is how high can you go? Cool. So once you get, how are you going to know? Do you have an altimeter on the, I'll have an altimeter, but I'm also going to have a communication. Okay, full everything. Okay. I'm going to have cameras with me for the, are you using a watch for the altimeter? Like, what are you using to? I'm using this one called the kunu right now, but it's big. Sure. No, but I was, I've been jumping with sumptos and things just to check how accurate they are. And they're not bad. They're like off by like 200 feet or something like that. But on the landing, you don't want to be off. Especially if you're like me, you don't even, you only have 400 jumps, not even, right? Right. So and you're landing in dicey areas, because you don't know where you are. Right. So dust of wind can throw you here or there. Yeah, anything, but you'll still have to like not hit a power line or a building or an obstacle or anything, wherever you are, right? If you, if you come down into a mountain, you're going to whack into that, it looks flying from here. But if you didn't adjust, you're going to come in hard. And that's it. You'll eat it. Right. If you hit a power line, you're dead. So yeah, those types of things we have to like and which is why when I'm controlling the balloons and going up and up and up and up and up, I'm going to hopefully be five. Hopefully. Scaring the shit out of me already. So at 5,000 feet, you, how do you get the parachute? It's up there in the balloons and I'm going to pull it down. It's on like a fishing wire thing. I pull it down and then I put it on. That's the only like really difficult thing as far as I'm doing it. You've practiced that I've pressed it and that's like really scary to everybody around. Like they they're asking me why won't I just wear the thing? Like everybody. Yeah. They're like you, you have to wear it. And you don't want to wear it. And my brother's really obsessed with it. My daughter's new question is how come you're not wearing the parachute? But I'm, but I'm telling you, it's fine. But you haven't, have you done this transition yet where you go from floating to putting the parachute no, that'll be done live the first time. Oh, Jesus, this whole thing will be done the first time live and I've never done it in completion. I've done all of the elements of it. So I've done the jumps. I've done the balloon flights. I've flown the rig, but I've never put it all together. That's all going to happen for the first time. Live live. I'm going to. And so once you get the vest on, once you get the parachute on, then the goals to see how high you you can get up. Yeah. And once you get part that I'm obsessed with, when you get to the area of 30,000 plus eight, none of you can't cross there. I mean, I just want to get the goal is if I get up to like 25,000 feet, I'm excited. Okay. Because that's where the ice I want to disappear. Like I actually want the visual to be that I disappear into the sky. Okay. So you get up to 25,000. But I'm not going to kill myself doing it. So not I won't. Okay. I believe you, but this one is different than I have the O2 things by the way. You can't send the O2 pulse oximeter signals down. So they won't know if I'm hypoxic, but I'm going to have the O2 monitors in my pocket. I'm going to put them on. I'm going to show them to the camera. They can still communicate with you. Yeah. So now if they can't, that's a big issue. So communication fails. Then this is for me. Communication is done through what? RF. This this incredible guy that builds all of the communication for every sky diving snub. So he's the same way that a plane can communicate with the ground. Yeah. Yeah. It's something. Yeah. And I have a transponder up here. I have everything. So the planes I'm visible. Everybody knows around clearing everything with the FAA, the ATC. So everything is going to be, you know, completely organized as it needs to be. We have a wind path in every location that we're going to possibly do this in. Of course, New York is a dream and there's some other dreams that we have. So we have a couple of key points that we're dreaming about doing this. And depending on wind and weather, that's where we'll do it. And how do you get how do you descend? Just let go of some. Yeah. Just completely. Just a little while. Yeah. So you're going to sky dive at 25,000 feet. Yeah. By the way, when I did the when I did the, I told you when I did that test, when I went up to 20 almost 24 seven or whatever, I had the, they helmet on the first breath I took. The entire thing was ice right away. So and I was flying down looking through like a little hole in the helmet. You know, I couldn't see. Jesus Christ. And so when you land, you have to land. I mean, you're from 25,000 feet. You have to make sure that you're conscious. You have to make sure that you can see. That's right. But usually by the way, even if you are hypoxic and you're dropping, you clear up at like 10,000 feet. So Luke Aiken's, who you watch, he did a jump once where he was jumping with Felix, bum garden, who he trained. And he was out of, he was hypoxic. He was blacked out. But when he got to about 9,000 feet or so, he woke up. And then from, yeah, but from 9,000 feet down, you have, you know, 40 seconds to figure out where you are and what you're doing. Okay. It still seems fucking terrifying. And so then you're, you're floating down and you have to find a good spot to land. And when are you going to do this? Like what's the official launch date? Is it August 31? 100%. Depending on wins depending on what. So if the wins are fucked on August 31st, we should know exactly. And that's the other thing YouTube's been amazing. There it is. David Blaine, Ascension, YouTube originals, August 31st. Yeah, that's basically what it's like. I love that YouTube stepped up to do this. But yeah, it is amazing. It is amazing. Look at you floating above the cloud and that image. And that's literally what you're going to be doing. That's so fucked. But also the thing about this one aside from like the the technical of orbit is like the visual on it. So far is my favorite one. Yeah. Like it's like up. Look when they did it. Yeah. But when I, but when I look at the balloons, I become like giddy, like in all these adults are working. We're all like laughing because we're like little, we're like kids. Right. Blue, you know, it's like, it's like, it's like Honic. It's something that every kid is kind of thought of. Yeah. Yeah. Grabbing a balloon and floating. Yeah. Mary Poppins. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. And that was my daughter's nickname when she was growing up. We called Mary, the real Mary Poppins. She was a real very pop. We put a balloon up and we'd always watch it and dream and talk about where it goes and stuff like that. What is it like for her to when you discuss things? She's so amazing. I run ideas by her. She's a really. Yeah. She's a bit by the way, the reason there's pink balloons in this one is because I was showing her all the balloons. She went, is there going to be pink? And I was like, of course, this is going to be fake. Now, they're fake. Wow. Now, have you been doing live shows this whole time or are you able to with COVID? Not during COVID? No, but right up to COVID, I was doing live and that I haven't been promoting anything, but it's like my favorite thing because I've been working on the live show for 20 some years and I've never done one until like the last few years like started like three years ago as a first time I did that, which is crazy, right? Yeah. But I finally felt like I had the right material to make a good show. And the show is so it's so it's like I opened it with the mouth sewing. So the first thing is like it, but I bring people up. So it's also comical. It's like funny, right? Like joking around. some of you see people like that. Yeah. Yeah. When you say mouth sewing, you actually sew your mouth. Yeah. Yeah. And you do that at how many nights a week? One? No. So I would do two days on one day off, but every day of a show means you can't eat for 36 hours before the show, because I also have to put a gallon of water in my stomach. I have to put a cup of kerosene, but now I don't swallow the kerosene. I put it in my mouth now and spit it. So I don't swallow it, but on Jimmy, Jimmy Kimmel, I drank this stuff. And it's like really, really, that's how the the guy died, how gee, I'll leave that told you. So now I just put it in the mouth spit it. But see, I, and then I do the frogs in the stomach. I put the hanger all the way down the throat to fetch somebody's ring. I do the breath hold, I do the breath hold every single night. And then I push, and then I have them push an ice pick through my arm every night, which is like you don't want to hit a break. You know, anything or an artery or anything. So, but I, and I let them choose a spot. By the way, I also brought the ice pick if you do do one of us because I, I know that you know, it's real, but I should if I believe it's real, but I still want to see it. I haven't done it. I haven't done it. But my tour really, it's in to do it. I mean, I'm like, you to do it. I'd like you to do it just to see that it is like pretty straight forward. Oh, I believe it's straightforward, but I brought one with me and I got the alcohol from so here is a, leave that girl. So you're stitching that your mouth is. Yeah, but so see that so what I was able to do with the stage show is I bring people up on stage and I have the cameras at the big screen. So you see people reacting to this stuff. So it's the magic plus the reaction. So you get that hole. And this girl's really into it. Look at her. So you do this all the time. This stitching the mouse shot, I would imagine that you would accumulate some scar tissue. Now, that one's easy, but this one's legit. This one I used to do it through the hand. This is the ice. This one I used to do through the hand and I developed so much scar tissue that like when I move my fingers to certain way, I get a shooting pain. So I stopped doing the hands and I switched to here. That makes sense. Yeah, I would imagine that would really fuck your hands up. So wait, but I might have to sit next to you or something. Do you want me to do this to you? Is this what's going on here? I can come over to your side. Okay. Okay. That's so wait, but I might have to sit next to you or something. Do you want me to do this to you? Is this what's going on here? Yeah, I can come over to your side. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. All right. But wait, don't you need the or you can put those on? I'll just come walk over. If I take the thing off, you can if you like, we'll both be basically talking into the same mic. No, but we can do it city. Yeah. But can you put those on? Yeah. Sure. James, Mike work. Okay, James will turn this mic on and I'll crank this thing over here. Okay. So you two are on. We want the left or the right. Uh, let's do the right since it's right next to me. Okay. Do you want them to come in and see it as well? No. Good enough. Okay. So now this is not a new ice pick and usually I do it with new ones, which means this isn't as sharp as it needs to be. Oh, it means the push is going to be a little more difficult. I guess. Why do you like to do this? You seem to be or these ones that you give us to raise pure alcohol? Yes. Yes. I can just listen. I mean, they're just the standard ones that you get. It's fine. I'm sure. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, you want to make sure there's no scent in and there ain't no one. I want to make sure that there is no bacteria in there. Right. But I mean, on the alcohol strip. Oh, yeah. Exactly. Why do you enjoy this? You seem you're not excited about this. Well, first of all, it's amazing that you can actually do something like this. Like it's nothing. So there's a guy named Mirandayo. Can you pull up Mirandayo? You think so Mirandayo? It's this guy and nobody believed he was doing it for real. And he would take rapiers and he would have them push through it right through the middle of his body. Oh, his lungs and everything. He would show on all sides and then they would pull them out and he'd be perfectly fine. Every doctor and saying, Oh, you can't do that. So remember when Steve Irwin died? Do you know why he died? No. Because he pulled the stingray thing out of his heart. The stingray stuff and he pulled it out, right? Crocodile. So if he kept it in there, he would have lived right after that. 70 year old man was on his boat and a stingray jumped up out of the water, stung him in the heart and then stingray was gone. But though I didn't even, yeah, look at that. Isn't that crazy? But the fact that you can actually do this is what's crazy. Like the body can, with your mind, you can override him. And then the thing is he got so cocky though that he thought he could do anything and then he ate one of these things. He swallowed it and killed it. Oh, I didn't turn away and died. But see, he got really cocky because he was like, I could do anything. That is fucking insane. So he's, is he going through his liver? He can go through anything. And that's what I'm saying. So the seven year old guy that got the stingray to stab him in the heart instead of pulling it out, which it's like a corkscrew. He waited till they, with doctors till it beat out the other side and he was fine. You see? Wow. So instead of pulling it out, he waited until what happened? And then the doctors waited and with the heart, they let it beat out the other side and they slowly let it come out. He went through his whole body. If they would have pulled it, it's like a corkscrew would rip him apart. He would die. How long did it take for it to beat through his boat? I don't know, but I know that the doctors would think that as they let it go through. Guy. How many times this guy gets stabbed like this? I've done that one by the way right there. That's a safe place. That's like not an issue. But when you go through the lungs and stuff, it's crazy. It's great. But this is too much. I won't show it. It's too much. I'm thinking fucking sword, man. But that's one. That one? Listen, he's, but so what happened was he started to get too cocky. He started to think he was fine. Oh, geez. That's not a trick. No, but I know, but listen, so the origin of this is a kid. There's that trick where they do needle through arm. Yes. Right? And it's like the rubber, you know, the stuff and it sticks. It's going to get in there. Looks perfect. It looks like it's really through your arm. And then they like squeeze blood out of the thing. They put it. So I saw that. And then I was like, but maybe that's like actually doable. Like maybe that trick could really be done. So like the same exact trick, but for real. Right. So that's this. Okay. Because you take that. Okay. Like I said, it's going to be a little tricky to push through just because the, it's usually sharp. And this time it's not as sharp. And how do you know where to do it? Like we're going to pick. There's no. What you're going to talk about. I hit an artery. You know, you want to. How do I know I'm not going to hit an artery? I don't know. I can't kill you, but what if it's a good one? If you're done. So you want me just right here? Anywhere? Sure. Where do you prefer? Wherever you want. Like right there? Wow. Sure. I don't know. But yeah, do it there. Where you want. Do it where you want. Well, when you say where I was. Sure. Like where do you like it to go through the bottom? Like no, I like where you were going. Right. Like you're true. I mean, that's that's fine. Like you have to go like through. Well, what do you want me to do? Yeah, you're going to push through. Okay. So hold on here. Yeah, keep like a straight path. Like that? No, it goes through. Like that? Yeah, it goes through. That's right through. Yeah. Okay. Right slowly. And go slow. Yeah. You're looking like, see that? Yep. See. So it's hard to believe that it's real. You keep pushing. Keep going. Keep going. Wait. Uh oh. Hold on. Woo. What happened? Yeah, hit a nerve. Oh, Jesus. Another spot. No, no, no, no, no. Come on, man. You got it through another spot. You're in the nerve. Yeah, but what if I fuck your arm up? Man, and then you can't hang from the balloon. And then YouTube's mad at me. Okay. Again. Jesus, bro. Okay. So by the way, honest to God, I never go in this direction. Which way do you go? I always go this direction. Why? Inside the out. I'm just saying of like that of the all the times I did it, I've always gone this direction. Do you want me to go that direction? I'm just telling I've never gotten better. No. So what's the difference? I'm just saying I've never done it. This is okay. This is groundbreaking. No, I'm saying it's nuts. Well, it's definitely nuts. So hold my ears again. Okay. Good. No, but from the bottom. Like this. Like this. Yeah. And then I go again. And I would, I would try to go like a straight path through. Like right there. No, I would go like lower and in like this. Right there. Point. Ready? Yeah. Okay. Yeah, I feel like that. And keep hold on. Wait, wait. Push. Yeah. Like that. Like that. That's good. Yep. We're on a clean path. We hit something, but it's fine. Now it's something you're supposed to use a skin here. And I push so you can see it come through. Push. That's it. See. Alrighty. Super unnecessary. But uh, it does seem like a magic trick. It definitely doesn't seem like a magic trick to me. Hold on. There's blood vessels and everything. Yes. And there's no blood. Well, it's a very small hole in comparison to. No, it's, it's, no. And there is blood on the other hole. Okay. Yeah. That's because it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's something. Uh huh. And your body's healthy. So it's cladding up pretty quickly. Okay. All right. Shut up. Put it out. Yeah. Okay. Here we go. Well, that's lovely. Go. Cool. Cool. And that's it. Okay. So here, this is for you to keep. I can't say I enjoyed that. That was very uncomfortable. But it would, where to me more than anything is that you seem to enjoy it. You enjoyed the freak out. What do you have it? No, I, I like what I said. I like that you can override your body with your brain to do things that seem like they're not real. Yeah. Like doesn't seem, you know it's real because of what you do to your body. But most people see all the things they're doing. Think it's a magic trick. Right. They think it's a trick. Like, okay, it's a trick. Like he's not holding his breath. And you've done that thing with the sword. Well, you've gone through your body. Yeah, but it was not very thick and it was through right here. I didn't go through the organs like this guy did. No, but I, but I think you can. Like, obviously he did it. Right. And swallowing this is what killed him. So he got really, he thought he could do anything. So he's like, I'm going to swallow this type of thing and then I'm going to bring it up. Swalled it and he couldn't bring it up. And then he fell asleep and it rubbed it his heart. Phew. He woke up. They found him cold. Oh, boy. Internal bleeding. Jesus Christ. That is the thing about these extreme feats, right? Is that you possibly might be pushing the boundaries of what's physically possible, which means you could die like you, Dini. Like, who Dini died from getting punched in the stomach. Yeah. How does a punch the stomach kill you? Well, so normally like I had Kimbo, Syspuncher in the stomach. Did you really? Yeah. Ouch. Yeah. And then I had him do it again. And then I felt bad. I didn't want to make him keep doing it because it wasn't, you know, right? Because as you know, you can train to take a punch. Yes. Obviously. So I basically had my trainer, Rich Beretta, throw heavy balls, kick me in the stomach, do everything. And I trained for a long, like a year just to take a punch from anybody. Oh, yeah. It comes Kimbo. Oh. And then I said to him, do it again. So and by the way, I'm not even in top physical. So I said do it again. And then I, but I could have obviously could have kept going. So and I did that based on Houdini, right? Right. But here's the thing. So Houdini would do this on stage every night. And it's a, it's a great thing in the show. It's like, look, Bao, every, any 10 strongest people in the audience come punch him. And so the, and these kids think he's invisible, invincible, right? Like he, like this is Houdini, man, a steal, whatever. Right. So he's sleeping and is dressing when these two college kids, one kids like watch I was showing it in the punch Houdini and stomach really was asleep. Yes. And, and as you know, that's dangerous because you don't have a wall up. So he ruptured something, but he's a workaholic. So the guy is in a lot of pain, whether he might, maybe it wasn't related. Maybe it's something different. Maybe he had, you know, pen to say, who knows, right? He's in a lot of pain, but he wouldn't let the audience down. So he wouldn't quit his show. So he did his show and at the end of show, he's upside down the water tank. Everything else when he shouldn't have been, he should have been in the hospital. But instead, he did the show that night, collapsed on the stage, was not from the water tank. But right after the water tank was rushed to a hospital and then died in the hospital. And what was the diagnosis? What did he die from? Wow. It was a, you know, 1926. Right. Little food. Yeah, they don't like that. You died from food. Yeah. Wow. So when you, I mean, that, that's the thing about someone who does something that pushes it to the edge like that. I mean, when someone sees you hold your breath for 20 minutes, what's fascinating about is not just that it's hard to do, but that you might die. Yeah. Right? Yeah. Or some people say, what, what's how's he doing? Right. What's the trigger? You know, so there's all different interpretations. But the, the worry, the thing that thrills people. Yeah. It's like the, you know, the, well, yeah, the idea that something could go wrong. That's why everybody watched evil can evil because he might like that on it. And he often did wipe out. Yeah. What do you, this thrill of getting to that edge is very dangerous, right? Because you keep pushing. There's a danger, but I feel like if you rehearse and practice and put the best team and don't just do crazy things without like a plan, then I feel like the danger is like, sure, the danger is there, but also rode my motorcycle here, which is also stored. I've lost a lot of friends on bikes. Yeah. Right. So sure, I get what you're saying and I, I understand all that. You seem to like thrills. Why mean I like adventures. You're like riding motorcycle. Yeah, that is an adventure. Yeah. I mean, I look at people that do it every day and I go, that's a brave American. And her California, you're allowed to like weave. So that's, that's kind of amazing. You can't find it like, go ahead. Give it a shot. Fuck it. You're here. You know, how, where do you see this? Do you have like a grand vision of your life in terms of like these stunts that you do? Like, would you have like some ultimate threshold that you'd like to get to? I think we have to take a break. I want to make sure that I'm okay. Okay. Any bleed? Yeah, yeah, we'll take a break. We'll be right back. So we had to clean up your wound. Yeah, it was fine. Yeah. You seem to enjoy it. You really do. You were laughing while they were cleaning it up and checking it and like, it's good. We're good. It was just, what was it? The blood, what was it that was bothering you? When he's drinking all the water, pay attention to swelling. I just felt, you know, too much of a magic becoming real. It's the magic. How much water do you have to drink? I'll probably do. You do what you want to do. I will say. Hmm. What's up? Do you have to drink it at a certain speaks? I've seen people that can chug these. They just shove the whole thing down their face. It's almost like a magic chicken itself. They can drink it. Yeah, those guys are just, I had like the guy that was the fastest work on it. Very, very bad. How many do you have to drink? You've drank three so far? Yeah, plus the two out there. But yeah. So five, you have to drink eight total. Do you need a bucket or anything to throw the frog up in? Do we have a bucket? Ice bucket? That doesn't seem like enough fluid though. Bucket can. American flag bucket in the back. That big one? Oh, perfect. Oh, look at that. How convenient. This poor frog has no idea. He's a magical frog. How do you know he's real? Hmm. He's real. Well, I get on that. That could be a magic trick. Well, if it is, it's amazing. You should sell these to people that don't want biological frogs. So that's a fucking life frog. I mean, he's looking at me. He's moving around. He's bobbing his head. He's trying to get the fuck out. He's making the thing with the throat. Maybe. Look at him. He's trying to get out. That's a real frog, kids. No doubt. When did you start doing this? The frog thing. Is that enough? What is it over? Close. There's a guy called the human aquarium. And so the thing about most of the acts that I'm doing, by the way, like night after night, usually the people that did them, it was like their one acts. There's one guy called the human aquarium. And he was a guy that could swallow frogs and bring them up. But he would do it. You'd see him swallow them. And then you'd see him bring them up. So it wasn't magical. It was like a skill set. I would usually, what I do is I put them in my stomach, keep them in there for like two hours, and then bring them up and freak you out. You see? And I'd have a gallon of water in my stomach. So I have an aquarium that baking soda gets really acid. No food, 36 hours. And then once I drink this, we're at a gallon. We're at four liters. So just under a gallon. So did you not eat for 36 hours in preparation for this? Yes. That's a lot of not eating for this poor frogs worst moment of his life. What's part of it'll do, Jamie? Just in case you don't think he's real. He's real. Oh, there's more than one in there. No, that's just him. It's just a illusion. I thought there was a little one in there. That's a decent size frog, too, by the way. You wouldn't want to swallow frog that large. Mark Twain has a quote. He says, eat a live frog first thing in the morning and nothing worse could happen for the rest of your day. By the way, back to the James Nester book, the one that I was saying deep, which sent me talks about that's really amazing, which is one of my favorite parts. And there he talks about how coral communicates. Can I read this thing? Sure. Sure. So he talks about it's one of my favorite things he talks about. It's so amazing. So let's see where deep. OK, so I have a bunch of notes. What app are you using to read from? I books, just because you could keep all the books there. And you highlight things with I books? Yeah, of course. I didn't know you could have. Oh, yeah, yeah. And then you keep all of your books here. Right. Oh, no, I do that on my phone, but I didn't know you could highlight. I rarely read on the phone, too. I usually use a Kindle. Yeah. I only use this as a thing I live by. So it's ruined my life, but also had it help that somehow, I guess, some way. Let's see. I'm going to take me a second to pull it up. I just like the Kindle because it looks like paper. You know, the paper white ones? Yeah. And they're easier on the eyes. Yeah, that's all I want. It's tricky on my eyes as well. OK, so can I just read it? Sure. I like it. Yeah. OK, so it's part of what the Aquinats and Aquarius are trying to find out. They're also trying to crack the more mystical marine riddles, like the secret behind corals telepathic communication. This is so crazy. What do you write to it? Every year, on the same day, at the same hour, usually within the same minute, corals of the same species, although separated by thousands of miles, will suddenly spawn in perfect synchronicity. The dates and times vary from year to year for reasons only the coral knows. Strange or still, while one species of coral spawns during one hour, another species right next to it waits for a different hour or a different day or a different week before spawning and synchronicity with its own species. Distant seems to have no effect. If you broke off a chunk of coral and placed it in a bucket beneath a sink in London, that chunk would in most cases spawn at the same time as other coral of the same species around the world, which is crazy. Like you could take a piece of coral, break it off, put it in London, and another coral of the same species will in synchronicity spawn at the exact same time. From the have no idea why. The synchronous spawn is essential for coral survival. Coral colonies must continuously expend outward to thrive, expand outward to thrive, to remain healthy and strong. They must breed outside of their gene pool with neighboring colonies. Once released to the surface, the coral sperm and eggs have only about 30 minutes to fuse. Any longer, any longer, and the coral eggs and sperm will either dissipate or die off. Researchers have found that if the spawning is just 15 minutes out of sync, coral colonies chances of survival are greatly reduced. Coral is the largest biological structure on the planet and covers 175,000 square miles of the seafloor, and it can communicate in a way far more sophisticated than anyone ever thought. And yet coral is one of the most primitive animals on Earth. Coral has no eyes, no ears, and no brain. It's crazy. That's insane. Yeah, that's how I thought I was using it. But it's fascinating, too, that you just have no idea why or how. I mean, what is the mechanism for the communication? The fact that if something's under a sink and London, it sinks up with coral the same species on another side of the planet. What is happening? I think one of the most futuristic minds of our life, those is Jim Cameron. I think Avatar and Terminator, too, would like the machine-staking on. I think he's like, I think we're going to look back and be like, wow, he really predicted a lot. He knew some shit. The trees all communicate with each other. Yeah. Well, have you read about mycelium and the fungus underneath the soil that actually the trees utilize it through their root structures and they communicate through that? Yeah, there's some sort of a micro-rising relationship that fungus has with these trees. And they actually somehow or another communicate through each other as well. They're like using the soil. Like this. That's crazy. Yeah. We think of soil as being dirt. But there's life in there. Yeah. All sorts of biological life living in that soil. Yes. And these trees and different plants, actually, through their root structure, communicate and use the fungi that live in the soil. And it's very, very, Paul Stamets, who's a wizard when it comes to mycology and talking about fungus. And he's got some amazing work that he's done. Just his whole life studying mushrooms. And it's so advanced. When he talks to you about it, you just really get this feeling. Like there's something going on that we don't totally understand. Like the largest animal, the fungus is kind of an animal. It breathes oxygen and it breathes out carbon dioxide. So the... That's great. I didn't know about that. Yeah. So the relationship with fungus that mushrooms have with the earth is in some ways more similar to us than it is to plants. Because plants are breathing in carbon dioxide, obviously, and breathing out oxygen. Yeah. So the fungus are close for the fungus. Yeah. Then they're living with these things. And there's a group of fungi, I guess, in the Pacific Northwest, it's the largest living creature other than, I guess, like biological organism, you'd say it was the coral reef. But there's something in the Pacific Northwest that's fucking enormous. And it's just one interconnected mushroom structure. Wow. It's very heavy. Yeah. And obviously, the right ones can bring you to God. The right ones can connect you to alien life and the future and tell you what you're doing wrong with the planet. Yeah. So there's something going on with these things. That's a different part of your consciousness. But we're just very egocentric and arrogant in our ideas about what the human race means to the rest of the planet. Because we have this ability to manipulate things and send texts and emails. Which is just about our portions, basically, because our fingers are ability to like, yeah. But we think that's so important, because it's so important to us, because it's so significant. Like, the ability to watch a television show or not be able to. The ability to fly in a plane or not. Those things are so significant that we think of them as being the most significant things in the world. But meanwhile, there's some animals. Like, when you see a flock of birds fly in synchronicity and some sort of strange dance. And you're like, how the fuck are they doing that? I don't know. One knows. They really don't know. There's all this guesswork. They're not really sure exactly what's going on. How do they know how to travel thousands of miles every season and go back to the place where they spawned? Like, they don't know. They don't know. Like, how to salmon. Salmon figure out a way to get all the way back to where they were born. They make their way all the way through the river to the ocean. And then when it's time to rock and roll, they get all the way back. And they have to get back to that one spot. They can't get just any old river. They won't make it. They won't survive. They won't spawn. They won't do it. They have to get back to the place where they belong. And something in their little salmon brains or in their salmon biological system. Let's do it now. And we don't know what it is. We don't know what it is, but we fuck up, and we dam these river structures. And then they die. And they die off. The Pacific Northwest is a huge problem with that. And they didn't understand it. When they first put these dams in place, these salmon would just pool up. And they try to redistribute them to other places. And they're like, nope. I need to go back to where I'm from. It's weird, man. Biologize the life is weird. And it is amazing. It is amazing. It's funny, right? Like, we think we're so. Because we can do things that other ones can't do. But they can do things we can't do. We just don't put a high priority on what they can do. For whatever egocentric reason. Yeah. But I was swimming in a Tanga, the Pacific Northwest, and it was with humpback whales. And I was with my daughter, and we looked at the mother and the calf. I mean, swimming, we were watching them. And it was, it's the most beautiful, overwhelming moment. I'll show you after some footage of it. But then I was alone. And I was like holding my breath and kind of free diving next to them. And when you're not on scuba, it's not they're happy to be around you. And I'm free diving and swimming with the mother and the baby. And I'm looking at the mother. And I'm certain, certain that she's just looking at me, but in the nicest way. Like, in the most peaceful, it was just, it's not like a shark eye that's like, whoa, this thing is like. Yeah. So I'm like certain that she's like, being trying to communicate. And like, so yeah, I'm still on the same breath as I'm communicating. And I go like this. I open my arms up and turn to the mother like this. So I'm feeling like that. And the mother mimics the humpback mimics me and turns right towards me and goes like this. So now we're swimming together. And I'm like this, like kicking out, Finson. And the humpback is doing, the mother is doing that to me. And I'm swimming in synchronously with the mother. And the baby was fun here. And then as soon as I'm like done from here and I go back down, she goes back down. And it was like, I wanted to cry. But yeah, it's like, I think like, I'm doing a little dancing. But also their brains are so much bigger than our, but of course, I still have all this water in my stomach. So if I'm going to do this, I might need to do it. So you need another one of those? What is the reason why you need so much water to do this? Is it so that the frog has a place to be? So the frog is safe. I've never injured a frog or anything. I'm sure he feels very comfortable knowing that. Here he goes. Oh, Jesus. Did he hop right out? Yeah. He's like, I know what the fuck is happening here. Hello, hey buddy. Hello, mom. You just, okay. So hello. Okay. I just usually like to get him. Get him a little bath. Oh, yeah. Very good. Okay. So this is basically the technique. And I've put up to 10 frogs inside. Look, so he come. Need more? And now we can hang and talk for, you know, as long as So how long does he stay in there? What's the longest he've kept him in there? And they live? Like three hours or so. And none of them have ever died? Nope. Wow. That's pretty mean. How bad do you have to pee right now? I don't want to turn. Anytime anybody complains about needing to pee, I'm going to show them this video. 10th, 10th water. And what are the eight ounces? 16. 16. It's my water break. It's more than a gallon of water. Yeah. Now, here's the magic of our second. I shouldn't have an empty. And I have to like get him to swim up to the. How do you do that? I just like, data and had fluoroscopies and looked where they were and then saw that then for you, I had a sore, I did sore and swam to like. Do you feel I'm moving around, side you? When there's a lot. When there's 10. Chime your face. Do you feel I'm moving around side you when there's a lot when there's 10 Jamie your face Here he comes no no first I like to get a little bit of You force an amount now can't talk Was the first time we did this one I? Worked on it. I started like three or four years ago and it's been a You know the first time you put the frog in your mouth. I got strong now No, I didn't swallow the first time just wanted to get comfortable with the Fauna. Yeah, and then I got it again after I tried it the second time and then I built up a resistance to say I'm No I hope that's good if you like sushi mouth empty right here comes this is over our Here it comes because I drank so much so it's like After like locate him you have to locate kind of Sounds what would you call this Jamie ASMR? So for people that are just listening I highly recommend you go to the video No, no, no, no, we're gonna keep this up exactly the way it is people need to say oh Take out like a leader of water. Oh my god. It's so strange Oh, I spit on biggie The water spout that's like you see put out the fire. Oh my god The frog is probably like what the fuck did I do deserve this? I bet that frog was just like an asshole person in another life Do we need another bucket? Go get that plastic buck in the back The the the I don't know if that's good enough, but for now we'll just use that for now It is quite preposterous to wash the amount of water that's coming out of you Oh, I'm just good. Where's he at right now? You got him in there put him in my hands. Okay. There he is Here little fella Little fella you've had a rough life You know that a road you've had a road paddy So that's the frog trick he's alive and perfect. Yeah, he's good fine. Oh, go up. There's a I don't want to lose him. Hey, you want to put him back in the jar My big Need more of the paper towels Jamie Real ones, I don't know But is that just coincidental? No, no, no, there's a guy Ed Calderon He's a guy used to work with the Mexican police at the border Let me take a few paper towels, too and he He brought us some handcuffs to teach us how to get out of him, right? Just noticed that they were there random It seems planned. Yeah, but that's really they were just here He gave him to me and he gave me a little tool to show me how to How to open him what's this plastic thing? I have no idea But he gave you tools to show you had to open like how I don't remember I'll have to go back and watch the video Yeah, I like it the fuck out of that kind of pick on me. Yeah, how to shove it through the thing to kind of like Go past the teeth of the lock to make it open up say how to pick them. Yes Exactly So not gonna work We're trying to do that What are you physically trying to do? Oh? I just want to see if I can actually break them Break them. Yeah, I break them metal. So like really break them for real How do you usually do that? I don't know. You don't know. It's like really hard to break Was it usually easy to break them? No, it's always very difficult to break handcuffs because you're breaking my handcuffs Right, but you're trying Because there's some sort of technique to it or something using leverage How many days of your life do you think you spent fucking with handcuffs? You can just boil it all down to time 50 yeah, but this is probably boring for like anybody that's a big So you're just trying to use the way the attachment as a leverage point Just that yellow thing. Yeah That thing might be weird that yellow thing, but yeah, I'm trying to use like What is the yellow thing? I don't know. Oh, just just how Ed brought them to us Hmm, you want to we could talk it by now. I'm like it gonna be stuck on this. Yeah, but you'll be so preoccupied. Yeah That frog's like what the fuck just happened look at them. He's just sitting there breathing so it Yeah, imagine I'm being a frog like well, this is it. I knew it was coming one day I'm so scared of bass Either way there. Yeah, these are the ones I get are like normally they would be like used for bait So I was for it so I asked the guys I could give me some ear and they became my daughter's pets The super I've never Never ever injured or hurt a frog But how do you know that that was gonna be the case when you first wall one the first one you swallowed You probably had to be like no, I didn't start the fire started with like bingo balls and things like that I So playing around So it started with like you know How much water had put in and how could I spout the water out to use it to put out the fire? I think that the kerosene flowed on top and I went to That's so bad for you. What is kerosene like inside your body? Do you feel a burning? No, but The promise all that's no the promise all that stuff has a residue. What does this guy doing? James oil-based It's what I spout Haji Ali Egyptian fire eater in human fountain. Do you know this guy? Yeah, that's a guy. I'm talking. Oh, yes Yeah, he's a boy There's a really funny clip of see he's spitting the kerosene and then he puts it out with the water Which is like a me so folks on top. Yeah, look how much control Yeah, I saw that act and wanted to like figure that out What year is this Did it um like almost a hundred and twenty five of the scissors 100 years ago. I mean that guy Haji Ali. Yeah, he was called the human fire hyd that had to be a rough way to go However, he died because he probably did everything Yeah, yeah, forget those Through the after yeah We don't need to do very slippery so let me get back to the question that I have before you ran off because you got you were worried about your arm Do you do you have like you've done so many insane stunts and so many really? These bizarre things that require so much of you Do you do like have a thing in your mind that you have to keep ramping it up and that do you have a place You'd ultimately like to get to with these with these things? No, I just constantly like kind of try to figure out like What things have been done in the past? Historically and then I try to figure out how to make them interesting and then I figure out how to make them kind of modern so it's not like a You know, it's like it's a it's a small step by step Process and I think about each thing and then I try to put them all together. Do you feel like you have to keep pushing the envelope? um Well, I have like a few things up and trying to work on to Get to that place so there is like a It's not a push the envelope. It's to save a bunch of things. I've been trying to how many do you have like on the back burner in the back your head? More crazy ones that I'm trying can you share them? Uh The the thing I will tell you is if you put them all together, but the letters all equal out like my name so that And that's yeah, that's all you can say, but yeah I think that's gotta want to go to one to it What do you enjoy most? Do you enjoy? Does that make if you talk about something too much and then you talk it away? I understand yeah Yeah, you take away the magic of like what he's gonna he's gonna do what yeah Like when it gets announced. Yeah. Yeah Do you enjoy doing these big things or do you enjoy the live shows or do you enjoy Freaking people up just random people out like all of it So it's not like one specific thing. I kind of love doing card tricks of doing magic I love doing things from history. I love looking like the the human aquarium guy You know the frogs and goldfish and some of that came from Houdini writing in miracle mongers all about his act So it's like you look into the history of things that have been done like Houdini the human fire hydrant And you find these there's a great book that Ricky J wrote who's an amazing magician where he discusses and explains Everything learn all these things put them together and then what I do that Ricky thought was amazing is an insane is like I actually take these ideas That that seem impossible but magical and that's what the amazing part is taking them from a Hypothetical image and then learning how to do them so that's like what's amazing about the whole process to me And Ricky's book called learning pigs and farted. They're so many bizarre but amazing acts that exist in there So it's like you look at them like no that can't be real, but it was real if you believe it was real How many of their how many of you are there out there? Like this must be of like I always think of standard comedians as being a very small group of people that kind of Understand each other. There's there's a good amount of amazing magician. How many a thousand The planet no, there's a lot of guys that are me. Yeah, and there's different categories But the stuff that you're doing is not just magic what I'm saying is like this sort of the crazy Yeah, you're like mixing it all you're transcending magic and to you go into this weird realm of what I like All that you guys I like to use the body as the prop So I have to figure out how to do things where like your body is magic and I think that comes from like I didn't have like You know a lot of many resources to like oh go get which is lucky because then I was like okay So what can I do with like what's around? Okay, nice pick or a bunch of water Of course you'd be in the best you're yeah Yeah, not yet, but like you have to figure it out But you also do balance it out with like I mean you obviously develop some problems from not eating that one time and you know You've you've got these stunts where they have this possibility of physically injuring you permanently yeah Sorry to bounce out the risks in the rewards. Yeah. There's not that many of those people out there I hope not. No. That's what I'm saying like the people. I worry about them You don't worry about yourself. Well, I think I'm careful. You know, yeah I'm still like so we did one two four five six seven eight nine ten five five leaders basically that's like I think that's In one shot. I think that's a record. I don't think I've actually ever done that many you never drank that much water I don't think so. I think I usually cap it a gallon. Well, it's dangerous, right? You can die from drinking too much water and toxic case Yeah, but I think that's if you like flush it out too much, but but When you combine that with other things and it's things so that's well kids have done like in Like for tour for for eternity when they have to do those hazing rituals Right, they've died from drinking too much water and there was a woman in San Jose Yeah, it is possible of course what you would San Jose where she was on the radio and there was a thing like how much water Can you drink it? You wonder when an Xbox for a kid and she died? Yeah, yeah I think that's when your electrolyte levels get messed up. Is that what it stops where yeah, cuz yeah, so you Your water become just too much water in your system and your body doesn't do it and yeah, that makes sense. Yeah, yeah And it flushes out and to put the imbalance off on your electrolytes So when you do something like this do you make sure that you consume a lot of electrolytes beforehand because you're not Because I couldn't either do anything if you're gonna do the frog And why is it for my friend told me do not do the frog? I guess why sounds gross. I don't want you to have to do that cuz I've been up to listen to it You Definitely does sound gross But you you feel okay after drinking all that water that quickly. Yeah, but I spouted it out That's true. That's right. Most of it, right? There's got to be a lot. Yeah, I'm purpose. Yeah, Jesus You're a weird man David Blaine. You really are that's what I was getting at like when I'm saying there's not a lot of people like you out I'm glad you're there. I really am I'm glad you're out there up first of all because I think you're very entertaining But also because I I love when there's a new type of person that I meet You know, and you're there's not I've met a lot of people But you're you're in this new like oh, and then there's this guy You know, this is like a totally new frequency of human or just freak Take out the cleansing both But I mean it's it's a very strange path that you're on I mean ultimately it's like it's a The end of the day it's it's trying to just figure out how to make things that seem is Close to magic as possible and the process is really difficult and tricky and Laborous to get to but eventually you start to figure out this could look magical. It's this or this could you know But you seem like a very joyful person because of all this you know, you're clearly love what you do. Yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah That's why I do it. No, you love it. Yeah. That's what's interesting. It's like such a strange thing to love to do Stan what you do is crazy fight Take it down a long time, but that but I'm saying that's crazy like it is maybe but that's the same It's the same you're pushing your body to do things that most people But you're basically you're living in a place where you have to override this comfort and you have to override But your body's trying to tell you not to do and you push yourself You know, it's and then it And it's that whole journey of pushing yourself to do things that you physically don't think you can do or To set a goal that that's the best part. I think I'm just I'm fascinated by people that are really far down on a path That seems real do you know, we are a brought up that woman's Stephanie Milinger on the podcast before I follow her on Instagram, and I know I've posted some of her stuff on Instagram, but she's like a contortionist and She has like an incredible balance and and and course strength and she's this very small woman who does insane things with her body Like she did this one she's on a handstand and she bends her back so that her butt touches her head Like her spine is so flexible that you look at some of the things that she does and you they don't seem to be like Watch this look at this. Yeah, watch how she does this and look and also she's bouncing on these posts, right? So look what she does with her Wow, look at that that is amazing Amazing. Yeah, and then she stands with one hand and and she does by the way She does this like off the side of cliffs and she's incredible like look at the way her body is Contorted yeah, that's incredible Pressing her butt against the top of her head in the craziest way like it doesn't seem like a person She'd be able to do that and the amount of physical strength that it takes to move your body like this and balance while you're doing it It's just It's the the years Time yeah, this is what I'm saying like she's so far down the path See if you can find the one where she bounces on the plates that one in the middle where you see the plate watch this So she takes a this is like a standard Olympic weightlifting plate, right? So she puts it down so it's on its edge and Then she stands it on top of a bar Right so you got this like this bar that was like a Small chin up So it's a round thing bouncing on another round things Amazing and then she lifts her whole body all the way up and over and does a handstand on this fucking thing I mean, she's amazing Unbelievable and again always smiling always like joyful Loves this but the physical strength that it takes to do something like that and the kind of balance That's what I'm talking about like someone who's on this crazy path Where if you you asked someone could someone do that you'd be like no the body doesn't do it work like that It's not how body works But it does you just have to take these little baby steps for years And then you look back and you're in a different place And then also you find a version of it and then you figure out how to make it your own Yes, yeah, taking something and then made it like a whole yes new art right poetic Yeah, yeah, she's or like Cirque du Soleil like whenever I time I go to see sort of seen most of the Cirque du Soleil shows Every time I go I'm like what the how are the fuck? What are the their ambience like yeah, but they're on a path? They're just really far down on this path of extreme dedication Extreme focus and that's what you're doing. You're just doing it with bizarre physical feats and magic It's very interesting. It's very interesting. I'm really happy that you're around. I really am I enjoy the fact that a person like you exists. Oh, thank you and I want thank you for being here too, man. I really enjoy the fuck out of it. It's very cool. Very cool to talk to you too I'm wanting to meet you for a long time. I'm my pleasure. My honor. Thank you very much. Thank you So one more time this will most likely be taking place August 31st weather for many weather when we will let everybody know we'll put it on Instagram We'll put it on Twitter and if there's any sort of a change Let me know and we'll let everybody know great. Thank you brother. Appreciate me. Good man. Goodbye, buddy