Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. See you, sir. Thanks for having me back. My pleasure. My always. Yeah. So much crazy shit going on in the world. And even before we scheduled this, like more crazy stuff is happening. The war broke out, all kinds of things. Yeah. How are you feeling about the President Trump? That's an open-ended question. Do you text with him and talk to him? Occasionally. Yeah. Occasionally he'll send me a text. I get these, like, truth social posts of, you know, things that he's saying. But this whole fucking Iran thing, man. Like, did you see this coming? No. Definitely. I don't know. I mean, who did? I mean, when did he even decide? You know, their national security strategy they put on November basically just said, we've degraded their capacity. It's a win. There was no sense in which there would be additional action. I think it ushers in a new paradigm. Completely the older post-war era is just over. Mark Carney, the prime minister of Canada, articulated that the World Economic Forum. Probably better than the Trump administration did. Saying very clearly that older rules-based order is gone. You saw AOC tried to sort of articulate it, but she sort of fell apart. The Munich Security Conference in February. So this is an administration that is, I mean, and I don't even think they're thinking, I wrote a piece and I decided not to publish it because I was sort of like decapitation doesn't really work for regime change. But it's not clear that they're really out for regime change or they're just asserting power, shaking up things. I mean, some of it's art of the deal, changing the person that we're negotiating with. That's Venezuela and Iran. Is there really going to change those regimes? I don't think most people don't think so, but I'm not sure that that's what they're going for. They're just going for an assertion of American power in service of American interests. And then what happens in Iran, what happens in Venezuela? I don't think they care that much about. These are not behaviors that they do. Well, the none neither thing made any sense to me. The Venezuelan thing, I mean, look, they wanted him out forever. And he definitely stole the election to get in there in the first place. And he was a dictator, but at least that one was, at least clean. They go in, kidnap him, get him out. This one's nuts. Like, and what's happening in Tel Aviv? It's hard to know what's real and what's not because there's a lot of fake video going around and a lot of weird posts on X. So it's, when I do peak in, it's hard to know and you have to listen to Grock and then Grock dismantling a lot of the fake videos. Wait, wait, wait, wait, where do the fake videos at your face? This is like fake, fake videos of, you know, like an insane amount of bombs dropping down on the city, but it seems like there's a massive amount of destruction in Tel Aviv. Yeah, I haven't checked in lately, but I'm assuming. Was that just today or yesterday? Yeah. I mean, I think the president is, there's been some just, you know, Rubio said something about how, oh, we had to act because we knew that Israel was gonna act anyway. And I think people interpreted it in Netanyahu who's in the White House a lot. This, I think this president has shown whether you like him or not, you know, and there's certainly things that I'm unhappy about and have criticized. But I think Trump is in charge, like he's making these decisions. There's nobody behind him. There's nobody, to me point for all of that, you know, the Russians or whoever's, you know, these now these railies, you know, it's just he's clearly, I mean, Elon gave him, you know, $250 million and he still, you know, he didn't give him even the electric car credit, you know, like Trump is in charge, you know, like I think that's one of the big lessons from this. And I don't think that, I think that means that there's not a lot of like second order thinking here, like, oh, what's the move after that? He doesn't know. He's just acting. That's what's so wild about it, is that this older foreign policy establishment, which, you know, was like, let the experts decide what the right foreign policy, you know, all these think tanks, and that's just gone now. It's just irrelevant in this presidency. And I don't think it'll come back, like if you get a Gavin News summer or president AOC, I look president who? I don't think, yeah, I really think she ever admitted before, before, I mean, but I don't think it's gonna come back and I think that that's what the Prime Minister of Canada realized, I think that's what the Europeans are starting to realize, that this is a completely different world that we live in than the one we lived in, just a couple of years ago. Which just doesn't make any sense to me, unless we're acting on someone else's interests, like particularly Israel's interests. It doesn't just didn't make any sense to me. Like if they had supposedly dismantled their chances of making the nuclear bomb, whether or not that's true, I mean, it's so hard to know. He was unsatisfied, and just like he was like, I'm not getting anywhere in these negotiations, and I'm gonna replace the person I'm negotiating with. It's just, you know, turn over the table, like change things up. You're not getting anywhere. And you could credit, you could say he was too impatient. There of you was, the Democrats were too patient with Iran, they kept trying with Iran, Iran, they weren't giving them what they wanted. I'm not defending it, I'm just saying, I think that's what explains it. They haven't done a very good job explaining it because I think that it just sounds to some extent like what it is, which is that it's, they're acting without, they're sort of like, well, does it result in regime changing Iran? We don't know, they might say that we want that or whatever, but that's not, ultimately, they're not acting on the basis of achieving regime change. But just seems so insane based on what he ran on. I mean, this is why a lot of people feel betrayed, right? He ran on no more wars and these stupid senseless wars. And then we have one that we can't even really clearly define why we did it. Well, but he said he's against endless wars. They're all endless. Well, we hear rumsfeld talk about Iraq when it first happened. Tell me, they were talking about six weeks. Six weeks. Oh, yeah. Six weeks. Yeah. But they put, that was ground force. And I know that they've not ruled that out. For me, that would be. They have. They have not. Oh, my god. My name is David. I thought you said it in now. Yeah, no. But they don't seem eager to go into it. I mean, I criticize the Venezuela action because I sort of was like, how are you possibly going to run Venezuela? And then I think a little bit more time passed. I was like, oh, they're not going to try to run Venezuela. Like that's not what this is. They wanted to take over the oil. Yeah. And even there, I mean, the oil, it's not significant at any global level. I don't even think it's really about the oil. I don't think it's about the oil. I don't think it's about the oil in Iran either. Well, the oil reserves are significant. It's just the type of oil and how to extract it is extremely difficult. Lots of worst jokes in the air. Like the big abundant reserves are in the air on. So you're talking about it. What a nightmare. It's super far away. It's terrible. You get a gorilla conflict. You get a gorilla conflict breakout around those oil facilities. I mean, it's already more expensive because you have to heat up that particular type of. It's really heavy oils. To heat it up to get it out of the ground. Then you have to heat it to transport. It's a total nightmare. I just, I mean, and as a conservationist, I would say, that would be last place I'd want to see us getting oil from. There's a lot of other places that have oil. We shouldn't be going into the Amazon. So what if anything makes sense to you about this attack in Iran? I don't know that. And I'm not sure what I think of it. I mean, I don't like it. I don't like, I mean, the whole older system was that you had this international security council would have to agree. The Congress would have to agree. That's all gone now. I mean, it's just a totally different. This guy is just acting. So he says he's not getting where they want to get in the negotiations with the Iranian. So he says we have some leverage over you and we're going to use it. Similarly, clearly Israel wanted this. Israel has its own motivations, I think. Yeah. But I don't think, I think it's not quite accurate to say that I just don't think all the evidence shows that Trump is his own man and he is the president. And like literally he couldn't even give back. He couldn't even give Elon the battery subsidy that he wanted. You know, I'm like, I get that. I've never seen a politician. I mean, I've never seen a politician act that independently. That's, I mean, a president act that independently. So I'm skeptical of, I mean, I think that, I think that Rubio was sort of like, well, they were going to attack. And so we had to, you know, there's some of that. But I just think Trump is doing what he wants to do. And we should. You really think it's that simple. Trump's doing what he wants to do. Yes. Yes. You don't think people are influencing him? Because there's a lot of war hawks around him, right? There's a lot of people that want to talk about it. One he had tucker was in the right time. I mean, Netanyahu was in there, but then tucker was in there a bunch. But do you think that he's against it? Tucker has the kind of influence in Netanyahu has? Well, I mean, I guess if you just based it on the outcome, then the answer is no. No. No. But that's what I'm saying. I just think, he listened to everybody, but I just don't think it's, Russians aren't behind him. I mean, Trump is, look what he's been through. I mean, he's, you know, he's got where he is. There's no way he's going to, they don't have anything on him. That's why you know that. I don't think they have anything on him. But that's the way he's that way. Well, it could, but we don't see any evidence for it. Well, you wouldn't see any evidence until it broke out. Sure. They released it. And we'll get it. I'm sure we'll get into Epstein. But I mean, I just think when you don't have evidence of something, then you can't assume that it's happening. I haven't seen any evidence. I've seen evidence that Trump is fully independent with, particularly this case of Elon, surprised me. I would have thought at a minimum, you'd give your largest campaign contributor. The one thing you want. I mean, doge was something you wanted to. But and then I look at Iran and I kind of go, you know, Trump is always one. I mean, Trump has been, he said he doesn't want Iran to have a nuclear rep for a really long time. I don't know the exact date, but certainly. Well, no one wants him to have a nuclear weapon other than Iran, right? Yeah. I think that the other Al-... Well, he was also put it this way. He was also critical of the Democrats approach, which was the sort of the mainstream IAEA approved approach because of, of course, international law, Iran has the right to a nuclear, to a nuclear energy and a nuclear facilities, including nuclear nuclear for this centrifuges and the enrichment. Iran has the right to all that in an international law. And so, and Trump doesn't agree with that and he's not going to let international law get in his way. So when you say he has a right to it, you're talking just about nuclear power. Yeah, right. But that includes enrichment. So you know, to a certain point. Right. But they've already surpassed that point. Right. Yeah. And I believe I, you know, if I'm wrong, I'll correct it on axe. But I don't think it specifies the level of enrichment is part of the issue. And then you've got these centrifuges and so it's all been a cat and my whole team. I personally do not doubt for a minute that Iran wants nuclear weapons. So that's what's been going on. I think most people think that. But the Obama administration was like, we can do, you know, we can lift sanctions and exchange for controlling their nuclear program. Trump has not for a very long time agreed without approach. I think he was criticizing it for many years before 2016 before he decided to run. But definitely for the last 10 years. Did you read the thing today that came out that they're discussing some sort of a leak transmission that seems to be an activation of terror cells? Iranians have? Yeah. I'm not, no, but I'm not surprised. Right. Sounds bad. Yeah. That's one of the things that obviously, that was the first thing I thought of was like, oh great, are we going to get a bunch of Iranian suicide bombers in the United States now. So obviously, I don't know if it's going to be suicide bombers, but I would imagine it would be something a little bit more destructive than that could be. I don't know what they can get in. I mean, Sean Ryan's been having folks on that say that. Yeah. People are getting in with with heavy artillery. I just don't know the status of it. Well, the real problem is they can do it for four years. The border was wide open. Oh, yeah. And definitely some people for the Middle East got through. And we have no idea like what is we, I mean, I'm sure there are some intelligence agencies that have an understanding of what the threat is. I hope so. I mean, I think we see that these terrorists are able to do an incredible amount of damage with pretty simple rifles. And sometimes was it the French, the club, that particular terrorist action, there are other people that were using bombs that only killed one or two people, but the guys with the machine guns were able to gun down like dozens of people. So certainly it's scary. That's scary. I think none of us, I think that's where a lot of Americans when it happened. The reason so many people were against it, believe it majority is against it, is because you're like, great. First of all, is there going to be another endless war and second of all, are we going to get a bunch of terrorist actions here? I think if we did, I don't think support for the war goes up. I think it goes down. Oh, for sure. Yeah. I mean, it's just such a fuck. I mean, the whole situation internationally has been so tense already with what's going on in Gaza, with what's going on in Ukraine. To add this to the pile, it's like, I mean, it genuinely feels like there's a real possibility that we might be entering World War III. How would that look like? I don't know. I never expected Iran to start attacking the launch bombs into UAE, Dubai. I mean, where else? There's no more of that. I mean, it makes Iran look, Iran looks pretty isolated. I mean, I will say, you know, I was totally obviously, maybe not obviously, but very much on the left and was opposed to all this stuff Reagan was doing. I remember even in the 80s, but it's like he really did. I don't like to say it was the only reason. It was obviously a bunch of weakening within it. But I mean, he really did push back against communism. He challenged the entire foreign policy establishment on the basic view of just, you know, of just kind of keeping it, you know, keeping the communists where they were. and instead Reagan really pushed back against it and said it got to be regime change. It's sort of almost a moral, sort of there's defense buildup, but a moral argument. And I think it had a big impact and to bring down communism. So I, you know, the Irani, it's, I'm obviously, I have very mixed feelings about it. The Iranian regime is just so evil and so awful that, you know, your, your, your, every time you see videos of people taking these great sections, you're like, somebody bring that regime down. On the other hand, that country is pretty, the people of that country are pretty radical. And the Shah in 1979, I just know that I was not watching all the old 60 minutes from the 70s. They're amazing. But the, the Shah was really modernizing the country. There was a lot of wealth coming in. There was a lot more inequality. There was also a lot more state repression from his intelligence services. But the country was, you know, full of radical Muslims who wanted, you know, that, when all that instability, they wanted to revert back to, you know, a radical Islamist regime. And that's still, now I've seen other estimates to say that, you know, the current regime is incredibly unpopular in Iran. But, you know, how that works out. It's really hard to say. But there is something, I caution my own, I, I talk back to my own anti interventionist instincts when I think about Reagan just being like, you know, we're not going to do just containment strategy anymore. We're actually going to talk back to communism because people deserve to be free. And now is everything better for, you know, is everything fine in Russia? I mean, communism was just awful, you know, just a totally soul killing, you know, crushing, you know, a giant lie. I mean, it's awful to totalitarianism. So I think we have to kind of keep that in mind. And especially when you're in a moment of just such incredible chaos like right now, I told my students, I'm like, you get to live through one of the most interesting moments in history, certainly in the last 80 years because of the entire paradigm where the United States had these allies and everything's going to go through the Security Council and we're going to try to make it to the UN and there's got to get agreements and all this stuff. That's just gone. I mean, it's just, it's gone to the part where they don't even, where you're kind of like how are you, what's going to happen inside Iran? They're like, that's not our concern. We hope that there's an overthrow of the government, but they're, they're not, we're not like going to necessarily commit to that. Well, they're also calling on the people to rise up, which is, you know, I mean, look, look at what they did with the protesters. I mean, they killed thousands of people. And look at Iran and Venezuela, they don't have internal, the opposition is not united. There's not a united opposition with a united figure. I remember it was so interesting to watch in 79, when these protests against the shower were going on, the left and the Islamistists made an alliance in Iran. Something very, it's something really interesting topic. I just are only starting to explore right now, but they made it a lot. So they'd be holding up, I had to be holding up the eye to hold it, come in, eat pictures in the street. Like they had their guy and the left was like, look, we're just going to, you know, go with this guy. I think he was making promises to the left around allowing, you know, more, you know, liberalism. And then they came in at just consolidated into this really hard line, Islamistist regime. But they had a guy. We don't have, they don't, you know, we don't have a guy in Venezuela. We don't have a guy in Iran. I don't know if there's anybody in Cuba really, you know, in the older regime, under like the Biden, the open society people, the open-sized establishment, they had somebody for Venezuela, this is a Moshado woman. Trump gets up there and he just goes, yeah, she doesn't have enough support. So she's not with us. Gone. You know, like they recognize that they don't have, there's nobody with a opposition, you know, street cred that can come into power. So I think they, and they know that they're not like unaware of that. So I think some of the like, oh, they should rise up in whatever. It's a little half-hearted. I don't know if they believe that that's going to happen. There's certainly not, they don't seem to be offering them, you know, material support. Right. It's just symbolic gesture to talk about it. Sounds like it. And I mean, in this kind of the beautiful collapse of communism, which occurred so peacefully with the Berlin Walling, the guard, you eventually just sort of like, it's just in the vibes. And the guards are just like, yeah, we're not guarding this wall anymore. And it's over. And it was just over. And it was like, there's a kind of like a moral collapse. I'm not so sure that they're going to get that in Iran. Doesn't seem like it. It seems like they've been preparing for this for a long time. Iranians. Yeah. They're dug in. Now it's the sun. And he's just part of the represents the, I was the IGRC, the security forces. I mean, it's their guy. I mean, it's what you would do. It's rally around the flag. It's classic. What happens? And so, but you know, never, you never know. I mean, these guys then might just negotiate more with the Trump administration wants. I think the Trump administration is like, we'll just keep killing your leaders until we get somebody into that. We'll make a deal with us. I think that's, I think that's how Trump thinks about it. Really? That's my, that's my best guess. You're smiling. Do you think this is funny? Because it's funny because it's, it's so, Joe, it's just like, you just look at all the think tanks and all the white papers and the state department and the plan and whatever. And it's just like, Trump's just, he's going to listen to Tucker. He's going to listen to that. Yeah. And he's going to decide what to do. This episode is brought to you by visible. Folks, there's one thing nobody wants this season. That's getting catfished. And it's not just dating profiles that are putting you at risk. It's also big wireless carriers. You know the type looks great at first promises a low price, but once you're locked in, surprise fees and an expensive bill that isn't what you were expecting. Your night and shining armor, visible wireless. It's one line wireless with unlimited data and hotspot for just $25 a month, taxes and fees included. Now that's a green flag. The best part visible is all digital. So you can switch as fast as you can swipe. Don't fall for the trap of getting catfished by wireless. Visit visible.com to learn more and start loving your wireless carrier. Terms apply. See visible.com for plan features and network management details. Is that good? I don't know if it's good. I mean, I just, we don't know yet. I mean, I think part of it is, is it going to work? Part of you guys that moral and you're like, well, but does it, does it work to make, have better outcomes? I don't know. We're in a realm of absolute chaos. We're also in a realm where AI is going to be powering autonomous weapons, if not already. I mean, that is going on. That is so interesting. This thing with anthropic and the DoD and what's happening there, that is really interesting. So initially, anthropic was hesitant to allow them to use autonomous weapons, right? I don't know the status of it, but you saw the open AI, the head of open AI autonomous. It was an autonomous, it was an autonomous weapons. I think I'm not, don't give me exactly what I mean. She just quit like a couple of days ago. It was on ax and it was just like a huge story. So you have a bunch of, you have, you have a rift in between now. I think, you know, Sam and Elon are both on board and want to keep working with the DoD, but it looks like anthropic broke and, you know, and then, and then, hex up was like, well, but then we're going to punish you for this. That's very consistent with a kind of nationalist vision, which is that, which the Trump administration has, which is that your security strategy, your economic strategy, your border strategy, it's all a single, your industrial strategy. It's all a single thing, your trade strategy. It's all a single thing. And I think for Trump, it's just, you're either asserting power and and using your leverage and demanding more or your engaged and managed decline. You're just giving up, you know, and I, part of me, I'm, of mixed minds on it. Because on the one hand, I'm with the kind of, I kind of go, let's invest at home. We have all, you know, we have skid road to clean up, you know, we should be focused on that, not on trying to do regime change or bombing other countries or creating other problems. On the other hand, I think there's something right about defending the West. I mean, defending Western civilization, you know, defending our institutions, our norms, our liberal values. And nobody's done that. And we just had a guy in power that was, that opened our borders, that kind of gave a blank check to Ukraine. It seems like at a minimum with Trump, you have somebody that is taking responsibility in ways where Biden would be like, well, we're going to do what we're going to work with our allies. And it was just all kind of, like it was like, it was all kind of going to be decided in this, in this, you know, what, because you are in famous, it calls the cathedral, you know, just the, the single thing of the media and the think tanks and the academics and, and Trump was like, it's not working. And the working class of this country elected me to, to show strength and to demand a better return on our investment in terms of protecting our allies for our people. So that part of it, I think is really overdue and really necessary in a search of why the West is special, why we need to defend the West, is bombing Iran and replacing the, you know, the command you with his son is, Michelle, you know, is what's happening in as well as that the right approach that I don't know. But I think we were, the system was was failing. I mean, the open society system, which was supposed to be this liberal, you know, you know, system of tolerance, it became intolerant, it became totalitarian, it created censorship industrial complex, they, they weaponized the intelligence communities. We, you know, started getting ourselves into conflicts that we, that was not clear why we were in that, including Venice. I mean, sorry, including Ukraine. I mean, with Ukraine, it's like that war only continues because we continue to, to arm it. Like if we stopped, if we just were like, let's just have the, you know, just cut a deal wherever the border is right now. And you're just like, that's where it's going to stop. Then you can, I mean, I don't know, I'm not sure what's preventing that from Trump. I think he's annoyed with Putin. But yeah, I mean, my view is like, I don't see an interest in that war, um, continuing. I don't know how it's in the interest of the working, the working class Americans or Americans. And I have the same questions about Iran and Venezuela and Cuba. But I think that is a totally different paradigm than the one that we had from 1945 to 2024. But the, the idea of tolerance for, you know, with the last administration, that seems just to be a narrative. It seemed to be a political strategy of keeping the borders open to an increased populations and blue states, raise the senses, get more congressional seats and then a path to citizenship where you'd have permanent voters. That's what it seems like. And then there's also a ton of Medicaid fraud that's wrapped up in that that we're now seeing. Yeah. I think that's part of it. I mean, there were the times to the piece on why Biden left the borders open. And it was what was there. It was a funny piece. There was this, it was, you know, part of it, he's so out of it, right? Like there were just, it was not clear. Like there wasn't clear. There was like a meeting where he was like, yeah, we're going to just do this thing. They kind of concluded that I think Cecilia Munoz, who's one of the more moderate advocates and was in the bottom of the station, I think she said something like, Biden just wanted to give the left, just felt like he wanted to give the left what they wanted. And that's what, you know, the Soros think tanks and the, you know, the very progressive immigration groups have been, you know, have been advocating. Did the same thing on climate? So it makes sense. I know Elon talks a lot about how, oh, it's about importing voters and whatnot. Maybe. But it's not even clear that that's a good, that's a strategy that's going to work. You know, and well, because first of all, we don't know the Latinos. Like why are like, why do we assume Latinos are all going to, you know, vote for Democrats? Well, if you've got them all on Medicaid and Social Security, the numbers there are, it's actually more complicated. Europe is definitely the case that you have higher rates of crime and higher rates of social services among migrants. Here are Latino migrants traditionally, you know, be, you know, really thrive. You know, they do much better than the mostly Muslim immigrants in Europe. So I mean, I'm skeptical. I mean, the other thing, the statistic that I learned from David Shore, who's like one of the top Democrat pollsters when he was talking to Ezra Klein after the 2024 elections, he was like, if all eligible voters had voted, Trump would have won by 3 percentage points rather than 1.5. So it's also, so I always think it's kind of funny because the Republicans are always like trying to make it harder for people to vote. But under that calculation anyway, and maybe it's just Trump, maybe other Republicans won't be doing it harder for people to vote. What do you mean? You mean, male and vote? Yeah, just the whole effort. Yeah, but the problem is male and voting has always been a vector for fraud. Yes, it may be. I don't know how much of it there is. I've seen different things on it. It goes back like decades. People have been talking about male and voting just being too open to fraud. Well, but then maybe, but then the question is, is it really bad that, I mean, in the words, if David Shore is right, if everybody who could vote had voted, Trump would have won, like basically by twice the margin. Yeah. Well, I don't know if that's necessarily true, but when I see laws like what California has where you're not allowed to show ID, there's only, I mean, I've tried to find some sort of charitable way where that would make sense other than you want to open the door for fraud. There's nothing. Well, narrative that they say, oh, poor people don't have like, you see Kamala Harris. They don't believe that they don't have a Xerox machine. No, but you ever see the thing. I think it was a guy. I don't know if you did for free press. A guy was going around interviewing. Well, first, the interview liberals at like, I think you see Berkeley. And he was like, you know, do you think that you should have to have an ID to vote? And they were like, no, because black people don't have IDs. And like that's just going to be hearing that on end. No, no, of course, but they believe that. Yeah. I mean, but then, I don't have you still that saw that it's an incredible video because then he goes to like, I think he goes to Harlem or he goes to like a black neighborhood in New York. And he was just asking black people, it's like, do you have an ID on you? It was like everybody was like, yeah, like what's the matter with you? Well, it's also we just got done with three years of union ID to prove that you have been vaccinated. So you need to be able to have that to go to work, get on the plane to eat a restaurant. It didn't make any sense. It was so immediately contradicting what had just gone down, you know, months earlier. It's just stupid. Well, yeah, that was about that was because the left wanted to control people's behavior. And on voting, they the old I know because I just when I talked to my progressive friends about it, what, you know, and family of friends, it's it's very much like no, we can't put barriers on the way of voting because that's what they did during Jim Crow. I mean, that's where it goes back to. I mean, it's not a barrier. It's just an insurance that you're a citizen while you're voting. And they say there's there's not much they say there's very little fraud. I'm just telling you what they say. I'm not saying I agree. I was saying though. Progressive. Yeah, do you believe that that's horseshit. That's a horseshit. I think they believe it. I'll put it down. Yes, I think they just say it because that's the thing that everybody says. I think it's a group thing thing. I mean, I think if you sit down with any rational person and no one's watching, you know, there's no cameras on them and you asked them does that make any sense? No one would say it makes any sense. People in this country or citizens have some form of ID or can get some form of ID. And it's entirely reasonable to ask people to prove that you are who you are if you're voting for the president of the United States. That seems pretty reasonable. I find it totally reasonable and I support it. I'm just saying that if you make it, I'm just saying that you may, the Republicans may may result in outcomes that are not the predictable ones that they think they'll get just because Trump is maybe, you know, a special case. But I mean, he was able to turn out reluctant voters like he motivated people to vote because people were fed up with what had gone on in the last four years. And I think that open border was the biggest one. I mean, it was one of the biggest ones because people just felt hopeless like this is crazy. Like what you're doing, you're letting in what's equivalent. At least if you're, if you're just being charitable, it's 10 million people. It was, it was huge. Just being conservative. It's 10 times Austin. You let 10 Austin's in in four years of people who you have no idea who they are. It was it was huge if you just being conservative. It's ten times Austin you let ten Austin's in in four years of people who you have no idea who they are Yeah, and and Americans were on board with closing the borders and then when it came time to actually asking all the getting those folks to leave that came in The all the supports appeared right. I mean well, it's not asking them to leave It's showing up at home depot and just rounding people up and raiding places and going to restaurants and pulling people out of their houses and I think people got very uncomfortable with the idea of militarized police wearing masks on the street Yeah, and then when you find out that these guys have only been trained for seven weeks and they're they get a $50,000 signing bonus and then you find out that a giant percentage of them are Latino Which is kind of crazy You know like the two guys who shot that guy in Minnesota. They're both Latino and yeah, I mean that's what you get when you have Completely untrained unprepared people Well, that's only that the whole Minnesota thing with Alex Prities a complete cluster fuck. I still not have not seen verification of whether or not the The narrative that makes sense is true But the narrative that makes sense was that there was an accidental discharge of his gun as they were pulling it away from him And then that led to them thinking that maybe he still had the gun on him because you're in the chaos of arresting someone Someone says he has a gun a gun goes off and then they shoot the guy Yeah, I bet when you go about when they do the proper evaluation of it. They're gonna find multiple mistakes. I'm sure by the law enforcement That and then there was the thing with the woman who got shot where you have a guy who had almost been run over Just a couple of weeks before and the drag in his car the guy who shot her have been dragged by another vehicle He got dragged like 300 feet to something crazy So when a car is coming at him you could imagine this guy's got some PTSD from that and he should not have been sir He should not have been No, and also I was ready it shouldn't have said that fucking bitch like after he shoots her in the face too That's crazy too. Yeah, I mean the reaction The just the heartlessness of the reaction It was horrible was terrible including by the administration. That's probably why k christy nomen of them having to go But then on the other side these protests are organized. They're organized and they're paid for Which is also something to be take that people need to understand. These are not organic protests It's not organic that it just happened to be taking place in the very same place where you've found hundreds of millions of dollars in fraud Right this is like one of the clearest most obvious distractions you've ever seen like in the public's Arena like where you have these people who are being paid to protest They they give them money to go out there and protest they give them signs They're organizing it they go signal groups. They're Docksing all these different ice workers. They find out what their license plates numbers are they find out where they're staying They go to the hotel the cops the local cops are being told to stand down so you've got it like this this convergence of all these factors that lead to chaos and you know Mike Benz was talking about it It was essentially saying it's a mathematical thing and that if you have these things play out You're going to have a certain amount. It was Mike Benz right? It was saying that it was a certain amount of people that are you're gonna Have instances you just playing it out over the numbers certain amount of these protests You have organized protests. You have untrained ice agents. You have a lot of chaos You have support for people screaming in the streets Somebody gets shot boom and then it moves the needle and this is Calculated that they want this to happen They want it to happen this way because then this kills all the support for people that you know We're kind of on the fence whether or not I should be deporting all the legals Excuse me what it should Excuse me whether they should just go after violent criminals and And then there's these weird narratives like oh only 14% are violent criminals that have been arrested He was 60% or criminals 60% of the people plus or criminals and like what what by what definition violent criminals like what he like What do you is it okay if they just coming here and rip people off like you find with that? It's just like the violent ones. We need to get rid of like I Think they didn't yeah, they did a fairly poor job of it like why were they focused on on Minneapolis I think most don't understand how radical the left in Minneapolis is because you did Western place But it's actually got a long radical left tradition. Yeah And as you were saying I mean Alex pretty he should have been arrested several days before when he had a gun on him and got Into an altercation with police they should have arrested them then and then they could have the judge could have done a lot of different things But they could have taken away his gun they could have put a restraining order on him So that next time he showed up and people will know to look for him then he would have been you know kept out of the area Do you know the story about the gun that he was carrying? No, okay So he's carrying a gun called the SIG P320 which is notorious for accidental discharges Not not mean there's lawsuits all over the place. There's videos of cops in Precincts bending over to pick something up and the gun goes off in his holster There's a ton of these so I don't know if this is completely accurate because this is obviously the fog of chaos of these type of Altocations in situations, but there's a video that many people have reviewed and it's their conclusion That if you watch the video when one of the ice officers removes his gun Even though he does not have his finger on the trigger has his hand on the gun and this finger is on the slide as he's moving off It appears the gun goes off now they've zoomed in on it and shown that it does look like the guns going off And it does correspond with the sound of a gunshot. Okay, it's just hard to know you hear a gunshot in the video Yes, but I don't know if it's legitimate. It's hard to know but but if it was any other gun like save us a Glock I would say that doesn't make any sense this fingers on on the trigger. It's not gonna go off But that gun is notorious for going off. There's a guy online that he shows a video Where he takes the gun and he manipulates the slide and it goes off Yeah, and it goes off without nothing touching the trigger no one no one's pulling on it. It's just if you have the other problem is people alter guns. Okay, so the issue with the SIG was they They had I believe up to 2017 they had a lighter trigger and this lighter trigger if the gun was dropped or if something happened to it It was going off and they determined it's the gun does not have an internal safety like some other guns do It's I'm not an expert so I don't know exactly what the trigger mechanism is but my understanding is that the trigger mechanism is different Than their other guns like they have another gun that's notoriously reliable. It's a SIG P365 You could drop that gun it's not gonna go off It's not known for accidental discharge, but the 320 is known and there's tons of videos of people Demonstrating this online. There's a video where they're on a range and a gun goes off And a guy's holster and the range instructor says what the fuck just happened and this guy He points to this you know the gun that went off and he said is that a SIG And he goes here goes get that fucking thing off the range So it's it's that notorious This is one particular model and it just happened to be the one particular model that Alex Preddy was carrying which is fucking crazy Well his behavior was really reckless I It's really hard for people to hold two ideas in their mind at the same time like ice mess that up right clearly and Alex Preddy I mean you see the earlier video You know where he kicks out the tail light of the ice vehicle right and he's I mean he's got a gun in the waistband of his His jacket hidden by the jacket. He gets into this altercation with the police. I mean I had but when I posted about it I didn't say this But one of the responses were suicide by cop people were like suicide by cop I mean and I'm not making that claim, but I mean it his behavior was I mean the the recklessness of the gun choice Mirrors the recklessness of his behavior in those instances And I heard people being like oh well He you know he was just defending that poor woman There was a police officer engaged in a rest of a person and Alex Preddy intervened in that I mean I think Well, it was a little I don't know if it was an arrest The police officer shoved this woman Yeah, he was in an altercation with somebody. Yes You don't go and there was people go oh you got to put yourself in what do you think you're like who do you think's going on here? Like the boy should put himself in between that now the way the the ice officer wasn't police officer Right it's an ice officer. Do you call them? Please the way the ice officer reacted to the woman? Did that bothered me like he just shoved this lady like like step forward and fully shoved her That's when Alex Preddy gets involved. Yeah, and then pepper spray comes out and then an Alex Preddy should have absolutely filmed that Should have filmed the whole thing that that's exactly Well, we're filming it was clear. Yeah, cameras all over the so but but don't I mean multiple angles. Yeah, so but it's like I'm I just don't think that's appropriate behavior Let's go and get that's not the tradition of like I mean I think there's a non violent left wing tradition that's actually quite beautiful and spiritual and The row and Gandhi and King That's not what was going on in Minneapolis. That's not all what's going on This is a part of the problem with these things being organized Right organized paid protests and also people being radicalized by narratives then of course very different than what was going on with the Civil Rights movement you have social media So people are like radically pushed in one direction or another and it's not clear whether or not that's organic It's not clear is this the voice of the people or is this bot farms that are pushing things in one direction or another? Is it I mean this there's a lot of people that I Causiously watch their their posts on on X where I know that their AI. I know it's AI I can just tell by the way right now. There's so much AI slap on it's right now. It's weird Yeah, it's weird because it does muddy the water and it does fuck with discourse But it also radicalizes people one way or the radicalized people towards the right radicalizes people towards the left It's not good and I think this guy whatever his mental health struggles were that they appear to exist It seems like he was a troubled guy already So a thing comes along that defines them a cause that they're going to stand up foreign fight for because their lives probably a fucking mess and Their mind is probably a mess and they look at this they look at it like this is black and white binary situation for sure good guys and bad guys and Let's fuck all these fascists and he's kick-in tail lights and you know get involved in pushing matches with ice agents It's like that's crazy like all that stuff can should and can get you arrested Yeah, I mean I think on the organized issue remember like the civil rights movement was really well organized And it was like actually weren't being paid for it. It wasn't me promoting on social media It wasn't people's job. There are people in America right now that are unemployed that are paid protesters for a living oh I mean that's the entire like left-wing NGO sector as basically that right Yeah, I mean that's like that we saw I see at the level of San Francisco and for homelessness They just go and you work at a engine of a government funded or sorrows funded NGO And then you do all that civil disobedience stuff on your free time and But I was I just think I think that you were right you were right when you're saying like because I think it's the problem It's not the organization the promise that the organization in Minneapolis had a goal of Causing exactly what occurred. Yeah, the organization around the civil rights movement was to desegregate soda counters Yeah, and so one of them was about actually I mean the other thing is that brought pullback a little bit further Martin Luther King and the civil rights movement was about affirming our liberal democratic Western civilization Black people wanted to be a part of it. Yeah, this stuff where you're like we want to you know open the border and defund the police and basically start attacking all of these institutions of liberal democratic civilization. That's different. That's a radicalized left It's what gets a different clear He defines it best a suicidal empathy. I don't agree with Gat on that No, you don't think it's suicidal empathy. I don't think it's either suicidal or empathic because empathy is empathy is like Well, he he implies that to a lot of progressive ideas not just the immigration thing I don't think he necessarily I think it was actually long before the immigration thing that he was talking about it suicidal empathy the idea being that you need the rule of law to have a safe and peaceful society Yes, that's true. You did part true. Yeah, you need you need no violence You need no crime and when you're taking criminals and just releasing them from jail and you have no cash bail And you're doing all these things If you want to put on the fucking tin foil hat you would do that because you want chaos because you want chaos So you can have more rules and tighten down on people and have more control over the situation the civilization I mean, I think in that I mean, I think like it's not empathic to A lot more violent crime like I don't think that's empathy towards victims So I don't think I wouldn't call it empathy and not only that but like When you look at like the these who these folks are and I spent a lot of time looking at them and was one of them They hate Western civilization. They hate the United States of America. They hate capitalism like it's right It's an anti civilization thing that's a motivating it and that's not to say that like MSNBC watchers don't feel oh my feel bad for that person but I mean I always you know, it's like Like the people I hear complain about ice. They don't know any illegal immigrants They've never talked to them other than maybe their server or that you know, but they don't even really talk to their gardeners or their You know, they're they're made so I think it's like the idea that they empathy implies a deep understanding of someone's situation and so I think it's a Mis description of empathy. I think in some ways. It's more Quite the opposite of that that they're actually not showing empathy for all the people that are hurt by their policies whether it's open borders or enabling addiction or euthanizing poor and mentally ill people in Canada Or trans in kids. I don't think that those things are Empathic and the person that's doing doing them. I don't think is suicidal if anything. They're actually quite Full of themselves and quite arrogant about what they're doing. I mean I use the word pathological altruism in San Francisco and I say it's close to Moncousins syndrome by proxy. Maybe it is moncousins syndrome by proxy, but I don't think it's I worry about I worry about affirming because I think it's how progressive it's going to go. Oh, well if we go for the homeless are We're soft. That's just because we care so much. I just don't think that's the case Well, that's the homeless thing is nuts because the homeless thing is just a scam And we know that basically because of California like California What's happened with the whole homeless budget is so insane and that they vetoed audits of these budgets There's been $24 billion spent no one knows where it went there's no accountability and Then the homeless situation to increases. Well, that's why I mean remember it's like I was funny like I my students just did a pay We have something we've been working on it too like the Canadian euthanasia program Yeah, and it's like every year the numbers just keep going up and up and remind me of when you interview homeless You know service providers in San Francisco. They're like yeah, I know we're doing an amazing job every year We serve more and more people. It's like right. You have in it. You have all the you have the wrong incentives You're trying you're even incentive to serve to you've incentive to create homelessness and that's what they've done Well, if you get more money if you have more homeless your incentive is now not to eliminate homelessness because that's your job Right, that's how you make all your money when I first was alerted to that I was like I can't believe this is real like when you find out the amount of money That's involved in homelessness like that They spend $24 billion. Okay. Where did that go? Where and then there's no accountability? Okay There's no fraud. You're saying there's no fraud zero. Well, I wish there was fraud I mean somebody was sort of like can we expose you know like Nick surely expose the daycare is not doing anything I'm in the like Minnesota. I was like I wish the homeless Service providers weren't doing anything They're they're stealing the money that there'd be a lot less homelessness Well, what do you think they're actually Using the money to create homelessness. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I mean think about like so San Francisco was like up between a hundred and a hundred and twenty thousand dollars a year per homeless person things are I think LA at a bargain of something more like 25,000 that's that's just San Francisco. That doesn't count the 24 Billion that California gave so that money's going to you know single resident occupancy hotel owners It's going to nonprofit service providers or just bringing food and you know alcohol and drug paraphernalia To make it easier for people to do drugs and overdose and live in tents on the street That's you know It's very expensive to kill that many people that way. That's what San Francisco is proven right But it's really about the amount of people where that's their industry Like that there is an industry in taking care of the homeless situation and addressing the homeless situation and You know, Coli on noir when he was on the podcast He was explaining to me that he went to San Francisco and he was like why is it so bad up here? Do they need money's like no no no this guy was a lawyer was explaining to him? He's a lawyer as well Just explaining it to him like no no these people are getting money to deal with the homeless situation and some of them making quarter billion dollars a year and more Which is just nuts and then it's not getting better It's only getting worse and yet they see they still keep getting that money So it's like there's zero incentive to make it better There's an only incentive to make it worse and then we have no accountability So there's no auditing over the money $24 billion is a lot of fucking money So where is who's getting greased up? Where's that money going? Mostly it's into the it's into the temporary what they call they call it permanent It's propaganda work propaganda. It's a permanent supportive housing. It's neither permanent nor supportive It's often warehousing addicts where they die I mean we know that they died very high levels and those little this is a little crummy, you know single-reson occupancy rooms Yeah, they bought a lot of motels that were you know low low income, you know low You know cheap motels converting them having but they don't really there's no I mean all that money should have gone into a centralized addiction and psychiatric care system Cal psych is what it should have been and instead it's just it's just kind of yeah It's just basically incentivizing people to live on the streets and use hard drugs and dying over to us What's just so crazy? I mean if you wanted to make it better you to incentivize them and pay them based on the amount of people that are no longer homeless Right, but they don't do that But then the problem with that is well you're eventually gonna fix it all and then your business is gonna go away right and That's all happening. I think it's I think it's all happening Unconsciously like there's no room. There's no like you know secret room where they're rubbing their hands and being like other We're gonna make a lot of money this way. It's just you know when you interview them It's a very basic view, you know, it's just these people are victims They're victims of white supremacy and capitalism and and to victims everything should be given in nothing required Well, I think that's a nice narrative But I think once you start getting monthly paychecks from from the homeless industrial complex I think you're incentive is to keep this party going well sure, but they you're not But they think it's good. I mean they go this shows how good we're doing that We got a bigger budget this year and that's how they that's how they rationalize it. Yeah Yeah, I mean it's a sign of a very sick society Hence the title of your book San Francisco, Siko, which is a great title I mean it's a sick place and it was one of my favorite cities It was an amazing city Well, I've known my Netflix special there in 2016 so in just the amount of time in 10 years It's completely fallen apart when I was there in 2016. It was great with the mean There was always a lot of homeless people there But you have that in any liberal city, but it was never an epidemic. It was never like tents everywhere and shit on the streets That wasn't the case. It was just you know, it was a liberal city a progressive liberal city But it was cool. There was a lot of outdoor music. It was fun. It was a great place to go to restaurants and people walked around It was a great city filled with intelligent interesting Open-minded people and I live there when I was a little kid. I was there during the Vietnam war From age seven to eleven. I lived in San Francisco. It's a little bit better now. They've got a new mayor. Yeah a little bit I mean I want to acknowledge I can't lie about it. It's a little bit better. I agree I interview a lot of people still about what's going on It's still there like you know what happened with the mayor with his security guard. Yeah, I pulled down Yeah, first of all that's your ground for sure. He's learned some fucking jiu-jitsu the way Let's back grab him you didn't he didn't pummel he didn't do anything It looked like he had no understanding of what to do when that guy grabbed his body Like how is he a security guard? That's crazy. How how can you be a security for the mayor? If you literally don't know what to do in a clinch I thought he'd look like he didn't really see the guy as a threat or something like maybe he thought he was just crazy See a guy as a threat if a guy grabs me like that I'm not gonna let him get that position on you know He's cut it back it probably cuts back of his head Bang him on the ground. He body slam yeah onto the fucking concrete and then a metaphor for the whole situation Just walks away Walked away like it was nothing like he walked away not here See though because I saw that video and I couldn't tell if the mayor actually saw what was happening One hundred like he was going he was looking that way and he was he was here when they started physically Was struggling with each other and then when they're struggling with each other he walks off and then the guy gets body It was the weirdest video to watch. Yeah, but because they did it in a launch a lot they both see Yeah, as a metaphor for this is a different angle the marriage is running off to get help. Oh, he is Running off yeah, me may refresh this Who's it yeah show me getting so there's the merit there. Okay? He pushes this guy here in a second the mayor sort of as soon as he gets watch Not watch it takes off so why are they hanging out with this guy in the first that looks like they're in Can't so the security guy started it and he doesn't know what the fuck he's doing There's the mayor over here. Okay. Oh Look at this like she's taking much better Much better video and the other guys a lot stronger than him so the mayor What's awful on the tape starts running right seems relaxed? Okay, okay, he did start walking slowly and then starts With that gonna get help that guy started it all He pushed that guy if you're a security guy the last thing you want to do when there's one of you and two of those other guys is Deal with the situation that way. We push a guy I'm I have to say it's something you said. I'm always surprised when I see them do like that was the same thing I happened with the pretty Don't you think this guy's probably arm too? I mean But also He shouldn't push that guy that way. I mean the whole thing is fucking stupid Look at the chaos. There's somebody else just rain around and then they're homeless person or something Yeah, yeah, the other guy's probably talking shit. I bet that guy's funny. I bet he's Got the big coat on I mean, I don't For the life of me none of it makes sense right not even makes sense The the mayor walking off casually and then eventually running it doesn't make sense as security guy I just walked up to the those guys and pushed them when your details to take care of the mayor You should be escorting him around that and getting him away from any potential trouble like the Braziness of just walking up and pushing that guy Well, you don't have to fight at all It's very clear when you watch the way they grapple with each other. He doesn't know what he's doing This episode is brought to you by Intuit Turbo Tax April 15th is coming fast There's been so many tax law changes this year which means you're going to need an expert who has your back Your in luck turbo tax now has in-person locations nationwide Walking to their tech enables doors and meet face-to-face with a turbo tax full service expert Who will get your best outcome? Your expert works to get you every doll you deserve while updating you as you go about your day head to turbo tax .com to find a store near you seems like we're having a lot of security problems in our society Wild right I Can believe the pushing is I mean the same in the pretty thing like why are pushing is that like a? Is that like an important law enforcement technique? I mean, what is that well? Not only that he pushed a small woman the ice guy just completely just full-on shoves this small woman Which means he was emotionally out of control first, right? These guys are not like special forces. No, they're not well trained guys are Seven weeks and a lot of them are financially incentivized because like if you get fifty thousand dollars to like if you're in debt and then you You take this job on and when they get the fifty thousand dollars how long do they have to stay on the job for? To have that money to have that signing bonus or is it one of those things where you get the fifty thousand dollars as a signing Bonus, but you pay it like a record deal type deal where you know, it's not really your money You have to make it up later. I imagine still if you can get fifty thousand dollars There's a lot of people that'll take that job. Yeah, I they're just Yeah, though it was just a bunch of bad bad choices. Yeah, well the administration on that one Someone's reddit comments saying they have no personal experience, but they've heard that it's 50k over four years If you're in good standing at the end of those four years, right? Oh, so you only get it after four years I think I might not right right but for some people that have no job opportunities Oh, yeah, no nothing on the horizon that fifty thousand dollars looks like look it's an extra 25k a year or an extra You know 25k For four years for fifty for four years and says that's incorrect It's broken in ten payments once at 90 days then once every year for four more years Anyway, it's broken be the way it's fifty thousand dollars that you would not have been able to make Yeah, I mean we had police shortages before 2020 we had a bunch of police shortages after that mostly by police officers who were just Filled mistreated by the society by their local mayors who said that they were evil What didn't a lot of cops resigned when Donny got elected? Oh, I'm sure and then a COVID drove and then they A bunch of police officers driven out of drink. COVID so they're already are our security Forces have been you know, and they were just people underestimate how important it is to feel like Important in your job and respect it and it's not just about the money because they would be offering more money But I think a lot of people like oh, no, I don't want to be in a job where people are like spitting at me or throwing urine But not just that a job where your life is on the line. Yeah, your life is already on the line And then you're mistreated by the wider site which actually creates additional risks You know as this chaos in Minneapolis shows so yeah, it's just people want to believe that they're doing something That is appreciated by the community and so when the community decides that they're against policing your civilization's pretty far gone Right, but this is different is even policing in this ice thing the ice thing is a different thing Right, they're looking at it differently It's not like you're watching a violent altercation take place The police show up and people are spitting on them like you're trying to break up a violent crime This is different. They're looking at it like in the progressive narrative is like no one's illegal on stolen land And we need to have open borders and Allegals or immigrants rather the foundation of this country and you hear all that those narratives The president and those the president in the administration they wanted to pick a fight obviously with this left wing with activists Left wing city they thought it would Redown to their benefit to show how crazy the left was and it backfired on them Well, I think they wanted to do something about the amount of illegal fraud that was just recently exposed in Minneapolis But that I don't know that that's but you wouldn't do it with ice raids though I mean, but illegal immigrants if you have illegal immigrants that are responsible for hundreds of millions of dollars in fraud And you know at least some of them are illegal It seems rational that you would send ice and to find out who's illegal and who's not and put a stop to some of it There's also this nationwide focus on this one place because of the nichole video. Yeah Yeah, though. I think that the motivate my understanding Is that the motivation was to Motivate people that are here illegally to self-deport And so that that's the the main part of the strategy is this show of force because of course They wanted the publicity they wanted people to be scared in self-deport They claim that you know 1 point I think three million people self-deported or 1.4 and yeah There are 400,000 or 600,000 Deported through the normal channels and apparently they're just limited to how many people they can actually deport through the normal channels But they can get people can self-deport they can just go right and because of course There's this thing called e-verify where you just have the employers have to prove that everybody you're employing is here legally And they don't want to do that Trump administration doesn't want to do that because they'll upset in particular like the agricultural lobby Yeah, but other suction construction who depend on so it's a it's a funny It's not great. I don't know They'll upset in particular like the agricultural lobby, but other institution construction who depend on so it's a it's a funny. It's not great. I don't know. I'm not saying that there's that I have the perfect, you know, answer to the other one, but obviously like politically the president doesn't feel like they can do e-verify and maintain support from the business community for his political agenda. So you end up, but you end up with a kind of underclass that's here illegally, but that's protected because they're working in the sector that the president and the administration wants to protect, but then you're also self-deporting people. I'm not sure exactly how they're thinking about it, but that appears to be what the heart of their goal is. Well, this was always a lot of people in the left back in the day would say that illegal immigrants was this was like a Koch brothers thing. This was like a right wing thing that they wanted this for. For exactly what you just described and that this is not a left wing progressive idea and that what it would do was would lower the wages for the lower class in the middle class of this country and it would be bad for the citizens. And so you don't want unchecked illegal immigration unchecked illegal immigration would just be for the right because they're the ones who own these massive corporations that are profiting off of illegal labor. They don't have to pay them benefits. They don't have to pay them health care. Any of the things that are, you know, that cost money. Yeah. I mean, the on the left was always balancing a sort of open society. You know, they wanted the Soros Foundation always wanted to have a free movement of people to that was sort of their view of why the whole of cost occurred is that you couldn't move, you know, or at least the persecutions you couldn't move people as easily. But then you had the working class, you know, who were negatively affected by bringing in migrants who had pushed down wages and unions who were a big part of the Democrat Party. So the Democrats were sort of divided on it for a while, but they managed it in Hillary and Obama would sort of, if you look at when they were competing in 2008, they were very carefully like there was a whole thing around like driver's licenses, whether she would give them or not an Obama accused Hillary of kind of playing both sides of it, you know, typical thing. But they also both spoke out strongly against mass migration. Fast forward 10 year. You know, fast forward much more than that. It was at 16 years into today. And now you've got a much more working class for public and party who's unified around keeping the borders closed and restricting the supply of low income on skilled workers. Because I mean, it's just, I mean, it's, it was really weird to watch people that are always defending supply and demand and economics and economic policy. Then say, oh no, but having open borders and having all these working class people come in is going to have no impact on wages when obviously it would. And I think that's now, that's also now gone. I think that's another thing that's just Trump has just changed. I don't think you're going to see Democrats going back to advocating and that kind of mass migration again. Right. But you could see a world where they would push back against what has happened. What would they would say the barbaric nature of some of these ice raids and then saying from this filter boy ice water that too, if you'd like, you don't have to not have your bottle. We don't care. I think it's in the shot. No, it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter. Um, but you could see how they could go back to a much looser border policy. I think it would be back to what they're because it wasn't. They won't. I think they won't. I think the closed border. I mean, I think that that sweet spot of public opinion is like people really want to close. I think it was just really, um, but I don't think public opinion supported in an open border even on the left. No, during those last four years, but yet they did it in any way. And they were moving people to blue states. They were moving people to swing states. They were flying people in busing people. They were doing it on purpose. Isn't that, but not also though? Because the blue state governors were more welcoming of them. There's a little bit of that, but there was also the idea that you're going to juice up the congressional seats because you're going to change the census. Maybe although California lost seats, right? Well, because California does such a fucking terrible job of governing their state. It's so it that place is so crazy. Like every time there's some new law that they're trying to push through some new bill, I'm like, do they just want everyone to leave? Well, they drove the billionaires out, right? Yeah. I mean, I know they drove out David Sacks came to Austin. I think Mark Zuckerberg moved to Florida. I heard rumors to Steven Spielberg. I don't know if that's, I don't want to spread disinformation. I don't want to spread misinformation, but I heard he was leaving. But yeah, it's called the thing that drives me the most nuts is when these progressive talking heads staying. They don't want to pay their fair share. What the amount of waste and fraud, why would you, you don't think there should be some accountability to how much fucking waste and fraud that has been clearly demonstrated? Like the, the solution is just give more money. Oh, and they can do it because they have it. So what? You just give more money and now it's $30 billion goes to homeless with no accountability. Like what are you saying? Like where do you think this money's going to go? Where it's actually going to help people and affect things in a positive way. There's been no indication that that's the case that the real problem is they just haven't had enough money from the billionaires. That's fucking ludicrous. That idea is, it's such a lazy, intellectually lazy way of framing this whole discussion. That's saying, oh, they don't want to pay their fair share. Fuck you. That's not what's going on here. What's going on here? You give a completely incompetent government that's absolutely corrupt and they want more money. Oh, yeah. Gats is like $8 a gallon almost now. That's bananas. They were going to shut down. I mean, the refiners are being shut down. And that that initiative, the billionaires tax is an SCIU initiative. So meaning it's the union that covers healthcare workers like nurses. They're very radical, very radical left. And the money is to provide Medicaid for undocumented immigrants. That's what they want it for. Right. So like that's the whole thing. And so you literally get the, this is like, this is what people worry about democracy. All the, it's very democratic, but you get these powerful unions and they're able to change the laws like that. I mean, it's called the curly effect because there was a Boston mayor named Curly who made everything so bad for his political opponents that they left. But the consequence was that he ended up gaining more power. So all of, when everybody moves to, you know, when all the like moderate Democrats move to Austin or Miami or Denver or wherever, California just ends up locked in more to a progressive agenda. That's the problem. Well, I think the idea is that it's so good there that most people are just going to tolerate whatever new bullshit they throw your way. 100%. And also, I mean, it seems like the tech community is now backing the San Jose mayor who's running, who's a very, it's Democrat, very moderate. I, you know, he's been critical of governing for governor. Yeah. Mad mayhem. So keep your eyes on him. I mean, he's not, um, he's not like maybe the most exciting guy, but he's definitely running as a moderate. That might be good. Some money. Yeah. Exciting people are a problem. I know. They want, he might be enough to, I don't know. It's hard to say, but it does look like, because I mean, look, there's plenty of, the tech community only woke up politically in 2024. That's how long it took. And it really took things getting so bad where they were telling Mark Andreessen, as he said to you on your show that they were shutting off whole parts of AI. The Biden administration was openly threatening AI in this huge new, and you know, there's concerns. I'm not saying that there's not, but I think that, I think at some point, the tech community, which had been, you know, either leaning Democrat, you know, for a long time since the Obama era, you know, or wanted to stay out of politics, because they just want to focus on their machines and their investments. They don't really want to be involved in politics, but they woke up in 2024. And so hopefully, because it's not, I mean, when you see what Soros has done, and you really appreciate the power that one billionaire can have, you kind of go, why is there nothing like that, you know, on the other side? Why is it so dominant by Soros? And so I hope that that's starting to happen. But yeah, when you start to chase out the billionaires and the billionaires just give up on California, then it's got to be whoever's remaining to try to, you know, put the money behind the guy that can get some change there. Yeah. That's, I mean, I don't see a pathway where California anytime soon turns around. I don't see how it could. I feel like it's the momentum has shifted so far in a terrible direction. And the solutions are always tax more. Take more money from people. And you see of this completely corrupt irresponsible, fraud-ridden, wasteful government that wants more of your money. And the solution is if we take more money, we're going to make things better, which is just insanity. I mean, things that can't go on. Don't. So I mean, you could see it, right? I mean, if it's, say, Matt Mahan or somebody more moderate gets into the governor, Rick Rusa runs for L.A. mayor again. I mean, honestly, like if somebody can't defeat Karen Bass after she let Los Angeles burn away, which is now we now know for a fact was just totally preventable, absolutely preventable. I was saying at the time, but now we know, they tried to rewrite the report, but it's clear it was totally preventable. Have they tried to rewrite the report? Well, the report, you know, said, here's all the things that the fire department should have done that didn't happen. And ultimately, you know, the mayor is the one that chooses the fire chief and fires the fire chief. And the mayor was more, they were warned. And she goes to fly Stagana for this little junket presidential inauguration paling around when she should have been in L.A. with a command, the headquarters. And you know, and if she wasn't then Gavin should have been, you know, Schwarzenegger towards the end of his administration, they would just mobilize planes full of water. You know, huge, huge cargo planes full of water before there were fires just to start to circulate just to get ready to put stuff out. This idea that there was this idea promoted that it was inevitable that the fire is that, oh, eventually it's just no, like it's absurd. Like, of course you can protect it with adequate fire. You put, oh, the pipes weren't big enough. No, like maintain your reservoirs have water in them. Even the one that it was like was like not repaired yet, which should have been repaired. They could have kept, they could have air gapped the pipes so that it didn't contaminate the water supply, but left it for firefighting. They didn't do that. They didn't station the engines where they needed to station. Now nobody was on, you know, it's like they're not taking responsibility. Like they weren't taking responsibility for it. So anyway, to the point being, get a new governor, you get a better mayor of L.A., you've got a guy in San Francisco now who I think has still has a lot of potential. I mean, this latest video, you know, showing the chaos there. But you with that, I think he's not. Well, that could fix him though. Yeah, he's not his fault. His, you know, the criticism of him is they walked away too casually. Yeah, yeah, no, we don't. Yeah, so I mean, I think there is a, there is a way for California to come out. And my view is like, look, you've got, it's on the tech billionaires. They, you know, and I know some of them have laughed and obviously they don't need, but they're still a lot of billionaire rich guys in California that are perfectly capable of financing an alternative effort. The vote, you know, 75% of San Francisco voters want to arrest people using fentanyl in public. They want to arrest them. Okay, that sounds so, that's so taboo in progressive. That's 75% of San Francisco voters. So the voters are not, they're not the radical left. Some ways they're radicalized and they're hatred of Trump and the Trump derangement syndrome. But I mean, everyone like Caruso and Mahon and anybody else there will all just be able to say they hate Trump like everybody else. Well, I think they've seen the consequences of these policies. Oh, yeah, there's people are, people are really, there's, it's not like anything has changed that significantly. They will, in fact, my interview people in San Francisco, they're a little reluctant to admit that's gotten better because I think they don't want to take any pressure off the politicians. So I mean, I do think it's, it's rescueable, but it's hard. When you say it's gotten better like how so mostly the encampments are being broken up. Now you see a little, you see more of that sort of thing that we just saw in the video where there's like, I call him like a little more like a nest. You know, there's just a little home. So it's not in being encampments. Like yeah, the whole block. Not like that. It's in Oakland. Yeah. That's in Skid Row. Oakland's not Oakland is, Oakland might not be saveable. They had a chance to save themselves and they ended up voting for the wrong person for mayor and it's just as bad as ever. So, but I think if you get San Francisco LA and a new governor in place, I think you've got the makings to save it. But I've already seen this video this guy does the subscription of what's going on in Oakland and then drives across the county line into the next place. And it's immediately all done. And you just see what the difference between two different forms of government and how it works. I didn't see that one by selling one between Venice and Santa Monica. Yeah, I was there when the Venice and Santa Monica was someone like, you're like, why are there 10, why aren't there any 10s there? It's like that's Santa Monica. Yeah, different. Well, there's still some some San, Santa Monica got bad too. But they cleaned it up a little bit better. Yeah, but Venice is bananas. It's just, but Venice is nothing compared to Skid Row. Skid Row's 50 blocks. Venice is okay now. Yeah, they cleaned that up pretty quickly. And then they, and then the voters fired their city council member who represented them, who was total crazy radical chess, a boating level radical and replaced some of the more moderate person. So, but yeah, it's when you go to the beach. It's not chaos. No, I mean, I'm not, there's always, it's, but I mean, remember before it was, it was just, it was tense everywhere. I mean, it was everywhere. And then we dug in, you know, it was like crazy. So no, that's gone. But Skid Row, it's bad as ever. Skid Row is 50 blocks. 50 blocks is so crazy. 50 blocks of tents and homeless people. When we first heard that, I was like, that's got to be wrong. It's probably five blocks. No, it's five zero, 50 blocks. That's an enormous amount of land that's completely covered by homeless in campus. There's like a whole genre of like, of like influencers when they first visit Skid Row, because everyone hears about it. And then you see like their, their tweets are just like, they're just like, oh, I couldn't believe like I think like maybe Ben Shapiro or there's very conservative influencers who have gone to Skid Row and they're like, I had no idea. There was a, you have no idea until you see it. There was a comic from the comedy store that filmed something. He went like undercover and see, he had like in this past, he had some, I don't think. I think currently he was sober when he did this, but he decided to go there and film and stay in one of these encampments just to show it was like, and this is like 2006-ish, six-ish somewhere around there and it was fucking nuts. Even back then. And, you know, we talked about the story of how Skid Row with the whole Jerome hotel and how it all started. Skid Row was the place where they would take all the homeless people and all the people that were problematic and they would move them there and keep them there. And the idea was that you just keep them out of Beverly Hills, keep them away from Hollywood. We're doing movies and we've got famous people walking around. We can't have homeless people. Just snatch them up, take them downtown and contain them. So they had them contained in this area and they called it Skid Row and then they just kept getting bigger. It's not that different from the tender one in the sense that there's replaces where those single resident, this is the places where the really cheap hotels were. They were like often for like working people that were in town temporarily, like temporary hotels. Some of them would just be cages. There were no walls like you would just get your own little. That was how primitive they were. And then it would be just evolved over time and then they became all of them became subsidized for the homeless. But yeah, it's, I don't think I think California, I think it's important. I think with Trump and again, like a merhead and merdisgary, whatever, you see the potential of this country in particular to make a big change. And I think that it's ultimately resulted from a unleashing of social media made it all possible allowed for people to get, you know, accurate information for the first time in a different paradigm. So I don't want to lose hope on the Golden State, but you lost hope on Oakland. Yeah. Yeah, but maybe I never had hope for Oakland. So one point to Hamokland was great. Yeah. I mean, Jerry Brown actually brought it up a bit. You know, got it more development there. But yeah, it's all about governance. Yeah, it is. Yes. He can use the bathroom. Yeah, yeah, sure. Sure. We'll pause. We'll go back. Folks, I just sent Jamie something funny. Did someone just sent me about San Francisco? This is a guy, I think he calls himself the gay Republican, the gay Republican. The problem. There's a lot of those actually. But which is shouldn't shock people. They're clusters about the Republican part. Yeah, that's the thing. Well, it depends on how wealthy they are. I mean, some of them are pretty, you know, Peter Thiel pretty open about it. He was, yeah, but it's Republicanism. Watch this. Graham transit. We refuse to release crime surveillance videos because it will make people racist. Releasing videos would create a racial bias in the riders against minorities on the trains. Why would it do that, San Fran transit? Why would it, why would it create a bias? Is there, is there a reoccurring theme among the people committing crimes? You could say that about European crime statistics as well. Yes. Also, why the Germans actually, in particular, by the European countries, did not want to release. Right. But they did get them out. They have come out now. And the UK. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So let's move on to have your subjects. Shall we? So what do you think about all this UAP talk? It's one thing that Trump has said that is going to release whatever files that they might have on UAP's, alien terrestrial beings. Oh, it's just I talked to Jesse Michaels about it. He is highly skeptical. And he said that people that are involved are all old guard. And, you know, they're just, it's just going to be a bunch of horseshit. Maybe. I mean, just first of all, look, I mean, I think whatever you think about the phenomenon, this is amazing. I mean, the president just said he's going to release all these things. So I mean, after decades of saying we're not interested in this, we're not, we're not following this. We're showing down Blue Book. You know, there's nothing there. They're like he's saying, so I mean, that right there is, is I think amazing. And I thought the whole thing was amazing. Like Obama comes out and he goes, well, there's definitely aliens. Oh, but they're not in our area 51. Unless they're hiding it from presidents, which is like a well established conspiracy theory. So to have Obama even say that. And then Trump comes up and he goes, he goes, Obama revealed classified information with a little grin on his face because he's a little rivalry with Obama. I might help him out by declassifying. And then if you are, later, he did, I mean, I, what can't you like about that? I mean, I think that, well, it's theater. That's what you can't like about it. It's theater, but I mean, just something really comes out. This is just another distraction to keep us from thinking about all the other things that are going on. But you can't be so. I mean, we should get into Epstein files too. Because I think I have a different view of Epstein now. But look, I just think we've been asking for more transparency like we had in this very brief period in the mid 70s with the church committee hearings. It really took a whole Watergate. It took something big. It's been over 50 years. We got a lot of Epstein files. Yes, there's some missing, but we got JFK files, Amelia Earhart files. And now we're going to see UFO files. Is it going to be everything? Of course not. Like there's just no way. You know, but I don't think like, I think we should hold, but we should be happy that like there is an acknowledgement that there's a lot of government files and that there's some commitment to release them. Because I do think like it's easier to get new Epstein files released after you have some Epstein files released than if you have none. I feel the same way about UFOs. Okay. So it's easier to get more UFO files released, but like release. Like what do you want? I think one of it is like, what do we want? And I've been, you know, I respect John Greenwald a lot. You're going to be called the black vault dot com where he has been foie a he's been issuing, you know, freedom of information, act requests on UAP but also a ton of other issues since the mid 90s. When he was like 15 years old, he became obsessed with doing it before he requests. And he has identified a number of documents that we know exist with redactions. One of them is the UAP task force, which has a line that just says potential explanations, you know, the first explanation is redacted. It's blacked out. The second one is, you know, some sort of natural phenomenon. Number three is blacked out is redacted. Unredact those. Yeah. Come on guys. You can't tell me what we have to protect our sensor data. Come on guys. I mean, like that's not sensor data. Tell us what the potential explanations are are on terms of the sensor data. John also made a great point. Do you remember when the the Pentagon released the video of the Russian jet? dumping fuel on one of our drones. There's like a famous video. No, no, no. They show as a hostile act by the Russians jumping fuel on our drone. When was this? Just recently, I mean, must have been within the last year or so. So like they're not, we do see they do release, you know, warfare various, various times they do release things and you can kind of go, OK, that means that we have. I don't think what I'm saying is the main excuse has been not to reveal our methods for getting, you know, we're just talking about UAP here getting, you know, photographs and video. We know that a huge amount of it exists. They haven't even released the full, you know, gimbal and go fast videos. There's a whole bunch more video left. Really? So just really, yeah. So that the video that came out, those were whistleblower leaks, right? Eventually they released them formally, though. The Pentagon did. So there's much more of that. So and the particularly started interrupting, but was it the gimbal or the go fast where there was many more crafts? I believe that there was, so there's three videos, right? It's gimbal, go fast and then what was the one where the tiktik video moves out of frame. Yeah. My understanding is that there's significantly more video for all of those. And then I also, my understanding is also there's just a lot of other videos, particularly from those two incidents certainly have. There's so much more sensor data from because we know those incidents had a lot more going on, right? Right. And just was filmed by those videos. So I think that now there is, I wouldn't say the UAP community. There isn't really an organized one, although Jesse's doing an amazing job of organizing it. We should be really specific and say, you know, here's what we want. I did a piece with John Greenwald, Representative Nancy Mase wrote an open letter to the intelligence and military community saying here's a set of documents that we want to release. So I think the good news is we're like, look, the president said he wants this. We've identified a bunch of documents, identified a bunch of videos and film. Yeah. I mean, are they going to withhold stuff? Are they going to mislead probably? But that's been the story for 80 years. Yeah. You saw the age of disclosure, right? Yes, of course. Okay. So I think they make a really good point in age of disclosure that if they did release things, the real problem is misappropriation of funds lined Congress. And the fact that some of these, you would assume that the way these things are being handled, if they do have crafts, if there is some sort of a back engineering program, that back engineering program is going to be held by a military contractor. So whatever the contractor is, whether it's, you know, rock, dine, or whoever has it, right? You would imagine that the other competing groups would be very pissed off that they didn't have access to this thing. And they think it's who the misappropriation of funds lined Congress, people go to jail. Also, most likely fraud. There's got to be tons of fraud. If there's so much money that's being like shuffled away into these black ops projects, if there's no oversight, then who knows where the money's going, right? Sure. So there's a problem there. If you open up the books and people go, why was there $100 million check written here? Where's the $2.3 billion that's missing here? And, you know, I'm, yeah, I have doubts now. I mean, I have to say I didn't finish Washington, but you know, Jesse just dropped a video with him and Eric Weinstein and Eric Davis. Who's his? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So Jesse, I haven't seen that yet. Yeah. I found it really, it really made me question whether there's any there there. What does Eric Davis do? Eric Davis, you know who he is? He's got the bushy beard and he's in age of disclosure and is part of the whole, you know, big low, you know, that whole, off-sap A tip. He was, I don't know who was exact. He was a science scientist. Okay. But he was sort of talking about like, because I think Eric Weinstein was asking these really hard questions like, okay, well, like how many people are in this, you know, reverse engineering program and what is it? And I just found his answers to be very thin. So I haven't seen it. It's how I can't comment that. I know there's both skeptical and open minded at the same time. There is a like, yeah, I just, I definitely think there's a lot more than they've revealed. I think my skepticism on the reverse engineering stuff. I mean, obviously this is a crash retrieval because they're just retrieving, it could be foreign or they're retrieving something. The reverse engineering, I mean, if it's advanced tech, nuclear just took so, I mean, I'm just familiar with the history of nuclear. There's just so much effort to create nuclear energy and you'd have these huge, there's a huge enterprise, thousands of people. I mean, that's why I kind of go and I mean, a whole other form of propulsion. I mean, it's just really, it would require so many, so, such a big bureaucracy. That's where I'm a little skeptical that that exists because I don't know how you maintain a cover up that long, but I could be wrong. I mean, as people have pointed out, they've maintained secrecy of a lot of things for a really long time, so it's not even conceivable. But especially when you're dealing with government contractors and military contractors, they've done, I mean, they have a long history of keeping a tight lip when it comes to all sorts of top secret projects that they're working on. I mean, it's weird because like if you look at the UAP task force, which was created by people that had it, it comes out of, it all happened in a tip and an UAP task force, force, and then they create era, which is much more like what blue book was, which is their whole point is to debunk and dismiss. I think that's the whole point. It's just to say we looked into it and there's nothing there. So then they cherry pick the cases, like they don't actually deal with stuff that they can't explain. That's what era's point is. But the UAP task force was people that seem genuinely interested in it and they have potential explanations and three separate things. That means that they didn't know themselves. And so I would think that if there was some reverse engineering program, then you would have a better idea than just three potential explanations. But that's assuming they actually got access. The UAP task force people. Yeah. Yeah. Because somebody, if they open themselves up for, if they do have access, then you open up those questions. Mr. probation and funds lined Congress military contractors having access to these vehicles. I would imagine that's too messy. They get very mumbly. They get very mumbly at that. I find when you start kind of like, well, what is it and how many people kind of, it's a lot of like, you know, I mean, that's how that's how that was my interpretation of this. I think that it's I'm much more with Jacques Valle's view of the phenomenon. And I think that it that they don't know what it is. I think they have a lot more. Photos and videos showing just demonstrating this incredible phenomenon, but I'm not sure that they know what it is. It's pretty skeptical that they have a secret reverse engineering program just because I don't I don't see how they how they would have carried it out for this long because Jesse's theory, of course, is that it would date back to the seven to the 50s. Yeah. And it just, there's just too many possibilities for too many deathbed confessions from people to reveal this knowledge. So but don't you think you would keep a really close watch on anyone who had any access to any of these things? And that would be very threatening to them like Bob Bazzar. Yeah. I mean, I don't know. You believe Bob Bazzar? I do. Yeah. I don't know what he was working on whether or not it was ours or something else or what. But I don't think he's a liar. He's at the same story forever. Well, then we should go demand the documents. I mean, that would be something where we just need to be like, look, these are the documents that we want and it's on this this place these years. Well, one of these are Bob said is he thinks some of the documents that he was shown were horseshit and he thinks it's on purpose. He thinks they're that those fake documents that the fake narratives are a hook. So that if somebody does spill the beans, they know exactly who would who was doing it because they could point to like maybe if you're involved in, you know, X program, they give you some bullshit narrative on top of the real truth, right? They'll make up some stuff. Right. That way, if you really, well, the government told me X and he go, oh, okay, he learned it from this. He's a part of this program. Yeah. Now we've narrowed it down to 250 employees. Let's start scouring these people and telling them questions. Yeah, kind of tells us. Yeah, I mean, it seems like the, so you know the MJ12 documents. Yes. There's one of them that is this incredible document. I mean, just if it's a forager, most people I think think it's a forager, it's a hoax, whatever. It's so well done. It's the manual on extraterrestrial crash retrieval with different morphologies you've ever seen this? No. It's a really interesting document. Like I spent went down to a long rabbit hole. Look, I would say most you've followed just think it's fake. So it's not even me. I was incredible about this show, like, you know, like the old books from the library, they'd show who checked it out, they had all these names. It's an incredible, so then you kind of go like the only people really, I mean, it seemed like the level of sophistication to create this. from the library they'd show who checked it out, they had all these names. It's an incredible... So then you kind of go like the only people really, I mean it seemed like the level of sophistication to create this would have been the government. And so then you're sort of like well why would they have done that? One of the answers is it was just this is the called passage material to build a text counterintelligence activities. I'll tell you another one I can't quite figure out. I mean it says a lot of effort to and why that narrative I mean another thing I was people say is they'll go well they're using the UAP stuff as cover for secret weapons programs and you're like well why would that work as cover and they go well because then it's a way to distract attention. I'll say why would that distract attention? Wouldn't that attract attention? You go don't... If you're as opposed to like within the military like look we don't... This is this is secret research you know that's really important national security we don't just pay attention. Instead of like oh no this is UFO crash retrieval so don't pay attention to it that's seems like your a recipe for creating more interest in UFOs. So there's a lot of things that the government has done where you're like it's almost like assuming that is by the way that we know that like we know that the government the US Air Force did you know in the early 80s make this guy Paul Benno it's go crazy who was seeing things over a curtland airbase and then the sky Richard Dodie you know how they make them go crazy? They would be feeding them all this information convincing them of an alien attack and he basically ended up going crazy from it. It's this amazing story told by this by this book Morajman also documentary and you look and you kind of go and they go well was to cover up a secret weapons program at curtland airbase and it's like it's like I'm not even disbelieving it but it's like that's just such a like why would that be the best way to do that and why would you be so sure that that wouldn't attract interest from people rather than distracted so there's a bunch of things that don't make sense and so even if it is all you know which is the skeptic view you know is that it's some combination of government disinformation sci-fi you know dreams hypnosis hypnagogic states and then and then kind of the power of belief you know I just reviewed this new book on Barney and Betty Hill where the author thinks that it was that that really was a combination of her it was the stress of being an an eracial couple her nightmares and then hypnosis where they then confabulate this whole story that's the basic skeptic view is that it was sort of but the government's involved in it and that's always strange because you're like why are the government's a bar than the Betty and Barney Hill store no no in the in the UFO in creating it right and is you if assuming that they did the MJ12 or somebody to the MJ12 but certainly in the case of right why would they have any organizations why would they have anything right what why would they have why would you be why would you be doing like the thing with like the polo doe and the Paul Bennett with or the Richard Dodie and Paul Bennett with is like why why was that the best I mean it's just why was that the best way like somebody is observe strange activity of a curtlin airbase and they discover this why was that the right approach I don't I don't follow it and you had AJ Gentile on who did stuff on crop circles we saw they saw military disinformation around those activities in Britain so you see a lot of um crop circle things weird really weird because you want to just write it off I mean I wanted to write it off and like oh this guy's with boards they're making designs but then you see some of the designs and how the the wheat is actually woven and how they have these exploded nodes they're almost like they're microwaved and they've examined these things and it seems like there's some energy that's created these things and also the sheer size and scale of some of these things with no footprints leading into them or out of them and just the geometric precision of some of them that it's really weird like there's of course it's eyewitness accounts it's hard to know if they're being accurate but people who flown over areas where there's nothing there flown back two hours later and there's these football field size mandal brought sets there's the julia set over uh next to stonehenge was the one that the guy flew over and there was nothing there and a couple of hours later there was the julia set which is a spectacular that's incredible right I'll tell you it's even greater precision that's what's really it's much precision as you can get by folding over wheat but when you look at it like from above and you know you don't get to the the micro you you're looking at these things that like they really do scale in a fractal way it's very fucking strange and difficult to reproduce you would imagine something like that would take a long fucking time to plot out and plan you would take multiple people you'd have to measure and re-measure you'd have to have some some sort of tools and instruments not just to fold over the the wheat but if you're going to interweave the wheat like what is your method of doing that and how are you doing it where you know this one is one dimension and then the next one is precisely three fifths of that dimension next one is slightly in their fractal well it gets really even weirder than that so you know I just I just described this case of of of this air force kind of tells you this guy driving this guy Paul Bennett it's crazy I come that book is written by Mark Pilkington Mark Pilkington is one of two guys that claim to have created all the crop circles the other guys a guy named John Lundberg right right right AJ in his video about the crop circles accuses John Lundberg again the sort he's they call the circle makers they have a website they keep updated he accuses him of being a British intelligence AJ does or at least he strongly implies it and and part of that is because there's a bunch of weird stuff on the website about MI5 and the CIA and then Lundberg went to a school this all very circumstantial so I'm not defending I'm just saying what AJ said then Lundberg went to a school that shares a courtyard with with an with an with an MI5 campus or an MI5 training area I asked Mark I have like a three I have like three hours of interviews with Mark who I'm really interested really interesting person I asked him directly if they had any connection to military intelligence he said absolutely not it's hard to which is what you would say well of course you're allowed to say it if you are but I'm not making any accusations but yeah I mean he claimed that they made all of them and you know there's some of them have you ever seen the massive there's one that was absolutely massive yeah pull some of them up Jamie so we can get there's the Julia said that there's another there's another one there's the Julia so big it's really hard to see but he said that he wasn't at that one yeah that's the family that's the Julia said the gorgeous well the big one right there is in the middle that one yeah it's just amazing these are enormous yeah they're in the room go go full screen on that it's they're so big and I mean the amount of precision involved in them is kind of spectacular now Mark denies that they have exploded nodes and he denies that they're interwoven AJ says that they are definitely interwoven and have exploded nodes and there was an even an article in science magazine which you know argues that they were made by humans but that they they point out the the exploded nodes so yeah maybe that's it what's weird too is there's like how did you do this where how what's the where's the evidence of people trampling through this with equipment it's all missing like it's strange and then also no one's caught doing them how about the private here's the other one I asked Mark about this and he didn't know about it but do you the pie one yeah there was apparently I mean pretty sure it's the first time that it was a visual explanation of pie that's my understanding of it now maybe I maybe there's someone I haven't seen anything earlier than that but that's like on its own is really amazing that that was the first time that they had created a visual representation of of pie yeah and complete with like that that's it it's like there's a there's another image that will show how it is pie probably that one right there yeah and so that's a extremely sophisticated extremely crops are right I mean imagine the type of intelligence that you'd have to possess to pull this off and then not let anybody know that you did it and it's just for funsies just for funsies in a field yeah it's um and then you know these MIT researchers went out that's also part of it and they tried to do it and it just wasn't it wasn't nearly as good yeah okay yeah it is very fucking weird yeah it's very weird and it but the whole UFO thing is very weird it you know the Jacques Valle books are very interesting and I've read three of his books so and I've had him on a couple of times and the last time I had him on I really went on a deep dive and I read two of his books right before he came on and one of the more interesting things is the really old stories like the stories from the 1700s the 1800s where they lack the context of spaceships the idea behind it like none of that stuff exists but yet you get almost at least you could say oh I could understand how they would be describing it this way but it's kind of the same thing that other people have been describing the Zimbabwe story a lot of these other stories it's kind of the same story over and over and over again which makes you go okay well what does it have to be from outer space or is it possible that there is something here that is like far older than us that has somehow or another removed itself from our view or is it social contagion and people I mean I've always struck by it's always like the aliens always are like all protect your environment and avoid nuclear war it's like oh thanks like we didn't know we needed to do those until you guys showed up and makes more sense as like you could see it as a I mean I got very into I haven't interviewed her yet but I'm about to there's an anthropologist at Stanford named Hanya Lerman and she's done this incredible work on religions where she like anthropologists and also this guy Bowman like they they're agnostic on whether or not like those beans are real like they're just like we're really interested in like the culture and the psychology and the experience of it but she had this she she was like did her fieldwork with magicians and witches in England you know like modern witches and not magicians like magic tricks but like the old who's the famous magician I can't off who do you know no no the British one Merlin right oh but like the old style right like but they were like so she didn't really believe in it but she they were like you have to practice witchcraft in order to do this and she had like multiple anomalous experiences one of them that she woke up and there was five druids in her room back and into her and people like is it a dream and she's like no it's not a dream she had in their instance where they were trying to like conjure energies to like turn off to like turn shut down her watch and she felt a huge energy surge through her and shut off her watch and her point is that she thinks that the practice she's the she we put too much focus on the beliefs but she says like the practices themselves I don't know if she would say conjure I also interviewed Diana Pusilcon it they would say more like reveal these different realities so they're much more it's a very interesting set of work because they're not they're not trying to answer the question of whether the druids were really in her room or not I mean the watch thing you know apparently definitely happened but apparently definitely is a weird way to fit apparently to her definitely I know you know saying it's like show me man the conjuring thing is strange because that's a recurring theme that you go outside and you have like these experiences where you say I'm not afraid comes show show yourself to me and give it enough time with enough intention apparently things will appear in the sky my favorite one is the the black guy talking about Yahweh who with a the local ABC newscaster goes out and it's going to be one of those ha ha this guy thinks that he can conjure UFOs and they go out with them any conjures an orb do you ever see that one? that's like an incredible that's like one of my favorite where where is that? those videos and the newscasters like he called literally they see him calling his I think it's like an NBC affiliate or an ABC affiliate somewhere Jamie can probably find it but if it's he literally calls his boss the newscasters like all the stories turned out a little differently than I thought it's like one of my favorites I'm sure you can say oh it's a balloon or whatever but it like comes in and out I mean it's really and it comes right as he's calling it that's the weird things I've talked to multiple people that have actually done this oh people it's that have gone out a lot with these you know air quotes experts and they go out to some deserted area and you call these things there's a second guy white guy that also does it and Reuters did a whole story on them because apparently there's a whole bunch of people around that they saw it and of course Jake Barber who's this former you know a contractor helicopter pilot contractor for special announced that he was going to go and conjure UFOs and bring one down we met up with profit Yahweh Seer of Yahweh it do little park off Lake Mead we picked the day we picked the time and we picked the location everyone's gonna think you're absolutely nuts well I thought I was absolutely nuts until he says he saw UFOs over the years 1500 of them we make it 1500 one today what do you think I'll try he says the voice in his head told them to go public now so we took him up on his offer and we scanned the skies nothing but a few clouds when the profit started praying for a sighting I wasn't exactly convinced I pray oh Yahweh that you sent a sighting so that they know that I am not mentally ill I am not a false prophet like those who seek to kill me say I oh it was really chill oh brother look at their deals you can barely see it a white speck then another sighting they were just like I got it I got it I got it photo journalist Jonathan Hawkins locks in on it let's take a closer look here it's an orange sphere that appeared out of nowhere I call the boss with an unexpected change in my story I'm talking I could see it clear as day in fact it's bright I can leave this it's moving pretty fast it's gone to Nellis Air Force Base it wants to be we called Nellis to see what these things might be guess what they didn't call us back but this thing started coming back toward us getting toward us now I think what see it's coming up toward us it's going back up in space profit Yahweh isn't concerned he says it'll be back I would take this more seriously if that guy didn't have your reporter voice it's amazing oh this is part of the charm of it I think it's I love it because I don't I don't think you can I don't think it's gonna convince any skeptics but it's like one of the few things in our in our world where it inspires a set of like wonder and a set of awe and you know for those of us that struggle with our face it's inspiring because it is sort of a spiritual like I mean he goes himself Yahweh right so there's like there's like there's didn't it wasn't about like gray aliens or whatever it was just something else and that's what I mean about like why more valet his work explains all of this much better and then the sort of the extraterrestrial hypothesis did and he's had that since 68 but I think what he does best is not explain it yeah he doesn't yeah there really is an explanation but here's what we know he goes to the control system though yeah which is sort of like I asked Diana I was like is that how is that different from God because he's of a control system that is his his views that there's a control system that's evolving human consciousness and it will manifest different things or in relation with humans over time and so he looks at the you know the apparition the Maria or St. Mary apparitions in Spain and the airships of the late 19th century where people saw these things that look like the zeplins even though they hadn't been invented yet all of these things he says his view is is there sort of being sort of produced in some relationship as well with our culture that's volleys argument and that sounds a lot like God in some ways we say control system right what does that mean like is it a higher life form that is monitoring us like that that's the the secular version of religion for a lot of these people that are really interested in aliens like that there's some advance being that's making sure we don't fuck everything up completely it's certainly for me that's my interest I mean I like again the Santa Paul just lerman you know she says you know William James is this famous Harvard psychologist wrote a book about the varieties of the religious experience in 1902 and he says everybody wants to kind of be like is it real or not real is like this world just what we see and he says I think there's something more there's not so this this very you know skeptic or debunker thing which like oh no it's just got to be a bad things got to be a bird or it's a and it's like well but it really you haven't just calling at that and as they point out it's like they showed up when they wanted to I mean it's a pretty amazing if it's just a coincidence it's a really amazing one and so I think for me it's like because I am a Christian and it is hard to believe in an all powerful and all good God because he obviously allowed the Holocaust to occur and allows terrible things to occur but I love that that segment and there's I love there's another one I love right now it's like a British woman in the 50s doing an interview about seeing it what she calls a Mexican hat UFO over her house and the kids saw it and she and everybody in the village made fun of her and they really killed her and she's like but it's you know but it's I saw it and it was real and it was like it's like those are like our those are spiritual experiences I think so I don't know that like I want the files released from the government I'm also skeptical that it's going to tell us what it is because I think at some level we're not supposed to get more much more information about what it is I think it's where something else is going on or maybe it's having a positive effect I think it's I think one of the sometimes people get really mad at UFO believers like skeptics get really like angry like how do they what they're so you know whatever they get so mad and I'm always like but like how often do you see them causing real harm or problems I mean we had one cult where they you know like a few people killed themselves but for the most part their balls are first yeah it great so you know you have like for the most part UFO people are ancient UFOs are dreamy seekers spiritual and I think it's I think it's wrong to I think it's lovely and wonderful and it reminds us of you know that we're small on the one-hundred humble about our knowledge and there's just surrounded by mystery I mean you're so much of your career and this this platform has been to allow us to talk about things that are unexplained and that or over the explanations don't really seem to explain it there's something more as William James there's something more and I think that the denial of anything more this idea that oh we know everything and we know where they want anything that's hubris it's just crazy but those people are silly they're more silly than the believers because this this idea that like look if there is a if you have a completely novel experience like say if you are Commander David Freaver and you encounter this tiktak shaped object that's hovering over something that appears to be a ship that's under the water this thing takes off at a absolutely preposterous speed that is documented both in radar and visually and on camera right so they've got video of this thing moving they say that it went from above 50,000 feet above sea level to sea level in less than a second which would require more energy than the entire United States produces in a year in order to get an object to move that quickly and it does that with no heat signature okay if this is all true just that alone now imagine you have this completely novel experience and because I haven't had it and you haven't had it and Jamie hasn't had it well it's very simple and easy to dismiss it but if this happened what do you what what do you expect the person to do what do you expect a decorated pilot in the in the Navy a guy who has a rock solid record who is there's nothing about him that screams that he's a coup or he's mentally ill and when you talk to him he's incredibly meticulous very intelligent very disciplined well his face it it looks like he had a spiritual experience yeah smile on his face I went to the when I was in Delhi I went to the jane temple and I went to the Hindu temple and I'm not Jane I'm not Hindu but I had a look on my face that reminded me that sort of that sort of that sort of like that starry eye right the look in your face where you've experienced the wonder and the awe of being alive and we're on this planet and we don't really understand it all but it's beautiful and it's okay and I think that that's the spiritual I mean that's where it's like he's been touched by I don't you know I'm not imposing this but sort of touched by God in some way or but touched by something something and it's not something extraordinary yeah in the thing look I think the thing you read that environment you're like that thing showed dominance in that environment so in the one hand it showed a lot to be called technological what it would have all a Michael spiritual dominance you know so but that's for me what's what's special about it and I think it's not going to go away and I don't think we're going to get to the answer I don't think I don't think the government how could the government you know I don't think they know and I don't even if they even if there was some contact I don't know if that would really tell you all the answers but what I could imagine is that they have acquired both eye witness video radar all the various sensors data and they've done this with multiple instances of these things and they are trying to assess what this is and they have a long standing study of these things that would both be disturbing and confusing to a lot of people and disruptive to society I'm sure you're well yeah aware of how put off and what happened with him during the Bush administration where they brought him in and they essentially told how put up this is assuming how's telling the truth and I have no reason to think he's lying they brought him in and a bunch of other scientists and a bunch of other thinkers and said I want you to create a chart on one side list the positive aspects of disclosure and the other side what are the negative ramifications of disclosure government religion the finances all the different things that could happen in the world and the negatives outweighed the positives and they decided not to disclose but the premise that he was brought in with this was saying we have acquired physical crafts that are not of this world we have biological entities that are not of this world and we are part of some sort of a back engineering program we want to release this information what would happen if we did and their conclusion was chaos Trump Trump didn't seem to go through that checklist to and go with the same answer I don't think he got that memo but also I do think it doesn't I think he ignores the memos from experts in general right if he was in office and that was the case they came to him and someone like talk or someone that's influential to him could sit down with him and talk to him and he thought it would gain their favor he might just release it I mean it's wild because of the one hand it looked like it was spontaneous but I think they had a lot you know Laura Trump who's like someone that's like a trusted family member who's like really competent like they sent her in to like take over the RNC and fix it and fire all the people like if they're get their loyalists in there she was out there talking saying that you know oh the Trump is I was hearing a lot of noise but it wasn't from people that I trusted so I didn't report anything on it but I was hearing a lot of noise to that Trump administration was considering doing something but you didn't know I didn't know if a circular reporting but I thought the Laura Trump thing was interesting because I don't think I don't see her as sort of she's not just speculating or bullshitting you know she's a trusted you know trusted source for that so she said that and then Obama was asked about and then Trump made that announcement so I don't know what they have planned you know we were pushing on the intelligence community private leader released the stuff and it was going nowhere the Obama thing was nuts because the guy didn't have any follow-up questions that was that was part of what was really weird about also they put it in a speed round like you put it in a speed round which is probably why he didn't have follow-up questions you think about that way but I mean that's just a massive dropping of the ball well you guys his aliens are real how do you know how do you know is the next question right it's right there how do you know aliens well yesterday the day after then he said oh I just meant theoretically in his life in the universe well why don't you ask that so you catch him on the spot instead of when it becomes this big viral moment and everybody's talking about it and then he comes up with a rational explanation for why he said that yeah I mean and and he told Obama told one of the late-night hosts I can't remember if his Kim O or Colbert or somebody but he said they said something like tell us what you know and he said I you know I can't tell you there's things I can't tell you so I mean he obviously knows more than he said right otherwise he would say there's nothing and then Trump said that he knows more it was very interesting you know I talked to Trump about it yeah he won't tell you shit he kind of a lot of things a lot of things yeah a lot of it's very crazy but you know he said they weren't going to release the Epstein files and that came out so I just kind of go you know I have a different I don't know if you want to get it but I have a short different view of Epstein then then I think I did well before we get into that you know tuckers thoughts on this whole UFO UAP thing he thinks they're like angels and demons from the Bible and he thinks that they're they've always been here and you know I'm sure you're aware of like the book of Enoch the book of Enoch which was one of the original biblical texts it wasn't included in the canon but just because of a few rabbis decided it didn't jive with the Torah and they found the book of Enoch along with the book of Isaiah as a part of the Dead Sea Scrolls and when when you find out that there was a biblical text that there was contemporary to books that did make into the Old Testament and that they talk about the watchers who come from above and mate with humans and create this race of jime giants called the Nephilim who destroy everything and consume everything what the fuck is this like what is this and and just stop it imagine if those rabbis hadn't disclosed like if that hadn't been excluded like Wesley Hough is great talking about the stuff he's a real historian when it comes to you know really understanding the the history of these biblical texts and you know and he's absolutely fascinated by it and he's like yeah it's kind of crazy that they just decided to not put that in the Bible imagine if they did and part of when you're going to church and they mean they're going over the Old Testament like okay this week we're going to go over the book of Enoch and we're going to figure out who the watchers are like what is that like what is that story the crazy thing that Wes Huff told me was that the book of Isaiah that they found in the Dead Sea Scroll predates the oldest version of the book of Isaiah by more than a thousand years when they found it they found out that there was a book of Isaiah that is a thousand years older than the one they thought was the oldest one and it is verbatim it's verbatim from the one that's a thousand years later wow which is kind of crazy wow but then it's also in the same fucking caves as the book of Enoch it's all together they in the Dead Sea Scroll amazing and we've had this we've been fed this story that sort of all of these religions and myths from the past are all just false they're all just hallucinations right they're all just lies I don't believe that it's just really it's really arrogant actually like it's like we'll know now like we've been around for you know humans are around for like millions of years but the last 150 years it's like we really figured it all out and we figured out that all human knowledge before you know whatever some recent time period is nonsense yeah I think that's quite arrogant it's very arrogant but I all look I'm a believer that history is far older than we think it is I'm and I think the more time goes on the more that gets revealed so when you're talking about something it's four or five thousand years old I think really you're talking about a retelling of a far older story and I think there's it's very difficult when you're dealing with people that don't have an understanding of science the written language is fairly new it's an oral tradition for generations before it's ever written down so my question with all this is always like what were they trying to talk about what were they trying to say what was the original experience that someone documented in story and then that story was relayed over and over and over again. trying to say what was the original experience that someone documented in story and then that story was relayed over and over and over again generation after generation until it's eventually written down and then they study it and take it literally and then also translating it from Aramaic which is the Dead Sea Scrolls ancient Hebrew all these different languages to Latin and Greek and eventually English like but what's the original story like what are they trying to document what is this important knowledge that they want to share and how screwed up with that get over the generations generations of talking about it but what ultimate truth is in there like I'm I'm absolutely fascinated by the story of Jesus Christ because if you wanted to come up with a way that people would live absolutely be far more beneficial than just going on natural instincts and tribal behavior and you would you would follow Jesus' teachings like there's I can't find a flaw in the way he tells you to live life there's a lot of religions that involve you know torturing non-believers and raping infidels and being able to do terrible things so that people that don't believe your religion there's none of that in Christianity it's all forgiveness it's all treating your brother as in your neighbor as if they're you like it's it's a beautiful way to live life are you Christian? Well I go to church no I have been for quite a while okay so I've been doing it for the last three or four years but that's not really an answer to the question because I don't know I think it's very interesting and I do believe that if you follow the teachings of Jesus Christ you will live a better life I really do believe that and one of the things I talk about is like the people that I go to church with are the most fucking polite people I've ever met in my life they're so kind and so nice and everybody let's you out of the parking lot everybody's like you know it's like the one point it works you know what I'm saying like if people are trying to find an idea does that mean I believe people came back from the dead does that mean I believe Moses part of the Red Sea not really no it seems like that's most likely a story where people are telling it generation after generation after generation but there was probably something happening there's probably some truth to it then we take you take into account some of the stories from the Old Testament like the book of Ezekiel which I'm absolutely fascinated by book of Ezekiel and his account of the wheel within a wheel and the the fire flashing forth continually and in the midst of the fire as it were gleaming metal like what what the hell is that like what is that like what are these stories and in the midst of the this gleaming others the likeness of four living creatures like okay they darted to and fro like the appearance of a flash of lightning okay what is that like what are they what were they trying to say and what was the original experience that people documented that was so important and it might have been a lot more similar to these UFO experiences that's that point yeah I think this is what one of the things that Tucker goes back to the the Christian story is so beautiful and so important you know Renee Girard's view of of Christianity is really stopping the cycle of scapegoating you know scapegoating where and I'm seeing it right now as part of the reason we've been pushing back against the moral panic on Epstein is that you scapegoat the thing you know traditionally literally was it good but you scapegoat the person or whatever originally was it go really was it go yeah it was it yeah yeah it would carry the sins of the community you sacrifice and you would send it away to die or something but over time you keep going yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah and then it's only the goat the general is for the devil goats or everything go get a bad rap goes are in your lobby aren't they are those those are elk no you're like no no big difference yeah but I mean so Christianity puts an end to that it says stop scapegoating I mean they escape go to Jesus really I mean you kind of go that you scapegoat the way the purpose of the scapegoating was to was for this the community to unite the community and and scapegoat to put all of its sins on one thing and then kill it or get rid of it and that was the way the community would restore unity you Christianity said no we're not going to do it that way that that's that's immoral and so you know he with the you know without sin should be the first cast of stone Jesus wasn't saying that prostitution was good or anything he was saying that we should not be scapegoating you know you've got sins too so don't scapegoat this person that's a really radical moment in human history and it really is what allowed humans to spread it creates a universe I mean Christianity is the first universal it's really universal religion maybe it's not the only but it's a universal religion it says everybody you know it's a child of God and it's and it's evangelical and once other people to become Christian that's very that's different from other other religions were like this is my God I've got my own God here and we're the best and you suck and and they make it very difficult to join yeah and it's not to say that Christians you know obviously there was you know fighting the Muslims and there's some interesting revisionism there but it's a beautiful religion there's terrible things that have been done under the guise of Christianity but if you listen to the teachings of Jesus Christ they're not following his teachings so it's like it's just human behavior that they have tagged on to Christianity so when people say Christianity is responsible for horrible atrocities I say no I say humans are because if you if it is actually Christianity you would be following the teachings of Christ and there would be none of those things I mean antisemitism is not Christian right so right true Christianity is not that so I think it's lovely and I hope there's a revival of some of it I'm not sure there is there is more now than before there's a lot of young people that are getting into into Christianity I think it's good to I think it's also I mean essentially with the you we're having a UFO thing it's an awareness that there's a higher power so one can sort of say look the UFO thing it's not the same as Christianity or whatever but this awareness that like we're not like there's something else going on there's something more there's something higher than us and that we should be humble in front of in the face of this just gigantic mystery you know puts us in a better mentality it certainly does and if anything if he's not the son of God if this was an actual historical figure what an insanely wise human being who didn't have these thoughts that are inherent to all of us of vengeance and lust and greed he's has none of these so radical also I mean you've heard it said before that you should you know love your friends and and hate your enemies I say to you you should love your enemies I mean it's just yeah like the hardest I'm not there I think very few people are there but it's certainly the right aspiration yes yeah it's the right aspiration and Tucker thinks that this whole UFO thing is somehow are connected to the spiritual realm and that we're well because we've been told for so long that there isn't a spiritual realm that spiritual realm is just a mental illness right you know it's like how he's like the Yahweh things like the problem of the people that tell you that are all mentally ill they're all very unhappy like like asius like secular like hardcore atheists are some of the most unhappy depressed people I know I don't see like incredibly happy unless they do a lot of mushrooms and those people tend to not be atheists anymore that's the one weird thing people that have had like intense breakthrough psychedelic experiences one of the first things they go I mean maybe there is a god like maybe maybe I don't know what I'm talking about because if I just experienced that and that's a real thing that you could have while alive on earth where you are confronted with divine wisdom and love and some weird strange form and when there's a lot of people that believe that that's the source of a lot of religious experiences and instead of alienating and making those things illegal we should study them and make them a part of the religious experience because it's probably what they were originally well that's right and so now that people are having spiritual experiences with UFOs it's wonderful and they should talk about them and kindle them I think the thing about psychedelics that's so interesting is that my experience with them was that you become you don't become so attached to your ideas and your beliefs and so which is a big problem in our society is people that get too attached to their egos get attached to their beliefs as opposed to like oh I thought that I mean I've made I've made my whole career out of being wrong about things and then correcting them but I think it's hard because that you do it's really great quality it's I'll thank you it's a very but it's still I hate it I hate being wrong and it's totally natural to hate it but I do think like having a practice that makes you go you are not your your beliefs there's something there you have an existence separate from right the things that you wrote on your blog or you were on X and don't be so attached to them right don't make them your identity yeah and that it's it's it's actually there's something really quite there's an awful part of when you feel like you've got something wrong but then there's another part we're like all it feels good to get it right and you feel clean and that's like that's what that's what we should be going for it but it does require for me being humble about my limitations before some higher power is really important place to begin because if you think there's no higher power or that the other one is like souls we don't talk about souls enough a new friend of mine at the university was talking about how important it is to really to care for your soul and to care about other people's souls it's one of the things the Christianity is so good at that you have something divine inside of you connected to something divine outside of you and that your behaviors affected treatment and it you know when you tell people that you're just you know a meat suit and you're just warm food and your life doesn't matter and that it's all just you know random and pointless that's a terrible story it's it makes people feel terrible but when you kind of go know you there's one of the most beautiful the I love all the charlie kirk videos that went out after his death because there are so many ones where he had these beautiful moments but he's talking to these women they're doing the only fans did you see that one and they're describing they're trying to shock him and saying just really kind of crude things about their sexuality and how like the sex they have it doesn't matter to them and and he was like I just don't believe that I think you have a soul I think God has a purpose for you what a much lovelier way to engage somebody and it wasn't a you didn't feel like he was morally condemning them right he was actually saying God loves you and so for me Christianity brings if that is the part of Christianity I think is so special but it is hard I mean one of the things that the anthropologists that I really need to just talking about she says it's it's the more of the God the more different the God is from humans the harder it is to believe in them and so people like Christians in particular she would talk about there even evangelical ones are always complaining about not believing enough and not having enough faith because it is so hard because you have the holocaust problem the problem of evil why if the God is all powerful and all good is you allowing the holocaust why do you love Hiroshima why you know these terrible things um and part of the answer for Christians has been well because he wants us to exercise free will and to be in touch with our better sides and to realize our potential as as moral uh moral humans and moral souls and and that's a that's a pretty good answer um but it is I I mean I was glad to hear that her say that people struggle with it because I certainly do as well well I mean I think everyone struggles with it I'm just I'm really fascinated by it I'm fascinated by it because when I go to church and I listen and talk about the various passages in the Bible my mindset is always like what was the real experience like what are we missing out of these tales what are we missing out of these recounting of these experiences what what happened I don't think it was nothing I really don't I mean there's something real to it and and it again it works that's the that's the main one for me it's like you want to live a better life like if you live as a Christian you'll have a better life you'll have a more love filled more wonderful life that's real and that this idea that oh it's fairy tales is it if it's a method for life that gives you a more rich and loving and peaceful life isn't that better for everybody isn't that a real thing that's a real thing it's there's no way you can know whether or not any of the stories in the Bible happened exactly as described we can't so you have to have this leap of faith to lead you know when he gets weird like Jesus comes back on a white horse like hey slow down you know like revelations book of revelations is weird but it's not like what's really weird some of these people that think that what's going on any wrong is to light the fire to bring to have Jesus return to light the signal fire like did you hear those recordings by that these non commissioned officers that went into these briefings combat briefings oh no yeah okay here's one of them because I saved yeah because it's so cookie that I read it and I was like wait what the fuck did they say one because it's so crazy I tend to be anti my knee jerk is anti apocalyptic because I don't see apocalyptic movements doing a lot of good in the world so yeah that's probably better off mostly I think a lot of Christians have ignored the book of revelations I yeah I think focusing to have lay on that particular book is probably it's a bad outcome okay so this was the story that this was in Yahoo I can I'll send this to you Jeremy so you can get this so you can put this up on the board did you find the thing okay here are just to tell our troops that this was all part of God now this is like I would go this is a combat readiness briefing urge us to tell our troops this is all part of God's plan and he specifically referenced numerous citations of the book of revelations referring to Armageddon and the imminent return of Jesus Christ he said that President Trump has been annoyed by Jesus to light the signal fire in Iran to cause Armageddon and mark his return to earth and they said that the guy was saying this had a giant smile on his face which made it all the weirder like like see if you could find that in there doesn't say that no it's not that particular oh this is just a movie something some complained about oh yeah a bunch of people there's actually like a lawsuit yeah really you risk like the whole self-fulfilling prophecy with that one it's well it's awesome what are you wait a second what are you doing what machines what weapons do control yeah there's a lot of fucking religious cooks so it's not just and also that is not how Jesus Christ would handle it let's go bomb Iran that's how Jesus is going to come back like do you think you would tell you that's the right way to do it like how did you in time very jesus see yeah jesus like how did you know with that in the text okay uh before we so we're deep into this show so the Epstein stuff all right so what is your take on this all right well so I've changed your position yeah I've changed I think it's been a bunch of time with the files um I will say I think I did do a piece well I do think that the shrimp is a code word for for young women pretty sure about that what do you think pizza is a code word well that was okay so then I did a I did I had I had resort about code words in the Epstein files and I did the shrimps and then I had some stuff about pizza and grape juice in there about grapes soda and my co-author Alex was like dude you can't go if you can't go full pizza gate you know like you gotta you gotta be like so we kept it out and then the times mentioned the pizza thing so I wrote someone x about it but I ended up taking it down because I was like I don't really know this one I mean we were we were to meet out the pizza one was where his urologist was like take your erection dysfunction pills and then we'll go out and get pizza and grape soda and I was like that is creepy you know as hell uh yeah so but I don't the shrimp one I'm like 95% of me is young women because you just see how they talk about and I think I proved it in my piece there's other ones like who are like the jerky is like cannibalism and whatever like well it didn't help that the restaurant owner was like the restaurant's name was like cannibalism yeah uh but um I'm skeptical that that's what that was so well you would be skeptical unless you a part of some of these fucking bizarre satanic rituals and then you would go oh my god it's real like there are look people have sacrifice people right can we agree to that in in in the history yeah of course and there have been satanic rituals throughout history can we agree to that sure okay so there has been cannibalism in history we agree to that okay unfortunately a lot actually there was a lot yeah why wouldn't we think they're talking about that we don't want to believe it right is that what it is no they don't want to believe that these people these multi millionaires and billionaires that go to this island and engage in all this crazy shit aren't doing something like child sacrifice or cannibalism well let's start with the let's start with the thing that I think a lot of us thought it was which is that it was an intelligence community sex black male operation that's what made it for me a story I mean a creepy guy doing creepy things there's just that's we call that a dog vice man story you know it makes it a man by dog story is like is that you kind of go wow it's like Mossad and CIA running a honey pie I mean that's the premise of Whitley Web's two volume book One Nation under Blackmail but when you look at it like we don't see that we see we see one case where Epstein emails himself something that sounds like it's in the voice of the Bill Gates science advisor Boris Karzitch I believe is the name and in it they talk about oh you know it's the famous email where he says oh you know I got STDs he says you got STDs from Russian hookers or from Russian women and then you tried to slip antibiotics or you want to meet a slip antibiotics and the Linda's drink and Melinda like the Astrobat is awful it doesn't like that's not it's weird what that is so first of all we'll talk about a second we're just talking about emails right right so who knows what was said just from the email we know that there are at least implies that he's got dirt on people and that he is exercising is doing something with this dirt that he has on Epstein or on Bill Gates rather yeah although so we're very limited in the data that we possess right because we just have emails between him and other people inside those emails we find a lot of creepy shit we find that one description where he was talking to this woman where she said I'm doing a doing investigating a story about an island where they bring children for sex and he goes she almost had a heart attack when I told her that person is me well he was talking about the the rumors and gosses about him but he wasn't saying that he's bringing children to his island for sex but that is what he said but if you look at the they're talking about me no no no she said I'm doing a story on a guy who brings children to his island for sex and he says she almost had a heart attack when I told her that person is me the person that my my name is terrible I'm not well you being charitable because that's not what the tech says with the tech says is someone's bringing children to an island I told her that person was me yeah he didn't say I told her that's a bullshit rumor I let her know that's not true but that's very much in his style I mean look look let's back up to the intelligence but wait a minute why would you why would you well we just pull it up and look at it I just think I think what we see from the files and I think Mike Benson sort of point out the ways in which Epstein might have been a contractor or a finance year or somebody hiding money for the intelligence community beyond that I don't see any evidence that he was doing much for the intelligence community if at all but you're only getting emails and only half of the emails right so there's only three million emails that have been released yeah there's another three million that the FBI possesses that they're not releasing right 100% is possible so we're made something there make why would you draw any conclusions based on only 50% of the data and then if there is 50% of the data that hasn't been released why is that way worse because this stuff is fucking nuts like this this is nuts like take your erection pill so we can go get grape soda okay what and it's weird this lady is investigating a place where they an island where they bring children for sex I told her it was me what well we should put that one up I want to look at that one okay I mean I think I mean here you're talking about you're talking about so first of all I think the picture is of a guy that is fully in charge of his life and he's doing he's like he is like amazing at getting people to love him and care about and people call him as their best friend in Florida clearly he was abusing girls and was you know busted for that I think usually because he's a pervert I don't think I didn't see that I don't see blackmail coming out of that and then you get to later and you've got okay you've got the Bill Gates thing which doesn't even appear to be from Epstein it appears to be for Boris and remember Boris the science advisor wanted Gates to pay for like a bigger apartment for him in New York and it appeared to be part of him threatening Gates to get something for Boris wanted so maybe Epstein was advising him on it but I mean to have a the other thing I'm struck by these emails Joe is that there are so many different attorneys people of the FBI people in the Eastern District the Southern District the Florida Southern District they would all have to be in on it and I'm skeptical because why would they have to be in on it well because they would be there in these I mean they're in they're reviewing the information they're trying to bring you know they're trying to bring action against them where like what depends on who are the powerful people that are implicated and what kind of influence they have over what gets released and what doesn't get released clearly names were redacted that are powerful people that are not victims so that shows you right there that there's some influence but there's a reason to do that why because they're not guilty okay what about the one where the guy says where Epstein says I like the torture video so why would you redact the name of the person who sent you a torture video for not trying to protect a powerful person yeah that's the Sultan is that right okay but that was someone had to just figure that out I mean the relaxes are so happy that's no no that's evidence that you're trying to protect a powerful person well but they didn't though in a lot of cases but they did right there yeah I mean they were making them I mean it was like a lot of powerful people's name yeah but I mean I mean look at like we're in the midst I mean literally the people that are being canceled for this like Peter Etia these people are like victims of a we're in the middle of a complete you know you know moral panic I mean we're now it's like me to version two I mean people are having to leave boards I mean these are people I don't like I'll just be honest like if part of me hesitated because I don't like Larry Summers I don't like Bill Gates I don't care about Sarah Ferguson you know I didn't say anything they came for Peter Etia you know it's a little bit like like Peter Etia like they keep it in doing anything wrong and you just like lost his job with CBS and you know he's sort of now they're under this cloud and people go oh but he was in the hospital and his wife was they were used with the apisiness wife is in the hospital we don't like what are we doing here like we're getting involved in Peter Etia's like personal life and so but he has to get fired for that I mean it's gone way too far Sarah Ferguson had to step down even though she you know she said tear you know like these people I don't like them like these are not people I agree with or think they're behaviors but I don't see so they're not guilty of crime I don't see they're not yet they're not like they were like they were all making a big deal out of like well so first of all let me just say I'm glad they released the file I think that you can I think they keep moving that thing around it's every time you do it it bumps you know I think like you know they I mean I'm glad the files were released there was definitely problems with the redactions there was also a case where the members of Congress were trying to get stuff redacted names got redacted of people that like I know in one case there were people that were getting licenses for guns that had nothing to do with Epstein on a list in other case other people's names were revealed who were not you know guilty of anything so that's why you you protect those people I think we you go everybody the logic right now is that anybody who had any interaction with Epstein had to have known of all the abuse he was doing okay or somehow responsible but a lot of these not right okay but a lot of these people were hanging out with him and doing business with him after he was arrested so this is all close to then you know he was very public okay but okay so then so then what is our view of people that do the crime and serve the time I mean the left you have been stopped right there he didn't serve anytime do you know he served he served a year okay he did not go to jail for a year you know he did house arrest yes it was a very sweetheart deal and the prosecutor was the prosecutor he turned it was was told that he was intelligence and this is why they were given that was a that was a by the way that's I looked into that yeah yeah that we looked into that one and that was um heard second hand uh so we don't even that wasn't even heard from a costa directly someone said that they heard a costa say that they told the vicky word and I believe her source is anonymous yeah so that's a week and you know Mike I mean when Mike Benz was in here and Mike has done a deep drive this he sort of like look at best you get Epstein tied up with intelligence with the Iran contract stuff right but he wasn't I mean there's two things to see here with his relationship with the intelligence community he was at best a contractor if you you know see her which means he's not an important player in deciding cover up clandestine operations it was the it's you know they had a state said he killed cold fusion I mean he said he killed pawns his his work on cold fusion I mean uh I don't know do you see it he I mean I called usually keep doing it right no they haven't done it yet well car I know Carl paid but he's saying the founder the brother of but he stated that he killed cold fusion research because he cut off funding for yeah he but there was I mean manipulated people I don't know that well I mean he said he killed it why would he kill it because it didn't work or maybe it did work and it's problematic that it does work because it kills all these people that all this other money in various energy modalities I just I mean I go fusion is like a whole I mean the idea that we have a secret that we've secretly tapped cold fusion and are hiding it for some reason he was on the way to breaking through to cold fusion and then they killed all of his research or but why you don't think that could be done because there's so many people that have money in all these other types of energy I just don't buy that you could first of all that technology is super difficult to get nuclear vision was this enormous undertaking huge numbers of people the cold fusion the cold fusion stuff was always the cold fusion stuff is really fringe I mean it was like we're gonna be in the lab and doing cold you know but you're not a physicist so how do you you know that well I mean I interview a lot of physicists and talk about it I mean the big fusion projects are incredibly difficult they keep announcing advances in them they can't get them cold fusion is not even considered a mainstream fusion project so to assume that there's some secret and I just think this is why I have a problem with the whole reverse engineering thing is I just kind of go you'd have to have so many people working on it covering up for such a long time I don't know how you get away with that well what if he was on the verge of a breakthrough but this guy steps in and stops funding and put some leverage on the university clearly he had dirt on a bunch of people that are at high levels of many universities that's why a bunch of these guys had to step down didn't they had a forward step down I think it's exaggerating in the head of Harvard step down because of him that wasn't there a connection between Jeffrey Epstein well it mean Larry Summers yeah well Larry Summers was you know he had to step down because he made those remarks about women as president and then he just he just had to step down as professor and I see this look I says genuinely someone that is not a Larry Summers fan I don't think I think it's ugly what he did it's terrible he was trying to get advice from Larry Summers about how to bed a Chinese economist and they were gross and their emails and it's terrible but I don't think that you lose a job at Harvard over that I don't think that Peter T. ish loses job at CBS over that we've got that's where he seems to understand I can't I see what you're saying but what I'm saying is clearly he had influence over some very high and powerful people he he also exaggerated his influence like he took a lot of credit for Santa Fe Institute which was a lot of other people I mean he's really he's really interesting and smart like he would he give a thing to you know band and talking to band and about it that was really interesting but he was also Steve Pinker talked about him as a kabitser like a kind of a bullshitter and he was like we also saw in the files it really overlooked we saw how he made his money like he he needed to get the Roth's he needed to get a deal with the Department of Justice for his client Ariana De Roth's child he hires overlooked. We saw how he made his money. Like he needed to get the Roths. He needed to get a deal with the Department of Justice for his client, Ariana De Roth's child. He hires Catherine Rummler, who was Obama's White House Chief Council, and she goes and makes a deal at the Department of Justice $45 million for the Roths child's, $10 million for Catherine Rummler, $25 million for Jeffrey Epstein. Everyone's like, where did his money come from? Doing deals like that. Like you realize, I mean, one of the things, succession actually had a little, little subplot about it. Like, there's a few people in the world that do these crazy high level deals, like often like mergers and acquisitions, that have these obscene fees because they're taking some tiny percentage. Epstein was operating. I think that they didn't realize is that when you read the files, is the levels of which Epstein was operating. I mean, his, his social and emotional intelligence is just off the charts, which is often rare among somebody that's that good analytically, someone that really understands like investments in the economy to be so, and he was a master manipulator. So I don't think it's, I don't think it's fair to say to people you had an association with him after his commit, after he's convicted of this crime. Rich guys, look, we have a totally separate system of justice for rich people. I think we've known that for a really long time. It's terrible. I, I condemn it. We should find solutions to it. That's what Epstein used to get out of it. I don't see any evidence that intelligence helped him. You know, we got other problems. The victims Virginia, Jeffrey, she claimed that she claimed that she had sex with Dershowitz. She then goes, oh, I was wrong about that. I mean, there's a lot of those victim testimonials that are untrustworthy. So you get yourself in a situation where you start to put like some of them were probably prostitutes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that's the other one is we, I did some reporting where we helped to, we found a 14 year old girl who was being trafficked on the streets. She turned 15 the process of us reporting on it. We were covering these PIs. They get the police involved, the police go get her. You know, she's orphaned. She goes and backs and live with her aunt. She's back on the street voluntarily back on the street. Nobody wants to talk about it. It's like, it's like you go rescue people and they're in that world. So these situations are much more complex than, I think the final thing on Epstein that kind of made me question is that I like a lot of other people had assumed that he's so murdered him. But you start looking at the evidence for that. Look, maybe there were more will come out and even this last round last few days or some new things that people point to, but they actually are not actually evidence of it. They said, you know, Epstein's brother's attorney, or Epstein's brother's examiner said that that he broke his highway bone and the highway bone is not usually broken and in hangings only in strangulations. Actually, it is broken in hangings particularly for older people. Broken in three places. Yeah. And that I mean, and that's like, and it's low on his neck. Yeah. And that happens. Also, the lady who was the guard deposited money into her account. But that doesn't, what does that mean? Okay. Well, you know, there was also Google, his name before he got all that's totally okay, but it's like, let me see why you're dismissing. I don't understand why you're dismissing this because if you're not dismissing it, I'm saying, hold on, you are, but hold on, you are because if you do have a guard and all sudden, this guard acquires several payments, she made several deposits. One of them was $5,000 just 10 days before he died. And then the cameras are cut. Okay. And then they mysteriously don't pay attention to the cell of one of the most important defendants of any gigantic public case involving enormously famous public figures. And then this guy hangs himself on suicide. Remember, he tried to commit suicide. I understand. But why you're not letting me finish one of the signs? Because that alone is weird. That alone is weird that the cameras are cut, that there's no video of it. The whole thing is weird. You don't think it's weird? Well, I think it's weird that this guy that he just finds, we just hang himself in this cage. I thought I had that same story. I was like, the cameras are cut. The security guards are asleep. All those things are true. All those things are true is also true that the cameras went out a long time before that night. It didn't just go out that night before. Security guards fall asleep at night all the time. He attempted suicide. I believe 18 days before. 18 days before he said that his roommate tried to kill him. Did you know that? Do you know his roommate was a cop that had killed four people in contract killings? His cop, roommate, his cellmate was a murderer. He was a guy who was a drug dealing cop who had killed four people in contract killings. And that was his fucking jailmate. And 18 days before he said that guy tried to kill him. But he said that. But he said that. Look at that guy. That is his fucking cellmate. Why would you put a guy who's one of the most high-profile defendants in any case ever in a cell with a hired killer who's a giant gorilla like this huge fucking jacked Italian guy. But he wasn't in the cell with him that night. He was a by himself and a fellow guy who 18 days before Epstein said tried to kill him. But Epstein tried to kill himself. I don't think there's any doubt about that, right? I don't know if there's I don't have never seen him say it. But I do know that he said that guy tried to kill him and they found him unresponsive 18 days before. He said that guy tried to kill him. And couldn't he lied about that? I was trying to get money. Couldn't he have lied about that? Video outside cell during Jeffrey Epstein's first suicide attempt no longer exists. How weird. Yeah. Why would he lie about that? He's in prison. He doesn't want to have a cell. Because he doesn't want to have a guy who he's already saying this guy's trying to extort him. Yeah. He's already saying this guy's trying to get money from him. And this guy is a known killer. He's killed four people in contract killings. How did you not know about that? I will say it's possible. How did you not know about that? I did know about that. You knew about the guy being a contract killer. No, I knew. I knew that story. But I mean, he didn't have a cellmate at the night of his death, right? That was one of the mistakes they made is that because he was on supposed to be on suicide watch. He was supposed to have a cellmate. Didn't have a cellmate. I think that looked about 18 days before he did have a cellmate 18 days before he said that guy tried to kill him. But 18 days before he tried to commit suicide. That's my understanding. I don't know if that's true, though. I don't know if that's true. I don't know why they would put him in jail with a contract killer. Well, I mean, how many who who's in that jail aren't the people in that jail pretty rough? His cellmate is a contract killer. Why would he be in a cell with a cop was a contract killer? I mean, aren't there a lot of the night? I have Epstein claimed a cellmate tried to kill him. New documents revealed Jeffrey Epstein claimed his cellmate tried to kill him in an incident before his death. Yeah, but we don't. Okay, but you don't know if that's true. Okay. Yeah. Why are you dismissing it? I'm not just missing a joke. Look, maybe you will come out. I'm just saying like, if you look at the evidence, we have to dismiss it. No, I'm saying I was confident it was a homicide. And now I know you aware of this. Yeah, of course all that's you were wearing the tried to kill us. Of course you were wearing the head where he said that. Well, how come you never brought it up before? You you seem shocked when I brought it up. Well, because because my understanding is it was a suicide attempt 18 days ago. Okay. But if he said this guy tried to kill him 18 days before, why didn't you take that into consideration? No, it is. I mean, I'm just saying that was a scheme like no, when I go seem like you took it into consideration. I was looking to dismiss it. No, I my view earlier was that it was a homicide because the highway burned, bone doesn't break when you have hangings. He said he didn't want to commit suicide. The video went out. The security guards are asleep. I mean, this was a huge investigation of this by the inspector general. So the number of people that would have had to been involved in this conspiracy and cover up is very large. And it's a large number of people who are in this job for to be do gooders. And so I'm very, I mean, that's look, maybe they're okay. So maybe they're with some evidence of not in the job to be do or sometimes they're in the job to be do gooders. Sometimes they're influenced by very powerful figures that want a particular result. Does that not happen? But we underestimate does that not happen in the real world? It does. Right. And wouldn't you imagine if you're dealing with multiple billionaires that may be compromised by the evidence of this guy's going to relay in a trial that that would be one of the times they would want to exert that kind of influence? It's possible. And like I said, in our piece, we wrote it's possible. But I think at this point, we don't know. I don't think we have the evidence either way. And and that's for me. That's the change. I went from, I think it was a homicide to now I don't know. I didn't understand that he committed suicide 18 days before. No, no, no, we should sell mate tried to kill him 18 days before. That's what he said. Right. They found him unresponsive. He said, my cell mate tried to kill me. Yeah. But well, how do we know that? Why would we think okay? And then was it reported that it was an attempted suicide to try to dismiss the fact that a cell mate was trying to kill him because they wanted his cell mate to kill him? We don't know. But but you can't dismiss that. The psychologist thought he was suicidal. They, you know, I think I'm minder saying he could have lied about the room. He didn't want to have a roommate. That's like why and they didn't have a roommate. I want to have a roommate who was a fucking contract killer. Well, it was a sociopathic cop who killed four guys. But if you're a contract killer and you're in Epstein's cell, why would you want Epstein to die in yourself? Because you want to kill him because people are going to give you like extra cigarettes at the commissaries. Do we have any evidence? No, but who fucking knows? We don't know. Is a guy already kills people and he's in jail forever. He's going to be in jail forever. So for that guy, you say, will you kill a guy for me? Like that it's not even much of a stretch. It's not much of a stretch that Epstein would have killed himself. It's not much of a stretch that that guy killed either. If he's telling the truth that there was a report 18 days before that that guy tried to kill him. We just don't know. I mean, that's who we certainly don't know. But I don't understand why you would want to make the conclusion that he tried to kill him. It's not the, it's not this guy who's a contract killer was not actually trying to kill him. When he said he was 18 days before. Well, Joe, I mean, don't please don't misrepresent. I'm saying I don't know. And that the change for me is going from really looking like a homicide to really not knowing because there's some evidence that I had not considered before that. Right. You know, the guy who did the autopsy was the guy from that autopsy showing HBO who his name is Michael Baden and he was famous official autopsy. No, no, no. The one his brother authorized because they don't think he cannot. He's a medical examiner. He's a medical examiner. He's also famous for he's also paid. Site conducted a post suicide watch report Epstein denied suicideality and stated, I have no interest in killing myself. And that it would be crazy to take his life, all the, though he was depressed and unhappy about his current legal situation. He was told he will remain on psychological observation in the near term. He said, look, anything to see him in there. He says, he says he didn't recall. He got the marks on his neck. So he didn't blame that on. But no, no, that's, that's here. But the other details from the other report said that he complained that the guy tried to kill himself. That did the, his cellmate rather tried to kill him. Can you go back? Okay. We can find that again. But I do. I don't think, but Joe, I think the, I don't think that you've got it. Fine. Okay. I don't think you've got it. I don't think you've got the, I don't think you've n, I don't think we've nailed the, the case that there's a homicide at all. Well, I'm not saying that I know. Yeah. But I'm saying, okay, so that we agree. We don't know. Yes. But you're dismissing the major factors of him being dismissive. Sell with a contract killer him saying 18 days before the guy tried to kill him, then finding one responsive that someone tried to strangle him 18 days before. Yeah. But I mean, there's just this, you can make a case either way is my point. You can make the case that he was, it was murder. You may make a case that I had a certain point in time when enough circumstantial evidence that's fucking weird, like the cameras being down, the guards being asleep. But the cameras were down. I think I don't want to don't call me on exactly, but they weren't down like that day before or something. They were down for a while before. And the security guards fall asleep all the time. What did you find about the, the roommate trying to kill him? Oh, I mean, this is the rephesis like very important. I was trying to find his, but this is this reporter here who's found in the fetal position laying on the floor. Epstein told officers that tag Leoni, cellmate had tried to kill him and that had been harassing him. Tag Leoni claimed he had been asleep and woke up to see Epstein with a string around his neck. Right. Does that make fucking sense? Well, you actually, but Joe, just to, so you want to try to kill him and if Epstein, but so, and the result of this is that Epstein doesn't have a cellmate, right? So Epstein doesn't want to have a, if you want to kill yourself, you don't want to sell mate. So if you interpret the same side, you can interpret the same amount of facts. You want to go, got a guy to go back and finish the job. You shut the cameras off and you open the cell and you let this guy kill him. But they shut the cameras off when they shut the cameras off, it doesn't matter. There's no, there's no video. Because they don't do a machine video. Even the video that's there has been edited. The one video they show of the outside of the cell, a minute's missing from it. There's a lot of weird shit to it. Yeah, I agree. But it's not, the where you should arrive on it. In my view, where the facts lead you is that we don't know. And so that's, that's, that's a different thing than just saying that's safe. Well, no, but it is kind of fucking weird that he's in a cell with a contract killer, kind of fucking weird that he made a complaint that the contract killer tried to kill him 18 days before. Not if you're trying to get it. Did they remove that guy from a cell? Is that what happens? He did. Yeah, he's by himself, obviously. The 90 kiln of himself or, or was killed, or was killed. Find the, did you find the email where he's talking about the lady on the island where that she's saying that we brought children to an, that someone brought children to an island? Remember, he's faced with life in prison. He loved his decadent he didn't stick life. There's plenty of motivations for him to kill himself rather than live in prison the rest of his life. Right. And remember, reason, like, I think it was like a day or two before he lost his bail appeal. So he got a gun on bail, he didn't get on bail. It's gonna be stuck there. The, the psychologist didn't believe him. She thought he was suicidal. And, and so the, the, our, so one way you interpreted it is that they messed up. They did a bad job. They, they should have, they should have known that he was suicidal and they should have had a roommate there. The, the guards should have fallen asleep. They should have fixed the video camera. I just can't imagine you're such a high profile defendant and you're not watching them. Look a fucking hawk. I would imagine that a guy like that would be in protective custody with, you know, no fucking shoelaces. No, no way to hang himself. I think you overestimate our prison system. I would think that you would do your very best in this case to make sure that this guy is watched. They didn't, they bring him to do. They didn't. They, they should have had a roommate in a cell. I didn't. Well, they put him in a fucking cell with a killer. So it seems a little bit more than that. But that you, when you say it that way, you make it sound like the killer was in the cell. The night he was killed. I make it sound like this killer was in the cell with him when he said the killer tried to kill him. Right. But or he, that's what he killed himself. Not a little weird. Why didn't the guy do it then? Why didn't it work? Well, he probably choked him unconscious and thought he was dead and he survived. They found him unresponsive or he tried to kill himself. And then when they said, why did you try kill himself? He blames it on the roommate. So he doesn't have to have a roommate anymore. It's possible. Yeah. So find that email where he says that it's him. I'm trying to. I don't have access to the files right now. The thing I was using is going. Yeah. It's gone. Ian Carroll's app was really good. And it is taking a down book, because they're making public now was only. Oh, you, you know, you, Jamel's, I know, I was thinking through that too. And I got so many tabs open. You guys have moved around. So if you kind of go. So for me, if I go, if I go, we don't know if it was a homicide or suicide. The intelligence community work was appears to be of a long time ago and he was a contractor. We don't have any other evidence of a sex blackmail operation other than that email. Now there is one of the thing that I thought was so one for the theory that he's a blackmailer is that he put like we have emails of him putting cameras and Kleenex boxes hidden cameras and Kleenex boxes with motion detectors. Was that in order to engage in a blackmail operation? You know, was he just a blackmail people? Okay, your friend told me about the projects he's doing researching a really bad guy gets children for sex sent to his island. She almost fainted when I told her that person is me. That seems pretty clear. I think, no, no, I think he's saying that she's writing a story. It was about him, but I don't think he's admitting that he's bringing children to his island for so I don't know about you. But if I was sending an email and I was talking about someone researching someone who's sending children to an island for sex, I would also include that I let her know that that was bullshit. Well, she ends up coming in and meeting with them, right? You've seen the follow up to this? No. So she ends up coming to meeting with her and I don't know if gives her money or something or funds her, but it's like, yeah, I mean, without justifying, I mean, I think that after 2008, there's not, I don't think there's any evidence and I could be wrong. There's not a lot of evidence that anybody under age came to, you know, that Epstein, you know, abused anybody under 18. And I'm not defending abusing women over 18, but it that did seem like a pretty big change. Epstein associate found dead in Paris, prison. So after he said he was going to flip. Ah, shocker weird. Maybe he got sad too. Well, maybe he's one of the co-conspirators. I mean, people kill themselves a lot. You know, psychopaths also kill themselves a lot. Also, people get people killed because they're going to flip. It's possible and it's just, it's just, we would just need evidence for it. Yeah. So this is really, if you're going to kill somebody, you should probably make it so that there's not a lot of evidence. Right? Yeah. I mean, in the end of the dead, did he kill himself? He hung in a cell. Yeah. A lot of sheets in there hung himself. Hanged himself. Yeah. How are we going to wear it? So then it's like, they should make the streets out there. So then the theory would be what? The Bill Gates hired a contract. Who did it then? Who knows? Yeah. Well, who knows what who knew what about what and when? But I don't think it's the, I don't think it's the intelligence community because we're not seeing, I just, we're not, I mean, Mike came in here and you guys talked for a long time and Mike's not suggesting. Well, there's no evidence that it was. I mean, we don't have like clear cut. He did this and they killed these guys because of that. We don't have that. Right. Yeah. So, I mean, but we also don't have three million files. We also like, the things that we don't, he doesn't need blackmail to make money. Well, he also doesn't need blackmail in order to be able to get people to do things and influence them. And if you have video of people fucking people and doing things that aren't supposed to be doing and you're giving them drugs and you got them on this island for these wild parties, they're more inclined to do things that would do stuff for you. I mean, it's possible. I mean, I'll tell you, I mean, FBI confiscated a lot of films and videos. They had that. I was always very suspicious of that. The fact that he's talking about hidden cameras and mission that gets very bad. Well, that was the narrative before that. There was thousands of hours, hours rather of horrible videos. Yeah. So it's possible that there was, now I don't know that I would be, um, visit and describe a bathroom reminiscent of James Bond movies. Hidden beneath the stairway lined with lead to provide shelter from attack and supplied with closed circuit television screens and a telephone. Both concealed and a cabinet behind the sink wrote the times. The townhouse now reportedly owned by wexner's even more mysterious protege Jeffrey Epstein. So yeah, so this is even before his arrest. Yeah. And also the part of the thing with this, remember when Jeff Bezos was blackmailed and he was just like, yes, he was like, I'm just going to love letters to in Lawrence. They were pretty racy. Yeah. I mean, it was still was private personal things where he was sending him to a woman he loved. It shows the risks of engaging in blackmail. And so that seemed out to be a dummy. That was like someone's brother. Yeah. Right. So but Epstein, I mean, in other words, if you use it, like if you actually like use your blackmail, I think it's very hard then to maintain your reputation as somebody. Now maybe it was sort of hovering ever articulated. He was attracting people. I mean, what's so striking about it is he's attracting people to him. He's got all this Bon Amie. Oh, come hang out with Chomsky and I who'd Brock and all these people. It's like a really good time. You know, I think then being like, oh, I have blackmail material on you. You need to do it. I mean, he's getting people to do what he wants them to do for money, you know, for for feeling like good vibes being in on some Israeli peace talks. I don't then see him going around and maybe I look again, like I totally convey. Maybe I just haven't seen the evidence then he's going around being like, oh, I have blackmailed what's your own line you have to do what I want. He got Clinton. He probably got, why do you think he's filming everybody then? That is he could be a pervert. I mean, there's plenty of evidence of perversion, right? Oh, the ranch. Investigators of finally looking to Jeffrey Epstein's Domexico ranch. Federal authorities apparently never searched the property, but now state authorities will reopen a 2019 investigation about time. New Mexico. It's great. It's great. It's went on Twitter or X has a very long, I was reading it earlier and got bored, but it's very long about the the link with the lottery. Oh, yeah. How they won the lottery. It's weird. Wait till that if that's accurate. It's weird. I agree. I want it crazy. I mean, Mike also points out that he was least this incredible mansion in New York by the State Department, but then the State Department like sued him. So it's, you know, they're like, he request if he was like doing less Wexner, give him a house in Manhattan. And then it will didn't that in the big house? That was the, this was a previous mansion. People just give it a fucking mansion. What that thing I told you about someone found that the person who notarized that $10 transfer of the house conveniently filmed like the best 9-11 footage. And that those are the three million, like the timing of those missing files is right around the 2001. I mean, we I think that what the files are important is that we saw he's able to make his money as a high level fixer. We saw people were really into him. People loved him. He was magnetic. He's able to get people to do things that he wants without using that as a tool. And we're not seeing I just don't see where I don't think we're seeing any signs or footprints or any of that of engaging in black male. We have the cameras. We don't have half of the files. Yeah. What we have is weird. The grape soda, the shrimp, the pizza references, the jerky, all that stuff weird. This lady saying that there's an island where a bad guy is bringing children for sex. She almost fainted when I said that person's me. All this stuff is kind of fucked. Well, yeah, it's kind of fucked. The shrimp's one they're definitely talking about. They're objectifying children for sex. I think that's kind of fucked. I think it's I think that he was I mean, my interpretation. I mean, one interpretation of it is that yeah, he's freely admitting on an email that he's trafficking children. I find that difficult to believe that you would put that. I mean, if you're going to say that he doesn't put the black male stuff in email, but he's going to put in an email that he's bringing children to the island. I mean, who he's being sarcastic there? I think he's saying, oh, that guy is me. Like that's what they say about me. Why wouldn't you elaborate? And so I mean, if you're sending this person who knows, the person he sends it to knows that it's not true. How's that? I mean, I think that person works for him, right? Masha, is that one of the women that he had? I don't know. I just, I don't think that's him saying I'm maybe. Yeah, maybe. All right. We got to wrap this up. Anything else? I got one. I got someone gave me a video. I thought I can share it with you guys. What? Are you a photo video? Oh, wait. Did we have a condition? And every sash with a kind of sentence to Jamie. Yeah, you get air droppet. Is it compelling? More compelling than your ways video? Like the yaway video. It's kind of interesting. It's all right. It's fun. Is it compelling? All right. Let me you guys will decide or not here. I sent it to you. Okay. That's just something yeah. I was curious about what? Oh, I was just, you know, Elon, you think Elon knows more than he's less than about UAPs. Yes. How is, how do you know that? Well, because he works with NASA. If he knows something, he knows something. Also, some people have told me that he knows something. But don't you ask him privately? He don't tell me shit. Okay. I got a big mouth. I asked somebody that was high up in his operation. Yeah. We were, it was, we were on the record, but I won't reveal who they are what they said what they say. And they go, I said, you guys must be, I was like, it's SpaceX. You guys must just like have to don't you have to edit out like UFOs that you get, you know, and the person just looked at me and they just said, you know, it's really close with the federal government. That was all they said. Good. All right. Let's see it play this. What am I looking at? This is her, this is her video in here. I think she shows, I think she zooms in. I don't know what we're looking at. It's here in Texas. What are you looking at, lady? Okay. It's like most of you have both videos. It's just a doc. We're not letting it go. It gets better. 30 seconds guys. Okay. Let me see her ripping out. All right. It looks like she's tripping. It looks like it's, um, you know, her, she a friend. She's my friend. She talks. I think she's not. No, no, she's not. And this is like not far from here. It's somewhere in Texas. I think she zooms in at the end. No. No. Well, we still got 10 seconds for it to get good. Oh, my God. Oh, she doesn't, I thought she had a, wait, she once she showed me she zoomed in on and it's such that it disappointing. We probably should have looked at all out. All right. Let's wrap it up. Thank you, sir. Appreciate you. Thank you. All right. Bye, everybody.