Mack gates. Thank you for doing this. Good to be with you. I haven't seen you in a while Especially in Florida. Especially in Florida. Exactly So I just want to start with a clip that I saw this morning That I think is amazing and tells you a lot about a lot This is from the Jerusalem Post Washington conference this weekend the man speaking is a guy called you who to cap one I don't think I've ever heard of before but now apparently works at the State Department In the office to fight antisemitism which is part of the department And here's what he said watch us I get off a plane I am the president's representative and I am walking off with the yamoka And I have kosher food and embassies will have kosher food It is a game changer the appointment is a game changer and it's not about history It's it's about education and how do we educate Indonesia has 350 million Muslims living in the country? How do we change their textbooks? How do we hold the people in Gaza accountable that if America is paying for UN textbooks and Supposedly the changes are made. Why are those textbooks not being used in why are they using their old textbooks? We have to teach people it's not okay to educate your kids to be a martyr Okay, and we have to hold those countries accountable How do we battle antisemitism on? the internet How are we doing better on algorithms? What companies can we work with? We are going to have a whole division within the office of? the special envoy to combat antisemitism That is going to work on technology and Working with the greatest leaders in technology many of whom are Jewish and have offered their assistance The office is going to be revamped entirely to be one of the highest profile offices in the State Department Nothing will convince Indonesia to come our way like sending rabbi, Yehuda is probably my how do we hold the people of Gaza accountable So that there is truth to the claim that in the pedagogy that is administered in a lot of places There's incitement Maya the martyr is a character out and that is awful and US taxpayers shouldn't fund it and we ought to hold anyone accountable It does at the same time like the the definition of antisemitism In recent times according to some of the Israel first crowd in the United States has really migrated like this isn't my line But I certainly associated with antisemitism used to mean Somebody who didn't like Jews now just mean somebody Jews don't like and that's not a standard that we can live with because Because the reason antisemitism is terrible. It's against my religion. I'm totally opposed to it in by the way It does result in violence. I think we just saw that and I hate it But it's antisemitism is wrong because hating anyone on the basis of their DNA is always wrong It's a universal principle. It does not apply to one group My group or your group would place to all groups and if it doesn't apply to all groups then it's not a principle and I can just ignore it Right see that's the problem. I have here Yeah, but the US ambassador to France Jared Kushner's father says that Antizionism is antisemitism And I don't believe that I think that you can be critical of foreign policy choices that a country makes Without the assumption that you hate the religion or the ethnic group associated with that that country Like when I was critical of Joe Biden that didn't make me anti-Catholic And when I'm critical of Benjamin Netanyahu that doesn't make me antisemitism Well, I agree with that and I I do think there has been a rise just I just noticed it in people Hating Jews disliking Jews antisemitism. I think that's real in the United States, but I Think you could probably fix that in a week. Wow by getting Jewish groups like the ADL Like the American Jewish Congress like whatever group you could have cap one runs to come out against anti-white hate which is institutionalized in the United States and if you had the ADL and the SPLC and these groups that have fought against antisemitism for all these years Make the obvious and true point that hatred of anybody on the basis of how they're born is immoral and we won't stand for it and In the United States the institutionalized hate is anti-white of course prevented from getting jobs prevented from getting federal grants prevented from getting Admitted to college that's still in place, but you know why that hasn't happened. I don't understand I you know what I don't understand. Well, there isn't a sufficient monetization path there the way it is when the ADL and Similarly aligned groups try to make the American people think that antisemitism is hiding behind Okay, so then I know it's not real. Okay, so if I get up look if I get up and say it's only wrong when people attack people like me then Everyone knows that I'm not defending a principle. I'm defending a group interest right and I can ignore your group's interest I cannot ignore a universal principle and the universal principle is that kind of hatred is always wrong no matter who it's aimed at So why doesn't the ADL? Stand up and do that. I would send money to the ADL if they did that I would send money to the ADL I would and I despise the ADL Because that would be a defensive what's true and so needed Why won't they do that well when you're when you're a witch hunter? You have to first convince people of the existence of witches and so I think that for the broad goals of the ADL They have to make the country believe that we are somehow aligned against the Jewish faith and against what they're saying It's okay to discriminate against white Christians, but it's immoral to discriminate against Jews No, it's immoral to discriminate against Jews and white Christians and black people and Indonesians and every group on the basis of their DNA period Well, there has to be a villain and that's what white people have become in in this really threat-constructed environment around identity Well, I've actually reached out to those groups and said I will make common cause with the all support You will send you money if you will just defend the principle and that would include defending no you never heard these people during the DEI They didn't say one word they were for it. They were for discriminated against whites because those kids who've been Shafted by anti white hate as institutionalized in every big company in every government agency in the whole United States and Western Europe those people are mad and Where was you who to leaven during that? Where was Bill Ackman during that and my point is come over to the side of Universal principles of light and truth and let's make common cause against all forms of hate and if you won't do that That I'm not taking you seriously No one should take them seriously because they they are an advocacy group for a particular ethnic group and that is fine Well, how's it different from like Ilhan Omar and the Somalis? Well, I think that in a lot of ways There are there are similarities when like if no nationalism is the objective and obviously Ethno nationalism is the objective in Israel. It's the organizing principle. That's fine. That's not our country country Yeah, and but oftentimes people are pursuing the policies here in the United States that that benefit Israel and our own interests and the interests of our people and the plight you described that so many young people have endured is Not a problem white young people. That's why they're mad Why do you think they're mad because they've been told that the country they were born in like officially Discriminates against them. That's ongoing I don't think it's just even white people. I think it's it's also non white people who see the attack on white culture Not as an attack on like colonialism, but as an attack on success. Right. I know a lot of non white people. They're like actually This this anti white activity that's going on is going to make me less prosperous and less safe and I'm kind of here For all the criticisms we his whites have taken We did an okay job setting up an orderly world and we would make some mistakes along the way and you've got to reconcile those But at the end What society would you replace with with like what we've set up in the western world is there is there some like vision of the way Civilizations were built in Africa or the far east that we would we would gleefully adopt so imagine moving here because it's a white country founded by white people and Getting here and being like yeah, I want I want to be part of that and which I get 100% and then you get here in the first thing you learn is white people are bad Right, I mean, that must be weird. It's I think that this is shifting the other way I really think during the excesses of the post George Floyd era people attached so strongly to identity and You know, I sense a real pushback against that and like you talk about like learning it right? The main place people learn still is in the school system right now public education is Essentially a failing enterprise and all of the innovation is to take people out of that system And then people will self select what they learn and that may be more productive This is one of my closest friends. This is Brooky. She's not our only dog, but she's our head dog I hunt with her. She sleeps next to me in bed every night. She's four and a half and Smarter than any executive at Fox News. This is a really impressive dog But I think we all think our dogs are impressive and great and we love them And I know that if anything ever happened in this dog There would be no limit to what I would do to help her and so vet bills can really stack up thing Heaven, she's been healthy, but for a lot of people including close friends of mine and it can be crushing and so when we Started talks with the company. We're now in partnership with Dutch Pet about how Their approaching veterinary care $82 a year for unlimited care. I just thought that can't be real, but it is real Dutch pet if you're watching this right now use the code tucker from this show if you care about your dogs Care about your animals if it's you know if it's real to you Check it out $82 a year for unlimited veterinary care you'd pay anything, but you shouldn't have to Dutch pet I think you're right. So I think what you're saying. So I'm I was Why want to get to the thing that really bothered me about the statement from you who to Kaplan whoever who apparently now runs the state department He just told us I did not vote for this just to be clear period The any of what I just saw yeah that guy but but you're saying Maybe I should calm down a little bit because like who cares history is passing this whole conversation by I I'm not saying who cares because that was that was a disgusting display of I think parochial interest that you just saw yes Correct, but we see that often so I don't get to worked up about it the the bigger issue is that Rabbi Yehuda would probably classify you and I as Anti-Semitic because we've been critical of some of the policy choices of the Israeli government and that broad Application of anti-Semitism to say anti Zionism is anti-Semitism To to say that even some things in the Bible may be deemed anti-Semitic if they're critical of Jews at any point It's it's so it is created such a Curiosity among young people to test those more A's and challenge those dogs like I think there are a lot of like the Mark Levin Israel first crowd who look at us and say like were the problem Tucker and mad at the problem actually were not the problem the problem is you lost us I know you they show these old videos of you being very complimentary of Israel and critical of Israel's critics You could easily find a lot of my libraries taking on the floor to Congress supporting a strong and robust Jews Israel relationship so two people who in our 30s were Incredibly supportive of this relationship completely have come on tethered and it is because the relationship has become to burdensome And friends should be able to tell that to each other and when you do that doesn't make you a bad friend I still consider myself pro Israel I think that what the Netanyahu government is doing to Israel is bad for Israel Much in the way the United States created more terrorists than we killed during the the wars in the Middle East That have consumed most of my life. I think that is what that is the chapter of the book. They're in right now this this expansionism and The adventurism and it ends badly and ended badly for us. You remember Syria's in the news now because tragically we've lost Americans in uniform in Syria and a translator there as well and reasonable people are asking why are we still in Syria? What are we doing being so we can lose troops? That's why? That is so sick and and I believe that's true You believe that that those people are there so that they can die yes and trigger a war That is correct and a deeper commitment and an emotional commitment you've lost people here in it I do think that and when we lost someone in Mogadishu did that create a deeper emotional Connection to Somalia or did that cause Americans to say what are we doing patrolling around Mogadishu? It allowed the State Department and the rest of the federal government and it's Constellation of NGOs to import tens of thousands of Somalis into the United States because all of a sudden well that had been happening under under Clinton You know for some time. Yeah, well that right put that I believe blackhawk down was it the During the Clinton minister. Yeah, right. So Yeah, we now have had military action in this country So there's a the deep and important connection between our country and whatever country We're killing people in and so we need to import whoever it is the Somalis the Montanyards from Vietnam Whatever and by the way some of those groups have done well here others have not done well at all But the pretext is exactly the same we occupy Haiti repeatedly also in we have ton of patience Like this is how it works. We're fooling with Venezuela policy got a ton of Venice Well that is at the next chapter here is you know, you're welcoming a good chunk of Syrians in the United States I mean a lot of them are already living in Europe Yeah, and but let me just say I've known a lot of Syrians in my life a lot of Syrian Christians and alway It's in moderate Muslims. It's never been a hotbed of a religious extremism Not a secular government until last year Damascus was a great secular center of enlightenment and Architecture a lot of the New Testament was written from what's now serious So it had a you know, it's had an ancient Christian presence of course Paul was on his way to Damascus when he meant Jesus So like this is the Levant. This is not some far away. This is on the Mediterranean. Okay, this is And so I know some amazing Syrians also a lot of like war traumatized Unemployed and unemployable dangerous Syrians and there happened to be living in Berlin right now so like whatever it It's a mixed it's a mixed back the only point is the soon as you intervene in another country All of a sudden, you know invade the world import the world becomes real Yeah, I introduced the legislation in Congress to take all of our troops out of Syria It was defeated overwhelmingly and was that that was that was in 2024 last year and Onopolina, Luna court, you know others and I took to the floor to explain that this would result in American deaths Those deaths would not be worth whatever gain is attempting to be realized in Syria In Syria we had troops funded by the Pentagon fighting forces funded by the CIA And in Syria is even an example on the limits of Russia's interventionism I you know took note of the fact that them propping up a government and trying to keep it loyal was not something that was ultimately sustainable for Russia And so now You know we ought to get our troops out. There's no Thing that we are fighting for there that is an achievable win What were these guys doing you hear it on the news now? Key leader engagement like you know what that means that means we've got troops wandering around Syria figuring out which better When leaders to go bribe as a part of some coalition we can represent and that is everything Donald Trump is against Donald Trump doesn't want to import a bunch of Syrians. He doesn't want to control Syria And I think that that there is a lot of the military industrial complex That just needs us to be in a state of Kind of constant latent war everywhere Oh, there's no question and I want to ask you and by the way Just while I'm on the rant. Yeah, the reason that happens is because in Congress There's this great sense of deference like if you're not on the agriculture committee You defer to those people if you're not on the intelligence committee you defer to those people or the armed services committee and under a system Where people's specializations were being represented in that way that might work But it's just a function of which special interests are our controlling which committees in which members of Congress The way you get on the war committee is to be for the wars The way you to get on the intelligence committee is to be for the intelligence apparatus Way to get on the agriculture committee is to be for big food The way to get on the natural resources committee is to be against natural resources And then when you do all of that you end up with this this highly deferential system to people who were elected by No one who buy off your leaders and those leaders justify it by saying well at least I'm moving up in the system And thus whatever I do to surrender my agency is justified and and worth it because I can have a seat at the table and maybe I can I think the moral justification for the person who makes moral compromises is Well, at least now I'm here and I could potentially make things better Yeah, but you're not even really there because you've sold all the shares of yourself You know, else was there Kevin McCarthy like he was there until he wasn't but the problem is the man had no agency because Over such an period of time he had sold shares of himself to the highest bidder Are there any sovereign leaders in the world that you're aware of like does any leader have the ability to say This is the right thing or the wrong thing and I'm just gonna act according to how I feel with like the authority vested in yes Really yeah El Salvador naive bouquet Yeah, I think he has total agency to just do things as he says Huh, how's the country doing? It's doing well people are safe investment is coming You and I have spent time there. Yeah, and a lot of time. I think that It is a great case study in what happens when you You know when you Exercise the type of executive power that benefits the people it's in a way if it's a dictatorship It's a very benevolent dictatorship Yes, and people get to vote for against him and they vote for him Yeah, they also get to leave. I mean a third of Salvadorans have left over the past 40 years come the United States and now Bunch of them returning so they are yeah, I mean and by the way like I know out there among your supporters in mind There's a lot of angst over like well, you know has Donald Trump done every single thing I ever wanted him to do in this first year in office like if you would have told me Back when we were staring at polls showing us that Kamala Harris was gonna be the next president of the United States That here we would be at the conclusion of 2025 with negative net migration in this country and some of that indeed is the great work of DHS But a lot of it is the self deportation where Trump has set the ethic in this country Where if you are not here legally you are not welcome and a bunch of those people are going home And I think that is a great credit to the work. They've done it is and in the case of El Salvador It's a great credit to the job the president of El Salvador is done in like improving his country. Yeah, like one out with there Well, here's a pretty obvious question that too few ask What's the smartest way to protect your home and your family? Is it a? Waiting until a burglar smashes a window and tries to get in or is it be Preventing that attempt in the first place. Well, obviously it's a be the second option is way better And unlike most security systems simply save understands this and acts on that premise So simply say provides proactive security it stops criminals before they get inside your house I mean really you would have thought everyone would have thought of that but no simply safe has though Simply saves cameras spot threats early and alert live agents actual human beings who talk directly to intruders Hey, you're on camera get out and they either bolts they split the scene most of course do or police show up fast No long-term contracts or hidden fees and you can cancel it whenever you want any time Named best new home security by us news will report for five years in a row plus a 60 day money back guarantee Simply save is the go-to for whoever needs security systems Takes just minutes to set up and the app lets you monitor everything from anywhere There's no tech wizardry needed this month right now Get 50% off any new system This is one of the best prices you'll ever see for simply safe visit simply safe S I am pli safe calm slash Tucker again that simply safe calm slash Tucker and lock in your discount There's no safe like simply safe So I just want to get back to one more question about the state department's new office on anti-Semitism And just say again, I'm opposed to anti-Semitism every bit as much as I'm opposed to anti-white hate Which is much more prevalent and all of it anti black anti-Mexican everything anti people But in there he says we need to control people say any internet. Yes, and we're going to talk to Jews in the Just said it's so funny. It's like do they really think that's gonna work? Does anyone but that's why should the US government be trying to censor its own citizens like I thought that was First of all illegal I thought we ran against that that was the Biden administration But isn't that like how is that different from slavery if you can't Say what the body leave Yeah, well, I don't know it's a form of bondage It's like I'm not treating you as he as a human being as a free man if I want to lie you just say what you think Well, and I thought that's what America was it was the place where you could say what you think yeah the Opportunity to do that apparently we can screw it constrained worldwide as as Rabbi Yahuda is serving you your kosher Why should the US state department I thought we were against censorship? How wait a second you thought the US State Department was against censorship? That's not true It's kind of standing up at some event with a bunch of lunatics saying Yeah, but I'm the US censoring Americans and I'm a work for the US government. How about you get fired today Yeah, I think he was pointing globally in the US State Department has a long history of trying to control what people see in here And how they react to so we need to change the textbooks in Indonesia Should we really be changing other people's textbooks? Whatever. No, I think I think there's a reasonable argument to be made Yeah, you should not be funding the textbook No, it should not be fun. It should be funding anybody's textbooks like there are people living on the street But whatever leaving that aside you're not allowed To censor our social media Period because we're Americans we can say and think whatever we want That's the point of being American. How can a US official say that? I think we have crossed that rubicon long ago when you had people in the Biden administration censoring true information about vaccine side effects And no accountability for that no action against those officials It has blown the door open to use powers and government to try to advance the viewpoints that You find comforting and to silence the ideas that you find uncomfortable I've never heard anybody say we should censor anti white hate on the internet. Now one person is ever I don't by the way, I don't think we should censor it or any Expression of what people believe should ever do think censorship like digitally is ultimately sustainable with the fragmented digital environment So that's the point I'm not I'm not seeing you're seeing up over over to you. I know because I just I think that You know you've got we have so many different opportunities to communicate now more so than in the 2010s and The censorship regime is only going to backfire on these folks and it's sad. I honestly I wish People like you know Jonathan Greenblatt at the ADL and and this particular rabbi Like would would see that what they are doing is ultimately to their detriment because more and more people are going to wonder Why there is this like one group that seems to have Primacy in speech and discourse You're a hundred percent right and you're able to control your emotions sufficient to see that which is why I'm glad you're here Controlling emotions really is what I'm what I'm known for no it is actually because you're seeing Release compared to me with no self control at all You're seeing the big picture which is that This is a conversation that can only be counterproductive They don't understand the nature of human discourse and of the internet and like you can't censor it Now and how are you gonna censor the presidential debate stage in 2028 because let me walk through what you're gonna see you're gonna see candidates on the Republican debate stage and on the Democrat debate stage they're gonna say I'm going to cut off all aid to Israel I believe the US Israel relationship is toxic. I think it is a it is an abusive relationship in the United States States is the abused partner and we need to leave and those people are automatically going to surge to a Prominent position in the polling in their parties. So then how do you? How are you ultimately going to censor a viewpoint that is a rising viewpoint on the left and the right? Among the bases of those parties not not a This isn't a viewpoint percolating among the elites that maybe the US Israel relationship is something we have to Question in its current iteration in its current form, but this is coming to a head and These like I saw the deal where if you looked at the far-off filings with the Israeli government is paying to Geofence US churches so that they can propagandize evangelical Christians. I'm watching this like saying It's not gonna work people are still gonna ask questions And I still can't find any of the of Israel's strongest offenders who will defend that conduct They've also I guess hired Brad Parscale to spoof the AI bots. I Saw that and I thought I thought at least it's like them getting grifted this time He's pathetic, but yes, no, I mean literally pathetic, but But it's still so dishonorable what he's doing, but you're absolutely right I should have a lighter heart about this kind of stuff. It's I guess what concerns me is These are people who are totally committed to violence Who I mean for rabbi whatever his name is to say we need to hold the people of Gaza accountable when they're already these Really in the US if murder tens of thousands of women and she'll remember them It's like that's not a kind of like what is Is there anyone who believes that Israel's campaign in Gaza has killed more terrorists than it's created? Is there a single serious person who believes that? Well, it's it's a crime It's it's a crime and when the more you know about it the more shocking it is that it's happened a first-world country doing something Murdering all those kids murdering them which they have and all these people like Rabbi whatever and Mark live in defending it They're just pro violence. They believe in violence Mark live in when Charlie was murdered three months ago said you know He was murdered because people called him an aussie and that's an invitation to shoot somebody next you know He's running on calling everyone who disagrees with the next aid package a Nazi He's espousing violence Markovins totally for violence a lot of these Stronger voices are for violence. So if censorship doesn't work it makes me uncomfortable When people who believe in violence and murdering the innocence as they do If they're if they can't achieve their goals by peaceful means like what's the next step? Violence I think that they come from a viewpoint of like every 400 years people round up the Jews and kill them on the planet earth And they think that their struggle is existential and if they do not become violent in certain places in certain iterations that they become the victim of it Okay, I get that and actually one thing that I agree with her because I hear about it all the time from friends of mine is that People are panicked or panicked and then you have a shooting this massacre in Australia is like the worst thing about it. I couldn't even watch the video. It was so horrible and It's like that adds people's sense that there's something like that is gonna happen here And I totally sympathize with that all of that But Violence is not the answer. That's the point. Yeah, it's why you can't defend the murder of kids in Gaza You can't call if your enemies to be killed like Mark Levin in effect does Don't do that right yeah, and It it Probably is you know the next chapter of all of this is that more of that type of violence is visited here in the United States And we're against that that by the way, that's why the speech in the dialogue in the discourse is so important Which is what Charlie Kirk understood? I know and and and said so all the time and I mean when you you and I know What few others do and that is the operational competence of Charlie Kirk In doing everything he could to support the Trump administration to make the best possible decisions on the information that existed Charlie told me something once about President Trump and and Twitter and he said you know man how many times back in 2016 2017 Did we did we have someone come up to us and say we love Trump, but can we get him off Twitter? Can we just get him to stop? Tweeting every impulse and by the way, I always loved the posts still do but We so many people were focused on the info tweeting every impulse. And by the way, I always loved the posts still do. But we so many people were focused on the information flow from Trump out into the Twitter sphere. When what we I think discounted was when Trump was scrolling Twitter regularly, he was getting bidirectional feedback that does not exist right now. That avenue is not open the way it was in those years. And I think it was really special and awesome about Trump that he was able to understand the zeitgeist and what the temperature and move the country was. And I would love to see Trump back on Twitter posting regularly and seeing the feedback from users. I think it's a really smart point and true. We did an interview with a woman called Casey Means. She's a Stanford educated surgeon and really one of the most remarkable people I have ever met. In the interview, she explained how the food that we eat produced by huge food companies big food in conjunction with pharma is destroying our health, making this a week and sick country. The levels of chronic disease are beyond belief. What Casey means who we've not stopped thinking about ever since is the co founder of a health care technology company called levels. And we are proud to announce today that we are partnering with levels. And by proud, I mean sincerely proud. levels is a really interesting company and a great product. It gives you insight into what's going on inside your body, your metabolic health. It helps you understand how the food that you're eating, the things that you're doing every single day are affecting your body in real time. And you don't think about it. You have no idea what you're putting in your mouth and you have no idea what it's doing to your body. But over time, you feel weak, and tired and spacey and over even longer period time, you can get really sick. So it's worth knowing what the food you eat is doing to you. The levels app works with something called a continuous glucose monitor, a CGM. You can get one as part of the plan or you can bring your own. It doesn't matter. But the bottom line is big tech, big pharma and big food combine together to form an incredibly malevolent force pumping you full of garbage on healthy food with artificial sugars and hurting you and hurting the entire country. So with levels, you'll be able to see immediately what all of this is doing to you. You get access to real time personalized data and it's a critical step to changing your behavior. And those who like Oreos can tell you firsthand. This isn't talking to your doctor and annual physical, looking backwards about things you did in the past. This is up to the second information on how your body is responding to different foods and activities, the things that give you stress, sleep, etc. etc. It's easy to use. It gives you powerful personalized health data and you can make much better choices about how you feel. And over time it'll have a huge effect. Right now you can get an additional two free months when you go to levels.link.tucker. That's levels.link.tucker. This is the beginning of what we hope will be a long and happy partnership with levels and Dr. Casey means. What role does Twitter X play in the discourse of the nation? It's the global newswire. It's where news is made and I think that people discount the significance of the platform when they say it doesn't have the same user base that you see on meta or TikTok. But the reality is the news that is made on X Twitter really pollinates to those other platforms extensively and drive. I think drives all the action. So Twitter is real life is what you're saying. I think that it is. Yeah. Could you understand what's happening in the country without reading it? I don't think so because you would be limited in the inputs. Yeah. To your system. Right. What are your... Well, you have to show. But even long before you hosted the show, you're in the middle of the national conversation. You were the subject of the national conversation for a while. What do you get your information? How do you know what reality is? I try to read a lot. I try to watch cable news as little as possible even though I'm a host of cable show, one of America news. I think we've lost an appreciation for like the 10,000 word piece in society today. For sure. I miss the long investigative reporting pieces we used to get at places like the national polls and places like Revolver news. Yeah. And more and more the attention span of the country is limited. And so you've got to be able to convey messages sharply, crisply so that they're absorbed and people can act on the information. Do you read Twitter a lot? I do. Yeah. I'm on Twitter a good bit. A citizen-free press. It's one of my daily check-ins for the news as well. And also more and more since I've left government life seeing how the movement of money impacts policy decisions. I was so into like what was on the next committee agenda. Yes. What the next witness would be in the chair and oftentimes it's it's the way money moves in global marketplaces influencing events. And I also think this is informative on our discussion on the Middle East because for most of your in my life, the principal capital markets that mattered in the world were New York and London. Of course. I think a lot of people were really comfortable with that. And then as capital has really flown out of these Gulf Monarkies out of the Middle East, you're seeing places like Doha Abu Dhabi to buy Muscojo Mon Riyadh emerge as these very significant capital marketplaces. And I think Netanyahu is trying to wash that region in blood and chaos and war migrants so that there is a return to New York and London being the principal capital market. Yeah. I mean, I saw in Israeli cabinet minister the other day describe was talking about the Saudis and you know go back to whatever your camels and sleeping with your cousin or whatever eating lamb and a tent. And you know it was dismissive of course I'm not even taking sides in it, but it was more than dismissive. It was like idiotic because I've you've been there recently. You know, there are not a lot of camels in downtown Riyadh where that's like eight million people in it's like the most modern city. The side of China. I think people don't fully understand how quickly that region has changed. Yeah. And you know the that change is frightening to people who are losing power. I get it. And I think a lot of those people are the constituency that Netanyahu is serving as he is trying to advance on agenda that will create more war and create more violence. And like nobody's going to want to do business deals in Doha or Abu Dhabi or Dubai if there are 30 million Iranians that are on the move because they're war migrants. No, that's that's really, really smart. So I want to get to something so you sponsored this bill in the Congress in 2024 last year that would have pulled the United States finally out of Syria and of course it didn't pass. Did you even get to a vote? Yeah, I was able to force a vote on it. I'm really under our rules. Yeah. I mean it lost by margin of two to one. I didn't even have a majority of the least. Oh, of course. But the fact that you did that, which by the way, for people who aren't from Washington, that's like a radical act. That's like tea party level. You know, it's like throwing the tea in Boston, Harvard. That's like no one would do that. Portals of Gabbard once said like why do we have to be in Syria? And they spied on her and kept her off commercial airplanes for saying that. So it was a ballsy thing to say, but you've always had this kind of like, you know, independent cast to your thinking. It's been very obvious for a long time. Several years ago, your life got completely blown up. It sounded like you're going to jail. People start calling you a child, molestor, your child molestor. I was attacked for talking to you. Which is kind of funny. Normally people were talking to me, but I was attacked for talking to you. But at the heart of that story was foreign influence. And I've never heard you describe what exactly happened there. So in one sentence, news broke in the New York Times at the House Ethics Committee. No, this was this was I got news that the Department of Justice was DOJ was the Department of Justice was investigating me. And obviously I knew that the allegations were false that someone was being right now if they were. Obviously. And the man Andrew Tate would both be in jail to stop with the bullshit. And by the way, like no one has ever even made an accusation against me in any forum in which I can oppose witnesses due cross examination, review records. So that's how you know the allegations against me are false. No one is ever willing to make them in any forum where I'm allowed to fight back where I have any of the tools that you have been charged about to process. So like charged sued anything. And so I should know. No, of course not. And if anyone were to sue me, a human being would have to stand up and make an accusation against me and have their name behind it. That's never happened. Who is the person who is publicly accused me of misconduct regarding women? It doesn't exist. Right. It is just an op. And it was an op to silence me. And Israel was involved. And I hate to say that. I was shocked to learn it. But there was a consulate official. So this is the charge that you were like trafficking underage girls. It absurd. And not even know what the charge was. But that was the headline. It's traffic is underage women. It's like, oh my gosh, can't talk to Matt Gates anymore. Well, for us, the shocking moment was when my father, who's a prominent person in our community, got outreach from someone he had never met that said that there were pictures and images of me with underage prostitutes and my dad needed to meet with these people right away. And so my dad somewhat surprised and concerned, because he talks to these people and says, what in the world are you talking about? And they said, well, Mr. Gates, we need $25 million from you to go and rescue a spy that is being held in Iran. And if you do that, we can make these things about your son go away. Which was crazy and wild. We did what any reasonable people would do. We went to the FBI and said that we were being extorted by these folks with their false claims. And we later learned that this consulate official with the working for the Israeli government was sending text messages to Scott Adams of all people that Dilbert cartoonist saying they were expecting my father to furnish this $25 million payment. And that that would be evidence of my consciousness of guilt for the American FBI agent grabbed on a Iranian island maybe 18 or 19 years. And I don't know anything about this person. I don't know if the person instead of alive. But it was troubling and concerning to me that someone who was getting paid by the Israeli government was involved in a criminal shakedown of a US congressman. And there someone went to jail for this. Someone the person who conveyed this message to my father pled guilty to the attempted fraud. And surprisingly, there was never really an effort to figure out what the government of Israel's involvement was in this matter. But you know that the government of Israel was involved because this was an Israeli government official who was in this matter. Yes. Yes. A person who is named Jake Novak. I think he currently works for real America's voice and he sent text messages. Wait, what? Yeah. Yeah. That's the name of the official. And he sent messages to Scott Adams saying that he was involved in this scheme that was later deemed a criminal scheme to shakedown my family. So what is happening in all allegations? He got a television show. Come on now. I didn't know any of this. I'm not playing dumb. I really didn't know that. Has he ever talked about it? I have attempted to figure out because obviously I still have a lot of unanswered questions about why he was working for a foreign government and trying to shakedown my family. What's the answer, do you think? Well, some have shared with me their concern that this was a consequence of some of the votes and positions I took in the Congress. I represented one of the most military heavy districts in the entire country. number one. Yeah, right right up there. And I saw these wars in the Middle East that my neighbors and friends had fought in as unworthy of our of our best unworthy of the disruptions and parenting and the divorces and the injuries. And so I took the position that we should be less entangled in these things. And I think that really shocked a number of people who thought I would be more of a neo con coming from the district I came from. And I think that with with like the Israel influence operation, it's always fire and ice. always outreach followed by consequence and then outreach and then consequences even to this day. There was someone who just appeared and offered to pay me a bunch of money to go to Israel and give a bunch of speeches and you know, you decline those offers when you don't feel they're appropriate and then lo and behold, it's like green blood on the other side of the operation going you and antisemite. This just happened to you. Yeah. You don't need to be an economist to see what's happening. The dollar is in trouble. It's getting weaker. It's sad, but we're not in charge of it. So we have to respond appropriately in ways to protect our families when paper money dies. It's going to be replaced by programmable digital currency or gold. Gold survives the same Americans who think they're protecting themselves with gold or the ones getting ripped off by big gold dealers after we left corporate media. We got offered tens of millions of dollars to promote gold companies. I think that money to spend that much on marketing because they're scamming their customers. We didn't want anything to do with them. So we saw an honest broker and together we formed a precious metals company that you can actually trust. It's called battalion metals at battalion metals.com. We publish actual spot prices were totally transparent about the vig what we take and we treat everyone with honesty. So if you've been watching what's happening, you know, it's not just about money. It's about sovereignty and holding something that endures and cannot be manipulated or taken from you. So if you've been waiting for the right time to act, this is it. Visit battalionmetals.com. You've got such a, maybe you've just been around. You're younger than I am, but been around a lot. You have such a blase attitude like, yeah, that happens. People try to pay you off and they threaten you. Pay you off and they threaten you. Yeah. I mean, unfortunately, this is the parlance of government. It's a series of carrots and sticks. And, you know, I was the only Republican in the entire Congress during my time there who refused all pack and lobbyists. Because it was like a game I just didn't want to win. What you have to realize is what most of your Congress is doing most of the time is trying to move up in this system. And sometimes moving up means a better committee. Sometimes it's like getting invited to better dinner parties. We lived in Washington for many years. You know that there's this like hidden dinner party circuit that is reflective of your influence and your acceptance. And people who are probably good people when they get elected go there and morally compromise for that. And I just like reached a point one time when I just thought, I don't even care. Like, it's like, oh, well, if you do enough favors for the chief deputy whip, they'll invite you there fundraiser. And then you could move up and the whip could invite you to his foreign trip. And if you say the right things on the foreign trip and kiss the ring, well, then maybe like the majority leader will want you want to task force. And at the end of the day, I thought, I'm not here to do any of this stuff. And I don't really care about any of it. Those are prizes not worth winning to. Yeah. It's sort of like the homecoming court. Like nobody really cares except the people doing it. The problem is in Congress, the people who are not the brightest and not the, you know, I think most service oriented often prevail in that system. It's also low bar. So just pathetic. But and it's even more pathetic when really smart accomplished people do it. That's always what amazed me. If you're like, I'm just country lawyer from North Florida, Ben and the legislature got elected to Congress. I never done anything in my life that rendered me a war hero or some tycoon of industry. But those people do get elected at times and then you just go watch them debase themselves and they become actors and the scripts are written by the lobby core and produced and directed by the leadership. You never took a back money. I did not. I refused those funds. How did that go for you? I just, you know, well, I guess you all took a little bit of blackmail. I didn't become attorney general. No, but I forgot that wasn't precisely about a pack for me. That was just about all of it. I even had groups like DNA or right to life that I was largely aligned with civil will you take our pack money. And I just the whole thing seemed untoward. Like how do you take money from people who have a specific interest at times hundreds of thousands of millions of dollars and then go stand at the fish house in Pensacola, Florida and tell people you're not influenced by it. I couldn't perform the act anymore. Now there's, you know, there's there are other throughout my time in Congress, there are other kind of accommodations you have to make. Like I had to be there willing able anytime your bookers or anybody else's bookers would call and say come be on television because my theory was if I wasn't going to have the resources to buy ads just go be on TV a lot. And you know that that comes with this own compromise to your life and your overall operation. Right. Well life is a series of traps. And sometimes you don't know you're falling into them. Yeah. Seems like a good trade, but it never is. So but just to go back to what happened to you. So this guy or a series of people approached your dad and said we have documentary evidence that your son like photos photos slept with underage girls. Will you give us 25 million to go find the FBI agent Bob Levinson. Levinson. Right. Also working for CIA who was grabbed on the silent gun Iran still in custody. Dead or alive. Your dad says no contacts you you call the FBI the person who reached out gets convicted of that goes to jail for it. But this other guy never punished for it that one who's working for the Israeli government. And then the story winds up in the New York Times. How does it wind up in the New York Times? Well I think that Bill Barr told them. Bill Barr was a very well known source for the New York Times. So what was the attorney general? And he hated me. And he and I we were in a big dispute about his unwillingness to enforce some of the election integrity laws. There was a case in Florida where a Democrat supervisor of elections brought to the U.S. Attorney a clear instance of fraud where a source aligned organization was fraudulently creating voter registrations so that they could request absentee ballots that were that were. ghost votes and the U.S. Attorney asked for resources to pursue that investigation and bill bar refused and said I refuse to investigate any of this stuff because it will decrease confidence in the elections. This is before the 2020 election. And so I was constantly pasturing President Trump and members of his administration. The bill bar had to be dealt with on this. You can't just say that you're not going to investigate something because the investigation itself will impact people's confidence. And so he and I were in that big struggle and I believe he was angry with me and wanted to leak things that would hurt me. This is the guy who covered up the murder of an American citizen and federal detention in New York City. I mean the person was murdered as called Jeffrey Epstein so I understand that I'm not defending Jeffrey Epstein but no American should be murdered extra judicially in federal lock up. Right. Bill bar covered up that murder. Also I mean we're the United States of America now. You can't even go in and out of a casino without people knowing that you're there and without it being on every camera and you're telling me that we don't have the video that's seen killing himself and that we're all just supposed to expect this guy who we know we know all those people who are in the admin now. My friends they know Epstein was in tow. They know he was tied to R and tell. They know he was tied to Mossad. They knew he was tied to Saudi. He was a free agent. He was willing to go. And British and tell us. Yeah and he was willing to go and get this compromise at a time when British and the Israelis and the United States government needed to get people aligned with the Iraq war. And there was a worry that people would drift off and start opposing an increasingly unpopular war in Iraq. And so they got together a bunch of people in academia, politics, media, business and tried to get them in a compromising situation so that then everyone would stay on board. No matter what. That does not sound unlikely. But when he died, Barr, his by his own admission, he said our job is to convince the American public. He killed himself and prevent dangerous conspiracy theories from threatening the guy was murdered. And so Barr is by definition corrupt. Like you can't. Attorney General can't do that. That is totally over the top. So, and he was fighting with you. But you think he's the one who leaked. I do. This stuff. Which would happen. I mean, I'm not going to sit here and pearl clutch over some over some leak when I, you know, when the FBI took my phone away. I assumed this was all, you know, when they first came up. What grounds do they take your phone with us? The opinions that we want your phone. And by at the time I was somewhat relieved because I thought perfect. If what you think is in my phone is some sort of untoward issue with underage people. Have a look. There's, you know, and obviously if I'd committed any crimes, they kept my phone for years. And they did. Yeah. They did. And you've never been charged with anything. No. What's it like? Because we have a justice system. You know, it's still in place, I think. Got courts and stuff and police and all that. But what's it like to be accused of a real crime? Child sex trafficking. And then sort of wait for all these years to get indicted for it and have someone prove it. And then never happens. Well, I mean, I know who I am. The people around me know who I am. I would during these investigations repeatedly run back to my district. And despite Kevin McCarthy spending millions of dollars to try to defeat me. I was always overwhelmingly reelected. And so I took comfort in that way. And then we elected in the middle of it. And despite, you know, a lot of folks not wanting me to return to Washington. But there is, there is comfort in knowing that, you know, the people will be there for you. Your family, the folks you care about. And so I'm not a tragic case by any sense. I wish I would have had the chance to be attorney general. I said a lot of bad things about senators over the years that made that impossible to achieve. So walk us through that. So Trump announces you're going to be AG. And I think I have not campaigned for that position to be clear. And, you know, I love President Trump and was there to support his transition as a friend, a confidant, someone who had been there during the tough times in his first term. I mean, the real reason I was hanging around the transition is because I remembered what was like when you had a good amount of the cabinet hoping that Donald Trump was a criminal and wanting to install Mike Pence. Sure. Just the nightmare that that was. So I was there to be a trusted friend and Charlie Kirk and Stephen Miller and I had talked to a number of people who wanted to be attorney general. And we were presenting some of those some of those ideas to the president. I was advocating for a different person to be the attorney general on a plane ride with the president. And he just sort of as he has a tendency to do said that that wasn't who we wanted and he wanted me to do the job. And you had no idea this was coming. No, none. And it was so you're telling Trump actually I think you should pick so and so. Right. Right. And I did tell him if you wanted me to do it. I would do my best job. I would work hard to be confirmed. And that I thought I could lead the department out of some of its darkest days and towards something better. I think Pam Bondi has done a very good job. I know she has her critics. By the way, I would have too. I would have been the attorney general. There probably would be a whole ecosystem saying I wasn't doing enough. But I actually think Pam Bondi's done a good job and I'm here to be her supporter and advocate. Clearly you are here to be your supporter advocate. I disagree. But whatever I think. But let's get into that. Took her like, wait, hold on. Go, go, go, go. I'm not here to attack Pam Bondi who I know well and I've always liked Pam Bondi. You know, you were willing as a sitting member of the Congress in the house to like go after your own party when you thought that they were wrong. And I think Trump also believed that someone who had been unfairly accused of something and would endure the grind of that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It would be really interested in fixing it. I mean, I think that's why President Trump asked me to do the job is because he saw that I could empathize with those who had been treated unfairly and that I would approach the position with the true sense of justice. I love that. No, I share that view and I do think the only quality that matters in a leader is strength. Not so he can oppress people, weak people oppress others. Strong people have no need to oppress others or rule over others. They can serve others because they're not compensating for the void within them. And I think you would have been, you know, the best person I can think of because you've been through it. You didn't collapse. You married a great girl right in the middle of it. You got reelected like your life shows that you are not destroyed by what happened to you. You were strong by definition. That's what we need. And all of America's problems are downstream from weak men. Obviously, it's why the women are crazy because the men are weak. So like, let's find a strong one to lead a critical agency. That's my primitive view of it. But I think I'm right. What happened? Why did you not get that gig? There were a lot of great people interacted with him in the Senate. But at the end of the day, there was a core block of about half dozen of them who'd said they would never vote for me. And, you know, I could have endeavored to grind that down. Maybe win, you know, one or two of them possibly over an extended period of time. But you saw the way courts started in joining the actions of this administration right off the bat. Pam Bondi did defeat nationwide injunctions as a ruling legal theory. And had we not had her and her team lined up to do that. I actually think that we'd be in a very different position today with the deportation agenda. Yeah, how can, but I mean, there look, you know, a lot of my conversations would have been like, yes, Senator. So this is a bad gate. I'm calling about my confirmation for attorney. What was tweeted about you? No, that was a staffer years ago and they were fired immediately. Oh, they were that petty. Oh, yeah. Yeah, several, you know, would bring like things I tweeted about them to the meeting. Is that really so the point of your attorney general is not to say mean things about an individual senator? Like what? What talk about making it about you? Well, yeah, that cares. And then I had, I had Senator, I had one senator, you know, from Oklahoma really grill me about like my vote against the antisemitism bill. So how can I vote for someone who voted against the antisemitism bill? And I'm thinking like, is this some like driving issue in Oklahoma that I'm just was Langford on a way of just mentioning it. Yeah, Langford is such a, is a week, such a week man. It's sad. And is a tool for evil in my opinion. So sorry, that's what I think. But despite, you know, having good qualities. But so who are the centers were against you? Do you care to name anyone? I don't know the desperate but I think that it would not be difficult to look at the college of senators who have been otherwise problematic for some of Trump's appointees. And that's, that's where I had problems. So you, you decided to bow out. Yeah, I didn't think that me obtain it me doing some multi week multi month fight to try to grind down the last of Mitch McConnell was somehow going to help the administration in the end. Can I ask, do you think just it was since you know the system so well because you serve within it most of your life? Do you think there's anything you could have traded in exchange for their support? I don't know. I don't know. I oftentimes couldn't get a meeting. You know, with people like Senator Murkowski and Senator Collins, they, they were not interested in even having a discussion with me. So it would have been hard to execute a trade. I mean, I think part of the problem is you're not the kind of guy who makes those trades and that's why they oppose you in the first place. Well, and I think also there's something unsettling about my unpredictability, you know, people that read people who read the script are easy to predict and manage. So you wind up with it with a government and business, you went up with a whole society run by weak people. Not at the top. Trump's pretty strong and I think of answers. Strong and I think, to you, why is this strong? But there's no doubt about what you just said. But no, I mean, beneath the very, you know, you're talking the pinnacle of the pyramid. I mean, like all the way down. And I think Suzyu-Wiles is strong, but there's no doubt about what you just said. But no, I mean, beneath the very, you know, you're talking the pinnacle of the pyramid. I mean, like, all the way down. They're just, everyone's so weak. And that's where evil thrives in weakness. Weakness and risk aversion. And risk aversion is fundamentally anti-American. We are a nation of risk takers at our best moments. That's who we are. But in government, it's often, you know, how do I avoid any attention or ire? I do think that, you know, what, like the riskiest thing we've seen is what Obama got everybody together to do on December 9th of 2016 when he ordered the Russia hoax. I think that is really the original sin of a lot of this that has happened. And, you know, I certainly would have brought a reco charge against the people who were involved in that decision making process and participating in the various predicate criminal acts. I wouldn't be surprised if that's precisely what Pam Bondi does when the, when the Biden FBI rated Trump's house, they engaged in a predicate criminal act to try to get information back that was exculpatory as to Trump. From my standpoint, that would properly venue a reco charge against the major players in the deep state in the southern district of Florida, rather than in Washington DC, where they have, they have an administrative and judicial advantage. So the Russia hoax was predicated on something that I'm pretty sure was a lie, which is that the Russian government stole a tronch of emails from the DNC earlier that year. Do you think that reinvigorated after? Of course, all of that got dispensed with. Then Trump won, which people weren't expecting, and Obama on December 9th calls in clapper Brennan Comey and says, you guys have got to go out and reignite this Russia thing. And in that effort, you see all of this offense against George Papadopoulos, you see the activation of foreign intelligence networks to try to create some predicate for spying on the Trump campaign. No. And where, where, where does that leave us? I think in like almost a post-coup country. Well, we're literally a war with Russia today as a result of this hysteria, which was all the kind of predicate for that war. And, you know, it's just the real discussion in the 90s going on about extending NATO membership to Russia, which is what we should have done. What do you mean? Putin in his first meeting with George W Bush was like right at the beginning of 2020, 2001 said I want to join NATO. Imagine where we would be right now. If the United States and Russia had created peace and a security infrastructure around Europe, I think appropriately positioned NATO as an alliance against the excesses of sino expansion, it would be a safer world. It would be a more prosperous world. All the way to Asia because Russia extends into Asia. And right, so you would have a Western block of not identical countries. Russia's got a different system, different culture, different language, different history. But so many aligned interests with NATO when it comes to countering extremism, having strong borders, all of the things that trade, one of the most mineral dense countries in the world, right? It's basically a Western country produced Dosteevsky. Don't tell me otherwise. Anyway, yeah, I couldn't agree more. But I just want to get to this, something I've never gotten past, which is the question of whether the Russian government stole those emails from the DNC during the Democratic primary. And then this DNC staff are called Seth Rich is murdered in Washington, DC in a robbery, in which his wallet is not taken. And a number of conservative people who call themselves conservatives went on TV and said, I think Seth Rich was murdered because he knew too much. And then those people were either sued or threatened with lawsuits from Seth's Rich's family. So everybody shut up about it. And then Julian Assange is asked repeatedly, who runs WikiLeaks at the time before they started to prison for talking like this. Did the Russians send you that information? And he goes, no, did Seth Rich? And he says, we're not going to talk about that. So the heavy implication is that Seth, and I don't know the answer, despite knowing Julian Assange. But the heavy implication was that Seth Rich sent this information because he was offended by how the DNC was taking Bernie Sanders out was basically all behind Hillary Clinton. It was a rigged election, and they were crushing Bernie Sanders, and he was offended, so he leaked these emails. And they killed him for it. And no one was allowed to talk about that. And I don't know if that's what happened, but I knew someone at a very high level the DNC who thought that's what happened. And no one's ever talked about it again. We in Congress had people that were doing various roles within the DC Police Department, come and say we want to be whistleblower's, and we want to talk about the way in which this investigation was truncated, and we didn't get to really do the... No, the FBI took over. Yeah, do the shoe leather work, but there's a way that the FBI can involve themselves in these investigations that doesn't strip the agency completely away from their partners to also participate. And so these whistleblowers were concerned about that. And then, ultimately, they weren't really given much of a platform. And just... Well, we never saw Seth Rich's laptop, and that story just ended, and I'm not a legend. But like, and is it the tell in that how it kept shifting? Like, first it was the emails, and then it was Vladimir Putin had taken over Facebook with 120,000 dollars, and then it was actually like George Papidopoulos in a London bar. Then it was Don Jr. at Trump Tower. It was an effort to obscure the lack of quality in any of these theories by just having a sufficient quantity of them. Well, that's always... That's... that's called flooding the zone, and that's what happened. I'm watching that happen right now. That's what always... That is the most classic move of anyone involved in the SIOP, the Intel community. Yeah, you just... You just... You see this with UAPs. It's pretty obvious what they are actually in my view, but no, it's... It's meant for Mars. It's an advanced technology program. That's like whatever. Yeah, they flood it with too many theories. And you think that's what happened there? Of course, because none of the theories could individually hold water. And I had a recent conversation with CI Director John Radcliffe, where... And I like John, but I chastised him for not answering some of these... Like fundamental questions. Joseph Knifsood was this professor who was drawn into an intelligence operation against the United States. He was drawn into that operation either by the United States or one of our allies. How do we not know the answer to that question? This was the key thing that we said we were going to uncover when we got power. And I know they got a lot of work to do to keep the country safe, but I would encourage the director of the CIA to really tell us the CIA's role. What's the answer to you, Phil? Well, I believe that some of this crowd in the Obama administration knew that their direct management of an asset against the Trump administration would create paperwork, payments, complicating things that could be found out. And so they went to other European countries and said, you do us a favor, we do you a favor, but the favor we want from you is actually to go against our country, our presidential candidate Donald Trump. And that is treasonous. That is straight treason to ask another country to attack your country. And I think that occurred. And I think that if we knew who had authorized that, we would have a person to be at the center of this broader re-co-conspiracy. Yeah. And traditionally it's been Britain and France who played that role, huge intel presence in Italy as well. Exactly. It's one of the biggest... And now with the growth of NATO under this war, it's Romania, it's Eastern Europe. It's wherever you have a NATO base, you have there are a lot of other things that come with it, of course. So you've seen this a lot where American political actors or I see members in the United States use foreign governments to do their work for them. Yeah. And I am concerned that that doesn't just happen abroad, that that happens even within the eight square miles of Washington, DC. Did you feel when you worked there, that there was a lot of intrigue? There's always intrigue. But I think that a lot of the decisions that get made in Washington are detached from the elected leaders. And there probably should be more intrigue actually. Our lawmakers should be more curious and inquisitive and skeptical. What do you mean a lot of the decisions that are made or detached from elected leaders? Well, take these bills that get written, right? Like, do you think that anyone who voted for the one big beautiful bill act was trying to outlaw hemp? It was just stuck in the bill and then they voted for it. And however you feel about hemp, I think it's kind of crazy that an issue wouldn't even get its own dignity. Like the lashing together of disparate issues for just an up or down vote that kind of becomes a shirts and skins exercise is a way to detach from the realities of the decision making. And those decisions are made by staff, by interest groups, by foreign countries at times. What's going to happen in the next two election cycles? I think we are headed for a bloodbath in the midterms for a few reasons. Primarily history. You, the president's party loses the seats during the midterms. I don't think I'm breaking any news there. And I think that the other scientists really worked up and they have an organizing principle. The organizing principle of the left in America today is we hate Trump. And they don't only need any more than that and there's something elegant politically about using that to activate voters. Yeah, totally. Whereas we're trying to tell people to reward us for securing the border and voting is rarely an exercise in rewarding prior conduct. It is always about new promises. What are the new promises you're making? And right now a lot of people have economic anxiety around the cost of living. And I think the Democrats again have an elegant presentation to make, which is we're going to take the things that cost you a lot of money and have the government provide those to you. And then those things won't cost you a lot of money. And we try to make an argument about economic theory that doesn't always land with the same point in its. So midterms in a year, very tough. Yeah, I think I think hockey and Jeffries becomes the speaker. I think that they will then because the problem is the candy becomes the poison for them because when they do this big elect us so that we can use all these tools to fight Trump, then once once they get that power, they're going to be pressed to continually use the silliest ones. And think about what they've already used. Like the attempted application of criminal law, that backfired. They already used the impeachment process that backfired. And so what I think Democrats believe or what they've recently been conditioned to believe is that shutdowns are good for them under Trump. That that's good politics. So my prediction is Democrats win the midterms. They execute a series of ransom like shutdowns on Trump. The country gets weary of that and probably Alex JD Vance president in 2028. What's the field look like in 2028 on our side? I mean, I'm just assuming that there will be, you know, Ted Cruz's running, I guess. Against you apparently, which is not an um, I've ever seen that it's odd to have someone running for president against that the organizing principle of their campaign is to attack someone else who is not running for president. It's a novel or ever will for Ted. But you know, Ted, what is that to you? Ted and Ron DeSantis, both want to be president really bad, but they're just they suffer from a like ability problem. And they're not really having a good time. I think so. And when you run for president, Ted looks miserable. When you run for president, there's an element of it where the people have to feel like they're a part of something fun. And that's something Trump understood. That's something Charlie Kirk understood. And you know, for for Ron and Ted, it is, you know, the campaign is something they have to do in order to get the power that they seek. So what is that into? I mean, I could see, you know, Ron DeSantis has been really successful in a lot of ways. I would vote for him again for governor. If he could run again for governor, I would too. I would too. Despite the fact he signed a hate speech law in Israel, which is like so offensive to me as an American, not because I'm against Israel, but we don't have hate speech laws in the United States. And when we do, we don't sign them in foreign countries. So I, you know, what did you still vote for him again? I would. For governor of Florida. Oh, without thinking about it for sure. I think he's been a great governor. You could whatever quibble about it. But generally, no, he's been great. I totally agree. But Ted Cruz is not going to be president. Obviously nobody thinks that I'm sure Mrs. Cruz doesn't think that she probably won't give out of the house. Who knows what's going. But why doesn't Ted who's famously, obviously the smartest person in America? Why can't he see that? Well, I think that as we were discussing earlier, running for president is an itch that doesn't go away with one scratch. I think that, you know, he believed he should have defeated Trump in the 2016 election, and he's toiling in the Senate until it gets, gets an expo at the Apple. I think on the other side, I would have believed before Kamala Harris that the Democrats had nominated their last straight white guy that that just... Yeah, I would think so too. Yeah, that just not... I mean, it is a movement that stands against straightness and white people. Is Gavin straight? I seems to be pretty enthusiastic heterosexual based on some of this personal conduct. Again, you know, George L. Could be an omnivore. There are some of those. Yeah, we're not the bedroom, please. Oh, no, I don't even want to think about it, honestly. Newsom has at least demonstrated power. And I think that is what Democrats have lacked in this time in the wilderness in Trump era is that no one steps up and says, I'm ready to use power effectively. And when Gavin Newsom stole those congressional seats with Prop 15, California, it was an effective exercise of power. And I think voters may reward him for that. You know, someone else in the Democratic Party who wants to be president told me that it was actually Kamala Harris who has like reignited the prospects of Gavin Newsom. If they'd have just run Biden in a lost, they would have never gone back to another straight white guy, but rolling out Harris and the embarrassment that that was has people thinking, well, you know, maybe we don't want to try this again. No, that's... I believe that just knowing what they're like. They're just transactually. They just want power. That's it. They don't have any beliefs. They just want to be in charge. And I get it. I find it terrifying. But that's who they are. And I also think that when Gavin started going on conservative podcasts, that's when I was like, ooh, you are formidable. I mean, he didn't, you know, defend his own policies very effectively. It didn't matter. He like went on other people's podcasts and took questions. Balsey. Well, that in essence is an indictment of Harris because Harris could not have an extended intelligent conversation about anything. And so just getting over the most basic of hurdles to be able to string sentences together was this great display of talent in the Democratic. And he'll say anything. He just does it. But look at what they've been through, right? Joe Biden never did extended discussions. Harris never did extended discussions. So he was giving the base at least some viewpoint into just thinking on things. So do you think Gavin will be that nominee? Right now I would say so. I think that AOC is going to make a compelling run. and I think she will be formidable as well. And she do. If Bernie really does the handoff, like you and I like Bernie has this like kind of goofy professor persona, but in reality, Bernie is like a deeply selfish person. He's selfish and he's a total power. And he believes he is the leader of the Democratic Party. Well, but he's one every argument in it. Maybe he is the leader of the Democratic Party. If you look on policy, Bernie has won the argument on this shift towards socialism. But the party structurally did things twice to stop him from becoming the nominee. They stole the election from him twice. Yeah. And he sat back and was like, oh, I'm kind of a sexist. I'm sorry. I mean, he's such a coward. I can't deal with it. If he was real, at least I would respect it. AOC same thing. Yeah. AOC is a very different person today than when she got to Congress. Totally corrupted. Totally corrupted. Co-opted. Completely. Oh, the Gaza war is fine. It's like, what? When we were asking McCarthy, like she came up to me and was like, you know, I really respect this because I'll be honest. We don't have the guts to do this on our side. What's she like? Before January 6th, she was incredibly chummy with Republicans in Congress would regularly come over to our side to down. Hang out. Talk about her day. Did you ever date her? Not, no. Did you try? No. And not my cup of tea. But she, after January 6th, treated us all, like, you know, we had horns or something. So she gave this kind of famous statement after January 6th and said, you know, as a trauma survivor, I was traumatized. I was almost killed that day. Do you think it was that real? No, but it is reflective of the performance art of Congress. And it was just bad performance. How could you get points from anyone for being like, yeah, I'm a terrified little girl? Because on, I find that contempt. Well, you can't be in charge on anything if you're a terrified little girl. Yeah, but we are a society that is increasingly built on grievance identity. You are the, the grievance that you can access, right? And so if you are, you know, a woman that's can be a source of grievance, if you're a minority, and then like you have, you have people who are just odd and say, well, maybe if I'm trans, then that can be this source of greatness. And then you have a bunch of men white men looking around saying, well, I guess I'll be a drug addict because then like that can be my, my source of grievance. And, you know, that she was leaning into that. She wanted to show that she had been aggrieved by this act and should be owed some, some unique empathy. But she revealed that she's afraid that she's a coward. Like how is that a, the only thing people respect on a gut level is strength and courage. That's it. So I just don't, I don't get like what's the, I mean, yeah, strength, courage and sense. And seriously rose from strength and courage. I'm brave enough to tell you what I really think. Yeah. And I got to a point where I was, I was confident enough with my district where I could say the things I believed that I knew they didn't because even if they disagreed with me on a subject, they knew I came to that view sincerely that I wasn't holding marijuana legalization. And you and I disagree on. Yeah. I disagreed with a majority of my constituents on that point. I authored Florida's marijuana law. I support President Trump rescheduling marijuana. And the, when, when people at my first Baptist church and for all beach Florida came up to me to say they really disagreed with me on that. They did not vote against me as a consequence because they knew that, that these were views that, that I sincerely hold. Well, I, I could be one of those congregants at the Baptist, if I were Baptist in the Baptist church because I, I agree with that. You know, I don't expect people to agree with all of my eccentric views or my heartfelt views. It's okay. We're different people, but can't deal with falseness at all. And, and that I think was the magic of Trump. And I think that's a magic that he knows he needs to reignite on the campaign trail going into these midterms, the connection directly with the American voter that no matter who you are, if you're the president and behind the resolute desk and in the Rose Garden, it's a different experience than being out on the trail on Lancaster, Pennsylvania. So what's AOC's lane? Is it the, the Bernie lane? Okay, but the Bernie lane was economic lane, which I always had respect for it. I didn't agree with all of it, but we've got too many billionaires and not a big enough middle class. That's true. That's factually true. And anyone who says that I will agree with him and he used to say that. And the open borders line. I mean, total, they're, they're too related. That mean we have always been open borders. They were always, I mean, Bernie at one point as part of his like pro American worker agenda was actually for restricted immigration. No, but there's no no. I'm saying they're related in that, but it's the AOC corollary. It's to take the Bernie social is like economic socialism and lash it to unchecked border borders. If you care about the, the lopsided economy where all the wealth is concentrated in too few hands and the countries becoming unstable as a result becoming preach of his Venezuelan, we're going to get a revolution of this continues or what a book about this. If you care about that, you have to ask how did that happen? And the main way it happened was by unchecked immigration, which do value labor. That's people of less economic power because there are more people willing to work for less. It's really simple. It's way organized labor always supported immigration restrictions. They're the ones who got them in 1924. They closed the borders for that reason. And Bernie was from that tradition. And I always respected it. And then he became this kind of, you know, neoliberal hybrid was like, oh, we got to fight Russia and it's racist to be against borders and like, what? You know what I mean? We have to send money to Israel. What? Like, so I don't think that's a real lane. I don't think it's sustainable lane. Do you? It is a sufficient cohort of voters to virtue signal, kind of a, a re-ignition of Bernie's economic policies alongside like that that she will stand up and say, no more money for Israel, no more money for ICE and universal basic income for Americans and open borders. That will be the core of the case. Open borders with universal basic income and print more. I mean, did you see what we just did in the economy in this past week? We are, we are printing money to buy our own debt right now. The self-licking ice cream cone electric windmill. I know when there's right. How much of it is real when we're printing money to buy our own debt? Yeah. And the explosion of personal wealth among people I know is just unbelievable. Not me, but I at all, but I all of a sudden you know people who are just like, you know, worth hundreds and hundreds and millions of dollars whereas I never and I grew up in rich people world. I never really knew anyone with hundreds and hundreds and hundreds and hundreds. One in every 10 Americans is a millionaire now. Actually. Yeah. You're including assets. Yeah. Well homeowners are millionaires now. So well and that if you talk about the revolution coming, I mean housing is likely to be a part of that as anything else because the way housing is indexed to what people make and what they can afford is insane in this country. Yeah. And I'm totally post-revolution's. However, if there was ever a reason to have one, it's that. That's a real grievance. I think that's totally. Isn't it kind of what all revolutions are about? Like where am I going to live? What's going to get? How do my kids have kids? You know, how does this continue? How do my genes thrive when I'm gone? I mean, yeah. Have you noticed this trend online where all these lonely women in their 30s are making car selfie videos about their personal English that they can't find men? I post one recently and got millions of views. And what's like I feel, I feel compact feel sad. Oh, so sad. I mean, my wife has so many friends who are beautiful, accomplished, wonderful people, but they cannot find men. They cannot find men to marry them. They start to feel the clock ticking. And it's really a lonely world out there. Well, I think it's important to identify how we got here in certain bad ideas, played a huge role feminism, which is like just a total eye on every level. But also the way the economy is structured where businesses decided to be a good idea to bring women into the workforce, a better idea than say like supporting families are allowing people to have children. Like it was more important to have female workers than it was to have American families. This is a constant discussion we have on one American news program is like can you have both? Because I do see women who excel in their place who build businesses who have great ideas and are the center of their family. Well, I certainly know a lot of women in the workplace who are amazing. And if women left the workforce, you know, my business would fall apart. Yeah, I mean, and they're the best. And anyone who's an employer, I'm a small, boring employer will tell you a female employee is man. Well, that's that is 100% right. Of course. And they're also like just the greatest people to work with if you're a man because there's no competition. They're so nice. They're always nice. I'm 56. I've never had a dispute with a woman at work ever, not one. I've seen them mistreat each other in a way that North Koreans could learn from. It's like truly cruel the way they behave to each other. If you're a male employer having female employees, it is 100% upside. They will never stop thinking about their job. They will never stop being nice to you. They're great at their job. Certain jobs. They're the old ones who can do it because they do it. But do you think men are out there looking for jobless women? Because I certainly wasn't when I was like, you know, single and trying to find a wife. I was not out there like seeking someone who had nothing else going on, but to serve me in a marriage. I think it people's passions and women and their classes. They're family if given their choice. And someone, I mean, there's anomalies in every cohort. But what do you say to the ones who are like, I want to make that choice? The millions of women out there that are like, please, present me the guy who isn't spending all this day playing Fortnite and, you know, hanging out at the tattoo. Well, look, the first thing to do is men and women need each other. They can't exist separately or they're destroyed. We have to take themselves 100%. They fit together like puzzle pieces and they can't live alone. Again, their exceptions to all of these rules, but over populations, these are hard and fast rules that have existed since Adam and Eve. So it's just a fact. And if you ignore that fact, you'll be destroyed and we are because we've ignored it. So most women, if given the choice between going to work at JP Morgan or staying home and raising their small children, will of course choose staying home and raising their small children. If they're given the choice, they're not given the choice because family is a total fucking lie. There are no choices. Get to work. Sometimes it's people's economic conditions that take the choice away. Well, that's what I'm saying on $130,000 in student loans because you were told that you had this great- That's the point I'm making. Great future. They don't have a choice. Yeah. That's why they do it. And it's a Hobson's choice. But it's not marital bondage as much as its economic bondage to debt. Marriage isn't bondage for women. Marriage family is the context in which women have the most power. Women have no power outside of their relationships. Women are relational. So if you want to empower women. Like power and business, they can have- no wealth, they can have money. That's not power. That's not power. Who has more power over you? Your employer, your mom, your employer, your wife, your employer or your daughter? Real power is the power to influence other people and women outside the family have very little within the family. They have huge power. There's no man. Almost all of it. Almost all of it. There's no man who ignores his wife. There's no son who ignores his mother. There's no father who ignores his daughter. They're freaks. The average man is influenced by women in the family more than any other place. If you want to empower women, put them at the center of a family. If you want to disempower them, put them at the center of Citibank. It's super simple. And liars and dumb people, like, I'm fucking feminist, like, no real power comes from money and job title. It's like, that's a lie. Anyone who believes that is- They think it's idiot. But they think it's their power to get them in. There was this theory that the way you prepare yourself to get the husband you want is to showcase your LinkedIn resume. And you're in your- I told them that. You don't think there are a lot of women who are going to watch this program that have turned out by now to say and say, yeah, like, I actually thought if I had the big job and had the house that a man would want more- Are you being serious? I mean, look, I shouldn't be surprised if you'll believe dumb things because look around. But that's the dumbest of all- Look, imagine believing that and now being caught. How much social science do we need? First of all, we don't need any because we just know our lived experiences, but there's a lot of study on this. If you're interested, I happen to be- Women do not want to marry men who make less than they do. Period. In any society in which that becomes the case, you find marriage dropping off a cliff. That's what happened to Black America. Black people used to be married, like everybody else. Then Black women started making more than Black men. The marriage rate declined. Rural America. Rural whites. I live in a place like this. The women on average make more than men because they work at the hospitals and the schools that men have only seen in their work. Guess what? No marriage. So if you want to discourage marriage, set up a system where the women make more, which is the system that we have. That's why people don't get married because women make more. And the women are making a decision. They don't want it. They don't want to sleep with them. They want to have babies. They don't want to marry them. It's just a fact. Ask them. Ask a woman. Do you want to marry a man who's short? And the women are making a decision. They don't want to sleep with them. They want to have his babies. They don't want to marry him. It's just a fact. Ask them. Ask a woman. Do you want to marry a man who's shorter than you or makes less than you? And the answer is no. But nobody asks one because nobody cares because the idea is to destroy the country. It's people and it's most basic structure of the family. So it's just like we're going to do this in your name and tell you what you want. But they don't want that. And if you ask, ask 15 women. Do you want to marry a man who's shorter than you or makes less than you? No, I that. And yeah, you're right. I'm so lonely. I need to find someone. I have so much love to give. I've built a great life. I want to share it with someone. And then it's like, okay, well, women say this and then I say, well, are you cool? Are you cool with a guy who like makes less than 100 grand? Well, you know, that shows that he doesn't have ambition. Oh, what about someone who's a little shorter? Well, I want to feel, you know, I want to feel feminine and if someone's shorter, that I don't think I'll be able to make sure more fucked up that I really people actually believe that. What? Look, a man's job is to protect and provide period. Those are his jobs, protect and provide period. Yeah. But when that class of men is shrinking because testosterone is falling because of the kind of the war on masculinity that we've endured for the last 40 years. When that resource isn't available, then women start to say, well, I've got to put a roof over my own head. I've got to protect and provide for myself. And there are a lot of them who would say, where is my protector and provide? I'm not attacking women. I'm just at all. I feel so I've got three daughters. I feel so sorry for women. I do. And I as a man, I always blame the man first, always 100% your job, you're the man. Your wife's unhappy. Who's fault is that yours? It is the job of the husband to keep your 100% that your job. Yes. I literally couldn't agree more. And if she's a drunk or something, it's not going to work. It's out of your control. But in a normal marriage with two sober people who are kind of trying, it is up to you. By the way, her happiness is not contingent on yours. Your happiness is contingent on hers. That's the great equalizer designed by God to keep balancing it in a relationship. I don't know a single man who's truly happy whose wife hates him. Of course, I don't know one. And the reason our system or biology is set up that way is because men are physically dominant. So you could just beat up your wife and grape or and make her do whatever you wanted. But it's terrible. Exactly. It sounds terrible. Exactly. That's exactly the point. It sounds terrible. Men don't want that. They want a woman to be sexually attracted them to be happy to have real orgasms to be they want it to be genuine. And that's the equalizer. You're totally focused on your wife's happiness. That keeps it equal. That gives her power. That's where her power comes from. How do you fix it? By letting people observe the laws of nature, which they ignore their peril. You can't ignore the laws of nature around you or you get killed. Nature is sending us the message when we see the declining birth rate when we see the societal impact. Nature is sending us the message that this isn't working. Yeah. And you're not allowed to consider some sort of weird religious frequent. You're like, I don't know. A natural sex acts gives rise to disease. People like shut up. Shut up. They do. I mean, I don't know. Have you I've been alive for 50, six years. I've watched this. That's just a fact. I'm not saying I want it to be that way. I'm not in charge of nature actually. And I'm not in charge of human nature above all. None of us is. Do you really know women who think if they get a big salary in a house, some guy want to marry them? Oh, yeah. Would you wear them? There are there are many who will watch this discussion and say, I am that I am perfectly suited for marriage. I have everything. I've done everything. Society has asked of me. I got an advanced degree. I got a six figure job. My LinkedIn is fire. I do five spinning classes a week. I look good. And you know, every every man that I find either is on the dating apps and they have so much optionality that there's not really an incentive to anchor your life with someone or their losers. And you know, they can be losers who've inherited money and just have no desire to build something beyond that. I mean, I'm starting something liberal. I do blame society. I blame what people are taught and probably, you know, the lies that they get through propaganda for convincing them that something so obviously absurd could be true. I mean, of course, men find that emasculating on appealing. No man wants to marry a woman with her own house and a hiring come. Then him no way. And she just want to marry him. You know, if you had marriage as this thing that gave people financial security, right? And people, you know, 40s and 50s people were getting married and then you're bound to someone economically and built a life together. You got married in your 20s and did your thing. And then when we did no fault divorce, then marriage really became a contract like more than anything else. And just like any other contract when you're out of the contract, there are certain obligations that you still have to fill financially and otherwise. And then the obvious next step is, well, if marriage is a contract, like kind of so is dating in a weird way on like what you will provide and what I'll provide. And if, you know, at the end of it, you know, there are women who say like, yeah, if I'm going to spend my time to go on a date, I want you to pay for it. I think that's where we are. And I don't mind like when I hear women say that they go out in the guy wants to split the check to me. There's something there's something shivl risks are interesting about that. I think that's awful. Look, again, men and women need each other. They complement each other. Any attack. We take each other men are necessary to tame women and women must tame men 100% and without each other, they become just industrial components who can be manipulated by global capital or whatever. Whatever you're for sure afraid of, the only real protection is your family. And that includes the one not just you're born into, but the one that you start yourself. That's your bulwark. That's your fortress. And if people are making it impossible for you to build that fortress, like I respect the whole man. It's not just like what you say you believe it's how do you live. If I had a camera in your house, would your kids respect you? Does your wife respect you? If not, why would I respect you? I feel like do you think that the notion of the barren life is what motivates people like Lindsey Graham to go to. 100% like a normal person goes home. You go home. I don't know if you and I are normal, but just like a conventional person goes home and it's like, I've got all kinds of views, but continuity matters to me because I've got descendants. If you have no descendants, it like ends with you and you don't clearly these people know these people believe in God. So it's like, I don't know. I got 15, 20 years, five, three years. Whatever I have, we don't know. And I, it doesn't matter what happens after that. That's scary. That's day trading with the world, right? With your life. No, but with everyone else's life. You think why would Lindsey Graham carry 70 years old? He's not, he has no kids. Like what does it matter if there's a nuclear war. I mean, he's looking just at, he's not the back nine. It's like the back three at this point. Like his options are like hard disease cancer and Alzheimer's. That's it. There's no tomorrow. Sad. Do you think I do think, I mean, you know, having, having children vest you in the future in a way that not having children just doesn't. I mean, hasn't it changed your attitudes? Of course, of course. And, and, you know, the way you care about what comes after you shifts dramatically. Well, it was like maybe 10 years ago, some smart friend of mine sent me this list of European leaders. I'm interested in Europe. So I felt like I knew a lot. I didn't know that like, none of them had kids. And it's, I remember thinking that's not, first of all, you can't say anything about that because you want to see like you're attacking people without kids, which I'm not. I'm feeling sorry for them. I'm attacking the idea of childless leadership. You can't have leaders with no kids because they're not thinking long term because why would they and look what happened to Europe in the Harris campaign. And the Harris campaign. Yeah. Whatever. What's going to happen to her? She's running again. You haven't seen the news. She's assembling her team. And for what president. Yeah. Come on now. I, as we've said, it's an ambition that resurfaces often. So what, I mean, you know a lot more about the Senate. Like, let's say you decide you're going to run for president. How, how does your party exert influence on you to like, that's such a bad idea. You would think some of the Democratic Party be like be able to say no. I don't know. Again, who's like, you assume the Obama's are in charge of that party. So potentially they could move her to another path. But you know, they'll have a crowded field and maybe the case that having ancillary people around so can up votes is good for the ultimate objective. I can't imagine the Obama's in the Gavin Newsome world would mix well. That's not really the same vein of the Democratic Party. You know anyone whose friends with her knows her well. Harris. Yeah. I don't think I do. Well, that's kind of strange considering you know everybody. I know a lot of people, but I can't say that there was a single member of Congress I ever interacted with that that could talk about any, you know, private moment or like in depth conversation. They never had with Kamala Harris. So there was really no constituency for her. Like it wasn't. I mean, that was. Yeah, I think that Democrats believed that there is this vast part of the population whose dream candidate is some combination of Michelle Obama and Oprah. And like the closest they could get was like bargain basement Kamala Harris to go and achieve that archetype and just didn't didn't work out. So it was all about race and gender. I think that that that was a huge part of it. And it we saw the limits of playing into those those impulses with Harris. Last question. Where do you think the country goes in the next say three years? Like what are the big trends? No, what are the big trends? Obviously, you know, we're going to see automation in the next three years at a level that you and I have never seen in our lives. You really believe we'll see that in the next three years. I do. I believe that automation in transportation and agriculture and manufacturing will be the new the new dominant force in our lives. And I don't think that's going to be entirely good. I think that it's inevitable because the capabilities when you think automation will be a dominant force in our lives for years. Yes. I think that that like I will tell my grandkids what it was like to order food from a person. That will not be a that will go the way of the the pay phone. There are like seven million American men who make their living driving today in one form or another. Those jobs are gone in the next half decade. Where do those people go? I think that's when you start to see these calls for universal basic income. Because we will say that there's there's such wealth being created on a lot of these tech platforms that that doesn't get shared broadly. And I worry that that that draw politically is something that will zap the motivation of the country in a bad way. Just look at this health care debate that's happening right now as a microcosm of this trend. Republicans are trying to cobble together something that they think is a free market approach to health care. As if anything in health care is a free market. Democrats are just saying we're going to give you free stuff for longer. And I think that Republicans in swing districts have seen that and so we can't beat that. So we have to have our own version of we'll give you free stuff longer. And you may see these these Obamacare credits extended via a discharge petition that does just that. And that brings the right in America in line with where the right has moved in Europe which is toward economic liberalism which I'm not for. I think you'll see what also has happened in Europe where the richest people to bill actmen's the bottom feeders like Bill Ackman, non productive. Elements of the economy is just like made billions of dollars shorting stocks. Those people are totally fine. They offshore their money. They find ways around tax compliance. But it's the level down. It's the 65 year old Florida retirees who owned some insurance company in Indiana. They spent their whole life building it. They sold it for five million bucks. Exactly. Exactly right. Exactly. They have like just enough money. Exactly right. To live on a golf course outside Sarasota. Love Ron DeSantis. Love Trump. Those people are going to see everything stolen from them. And the method of theft will be the devaluation of their existing assets. It will be the deep, that's it, especially real estate. I totally agree with that. And I think in taxation. Just like the, the, the, the, and I love Steve Bannon. So I don't want like my, our last discussion to come across as a criticism of Steve. But I mean, he's going to run for president on the, on just a straight Elizabeth Warren wealth tax economic agenda. Actually, yeah, he's going to run for president and say, take the money from those people who have way too much of it, the bill actmen's of the world. And I want to give it to you. I wonder if that has it ever, it always seems like those people flee the country. I mean, Miami is filled. People who fled other countries. Exactly. That's exactly right. And they live in splendor. Not attacking them, but like they didn't give up their money. They just left. And then the middle class, upper middle, upper middle class, especially just hammered. And that is the core of your society, right? It won't last that way. And you know, Trump's elections have been, I think a reaction to that broader trend we've experienced for decades. And you know, what I hope it doesn't happen is that it just becomes a policy race to the bottom to try to, you know, throw insufficient solutions at that. Things like, well, we'll just give them free houses. We'll just give them free healthcare. The robots will just build the houses in national parks. Right. And that wouldn't that be awful? Thank you for spending all this time. It's always good to see you. And I'm just glad that you survived everything in your thriving. Likewise. Are you running for president? No, not of this country. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Well, some Americans have become cut off from the things that once kept us grounded are land, the skills that tied our families to nature. Goldiers get his next spot. And for minus, we made a new six-part series, American Game Tales from the Wild. We follow the sports when we're keeping these ancient traditions alive. We follow a permanent, maybe seal into the mountains of Texas. Donald Trump Jr. across the ridges of Lenai. That's what we call from going from zero to hero. And wander with me with the quiet woods of Maine. I have just three dog commands. And then as I direct the dogs, find the bird. Find the bird. Find the bird. And then Denford, obviously. I don't use as much as I'd like to. We cast for Steelhead on the D'Souce River in Oregon. The first one I've caught in a while. Track mule deer in the Utah High Country. Spearfish in the waters up Montauk, chasing striped bass and bluefin tuna. See you on the other side. It's called the American Game Tales from the Wild Outdoor Series. Watch it at tuckofurlson.com.