Go run and find him! The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day Joe Rogan, podcast by night! All day! I didn't even notice you have a two-tone suit going on. Can a tell me about this suit? Please do. Okay. Well, what's happening with that? Company made this for me, LGFG. It made me a dozen suits. One for each rule from 12 rules for life. The rules are printed on the back of this. I mean, the caller. This is a heaven and hell suit. So it's quite fun. Which one's hell? Join the sex. So this is hell's red, Joe. Come on. That's not really red. Well, it's like a magenta. It's stylish. Yeah, it's okay. Hell's magenta. Yeah, designer hell. Ah, nice. So this is made out of sheep's wool. And this is made out of goats wool. So that's pretty funny. And then in here, you've got your basic heaven lining and your basic lining. Oh, okay. Yeah, so I don't think I've ever seen a man walk around with a... I think you're one up. Yeah, you're one up. Oh, yeah. Yeah, that's pretty good. It's a double breast. Double breast. Yeah, I think. Yeah, I think. I've got one suit with you in the lining too. Oh, no. I was going to wear it today. I thought about wearing it. It's a black suit with platinum wires in it, which is kind of cool. And inside it's got black and white images of like a really harsh, sharp, harsh graphic images of you and Brett Weinstein and Ben Shapiro and Russell Brand and, you know, as an assortment of the... Oh, that whole sandwich from Paris too. That's the same thing. Yeah, it's in there too. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. I still have hope for Sam Harris. Yeah, me too. Me too. Yeah, I hope he makes it come back. I mean, he's not really going away. He's just got some weird opinions. Yeah, well, there's plenty that floating around. Well, you know, I think when you have like complex, fascinating brains, they go off in all kinds of different directions. Do you think? This is one of the dangers of being creative, right? Most creative ideas are wrong and a good section of those wrong ones are fatal. But now and then you get one that's necessary. Yeah, we were talking about Twitter files before we got rolling and what the new stuff is. So the new stuff has something to do with AI and some sort of content moderation. Oh, yeah. Well, Tabby released some Twitter files today on Twitter, obviously. And they're going through the code. Now I don't understand the technical details, but you know, you don't exactly know when you see the output of a code generated system exactly what rules it's using to sort the information. I suppose that's the equivalent of shadow banning. There's all sorts of, there was apparently all sorts of directives built into the code to amplify certain kinds of messages and, you know, de amplify others. And so apparently Musk is doing what he can to clean that up. Ruben reported that the other day. Yeah. Then Tiberty today, he was talking more about the whole Russian collusion fabrication. Yeah. So that's also real fun. Well, how about the one guy that was going after Trump who it turned out was actually inclusion with the Russian? Oh, yeah. That's a rough one. Yeah. Yeah. Well, the best defense is a good offense, you know, and so I guess. I guess. Yeah, I guess. I know. But it's like why would anybody not think that that was going to come around to get them? It's amazing how often people don't think that, you know, what they're doing isn't going to end up aimed squarely at them. Well, this Twitter thing, right? Like they never suspected that someone like Elon was going to come along and buy Twitter. And then in an unheard of tactic, have a bunch of journalists review everything in all their Slack meetings and all their emails, look under the code, look under the wiring under the machine and find out how it was actually running. Yeah. Well, I mean, the fact that anyone would ever think that any of this stuff, you know, stuff is a good idea that people don't understand like the dangers of censorship. They don't understand where this leads to. Yeah. Well, we're seeing a little bit of that emerge on the right now, you know, which is kind of frightening to me. So I'm an admirer in many ways of what's going on in Florida, you know, with DeSantis. But him and Rufo, who I also think has got a bit of a clue, are trying to, what would you say, limit or even ban critical race theory. And the problem with that is you can't define it. Right. But how do you control something? You can't define. And the answer is you battle it out on the battleground of ideas. Because as soon as you start to try to define it and then try to censor it, well, first of all, that's just going to grow because that's how those things work. You know, like where does where does critical race theory shade into Marxism? Well, who the hell knows? Where does Marxism shade into socialism? Lots of even harder question than where does socialism shade into, you know, just being on the side of the working class? Well, all that's fuzzy beyond belief. And so once you get to the point where the government has to step in and regulate, say, what education systems are doing, you're already in a deep trouble. And because I can't, I don't see how it can really be done. Because I can't define critical race theory. You know, I mean, more or less, you can get some sense of the cloud of ideas that's associated with it. But, but trying to draw the lines, how are you going to do that? And then, of course, you enable inevitably, no matter what your goal is to begin with, you're going to control a certain form, let's say, of pathological communication, misinformation. That's just going to play into the hands of people who like to censor and that's just as likely on the right as it is on the left. So no, it's a real dangerous game. And that is a problem like the term critical race theory is it's open to interpretation. Yeah, well, it's often even hard, except in retrospect, understand a lot of what these things actually are, you know, because new clouds of ideas emerge and they kind of have an animating spirit and they have a set of associated, what would you say, presumptions. And you can often only see what that is in retrospect. You know, it took me a long time to understand whatever existentialism was enough to sort of define it, phenomenology, these different schools of thought that occupied the thoughts of psychological investigators over a couple of centuries, postmodernism, modernism, you know. It's not an easy thing to extract out the gist of those and define them plus, as I said, they have very fuzzy boundaries. So what I saw with DeSantis was there was, he had a concern that they, that it wasn't just black history that they were putting into this critical race theory, but that he saw that there was queer theory, which was in this thing that they were teaching in school like, how does that have anything to do with black history? Like, why is queer theory in certain ways? Yeah, well, I think the way those are linked is essentially through what you might regard as, well, it's an implicit Marxism, but it's even deeper than Marxism. So if you're a Marxist, you basically have a heuristic that simplifies the world and that heuristic is that you can understand any social relationship from, well, from an intimate relationship all the way up to the state by just dividing the parties. Let's call them the narrative partners in a discussion or an interaction into those who are oppressed and victimized and those who are taking advantage of them and profiting. That's basic Marxist theory of economics and there's obviously some truth in that because when systems become corrupt, that's how they operate, right? It's exploitation and victimization. And every system tends towards corruption and so, and if your eyes are open a little bit or if you're, let's call it, if you've moved from naivety to cynicism, then you can see every interaction as a power dynamic. And then that drives, as soon as you have that established, that idea that the basic relationship is one of power. Well then you can see, well, there's no difference between what's happened to queer people in relationship to those in power and what's happened to black people in relationship to those in power. But it's united by that underlying. That's why I always make a case for the domination of something like postmodernism and Marxism. I've been criticized for that, but I think it's inaccurate association. The postmodernists figured out and they were right about this that we see the world through a story. Now that turns out to be something unbelievably complicated. And I think all the top and neuroscientists like Carl Friston are what would you call converging on this presumption that you have to see the world through a story. And the postmodernists actually figured that out. The French postmodernists, you know, Foucault and Derredan, people like that. But then they did something that was a slight hand. And this was, this all happened in the 1970s. They said, well, we have to see the world through a story. And even if you're a scientist, you're not exactly objective because there's a narrative driving your work that you might be unaware of. That's your implicit narrative. That's what might be implicitly biasing you. But they jumped to the conclusion that the underlying narrative was one of power. It's basically that all human relationships are predicated on power. And, you know, there isn't a more cynical viewpoint than that. And it's easy to take apart, you know, if you think about it for a moment in a practical sense. If you're marriage is just based on power. First of all, it's an unpleasant place because it's tyrant and slave. And second, like good luck with that because people aren't that easy to tear and eyes. You know, like maybe you have a willing slave in your wife, but I doubt it. If you're just trying to play power games with her, she's going to fight back with everything she's got. And then if you have friends, it's like that's a relationship of mutual exploitation. Is it? Then you're just a bully with henchman and they're going to stab you in the back the first chance they get your mom. So, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, worse than that, even. A dictator. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You're a dictator, you know. And you know, people say, well, look at how successful dictator psychopaths can be, but I look at them and I think, well, that's your definition of success. Yeah, what is success? I mean, how you're the biggest devil in hell. Yeah, are you happy? Yeah. Right. Well, the leader of a bad place might be the person who's worst off in some fundamental sense, right? They're the most corrupt. Isn't that funny though that the way we define success is power and money. Those are like, look how successful they are. Yeah. And power and money, but a complete absence of love and trust and respect and, yeah, well, it's a human dignity. You know, well, it's also, it's also not really how people operate. So there's an anthropological literature on the formation of elders in, say, traditional societies, because you might ask yourself, you know, who becomes an elder? And if you were a Marxist cynic, you'd say, well, those who used exploitation to dominate like the priestly class or something like that. And that goes along with the supposition that, you know, religion is the opiate of the masses. And somebody that's obviously true, but a lot of it isn't. The elders aren't that at all. They're the people who others go to spontaneously to ask for counsel. Yeah. And then you ask, well, who do people naturally gravitate towards for counsel? And the answer is, well, productive, generous people who've managed their interpersonal relationships well, because who the hell else would you go ask for advice if you had any sense? Like you might go ask the local dictator and count how to them if you need a favor to take somebody out. But if you're actually asking for counsel, you're going to ask someone who's decent and who's generous and who plays a reciprocal game. And it's also the case. This is worth knowing too. The problem with a power game is that it's not playable, not in the final analysis. So friends to all, the Dutch primatologist has showed even pretty clearly in chimpanzees. You know, you think the roughest, toughest chimpanzee rules the dam roost and he pounds everybody flat and he gets access to the females. And there's a little bit of truth to that because female chimps aren't sexually choosy, but the male chimps will chase weaker males away from them. And so if you are more powerful physically as a male, chimp, you do have preferential mating access. But the problem with being a brute, even if you're a chimp, is that you have an off day and two of the chimps that you will press band together and tear you into pieces. And so what DeWalf found was that in chimp troops, the stable alpha can sometimes even be the smallest male of the troop. He'll ally himself with some of the dominant females. It makes networks that are essentially friendships, reciprocal friendships. And that gives them a stable position, not of power but of authority. And that's definitely the case in functional human societies. It's not based on power. Now it's tricky because if it degenerates, then it degenerates into a relationship of power. You know, and so that means the critics who make the claim that everything's about power are right in some sense when they're talking about nothing but corruption, but they're really 100% seriously wrong about the idea that it's power relation that constitutes the basis for the organization of any social interaction. You know, it doesn't work in your marriage, doesn't work with your friends, doesn't work with your children, doesn't work with your business partners, doesn't work with your customers. It doesn't work with politicians, although it's, here's another twist that's complicated. So imagine you have a population of people who basically cooperate reciprocally. So you know, I do you a favor, you do me one and maybe we figure out how to advance each other across time. That's a good game, right? Fair trade plus advancement. That's a good definition for a good marriage. Okay, but now you have a community of people like that together. Okay, now it opens up an ecological niche and the niche is psychopathy and the psychopath comes in and pretends that he's a productive, generous reciprocator, but he's not. He's just an instrumental manipulator, but he can get away with it because there's enough wealth generated by the cooperators, you know, the honest cooperators so that there's a space for someone to exploit the system. And that stabilizes that 4% of the population. So you know, across the world, 4% of people are close enough to clinically diagnose a whole psychopaths. And that's probably better than being paralyzed by fear and anxiety and just stay in in your bed, it's better in terms of reproductive success, let's say, and maybe even success in general. But it's not a good game because in the real world, most psychopaths get found out pretty quickly. So you know, you can screw somebody once and maybe twice, but then they figure it out and then word gets around. And so in the real world, two things happen. Psychopaths have to be itinerant so they can find new people to exploit. And the other thing that happens is generally non psychopathic males who are fairly aggressive keep the psychopaths under control. And so part of the reason that women like men who have some capacity for aggression, but who are still productive and reciprocal is that men who are productive and reciprocal, who have some capacity for aggression can keep the real monsters at bay. So it's hard on women, a because they have to navigate that really thin line between productive generosity and the capacity for aggression. That's a really tough thing to navigate. That's basically the story of beauty and the beast, the Disney movie, right? Because guest stars and narcissistic psychopath and the beast is someone capable of aggression, but he's not tamed into a reciprocal relationship. It's also the basis of the most fundamental female pornographic fantasy. And the Google guys figured that out, you know, 15 years ago when they analyzed billions of sex fantasy searches by men and women, men go for visual imagery, but women go for story. And the story's the same. Innocent young woman with a lot to offer, but kind of hidden find some male five categories of men, vampire, were wolf, pirate, surgeon, billionaire. And he's kind of an aggressive guy, but he's capable of being tamed into an intimate relationship. That's the standard female pornographic fantasy. And it's pretty much the standard fantasy of romance. And so you can see, you know, what are women are trying to do in that situation? Because they're trying to find some guy that's got the capacity for mayhem, but that's under control, but who can integrate that into a productive, generous reciprocal relationship? And so, well, it's fascinating because the capacity for violence and the capacity for aggression is one of the things that's been actively muted in our male population. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's a, it's, there's a bunch of reasons for that. And some of them turn into positive feedback loops, like they're sort of self fulfilling prophecies. So there's a lot of women out there who've never had a positive relationship with any male in their life. Right. And maybe not only not a positive relationship, but really a series of pretty negative relationships. And so women like that are very leery of any expression of male ability of any sort, because they can't distinguish productive competence from arbitrary power. And because they're trying to defend themselves, because they've been hurt repeatedly, maybe they come from broken families and catastrophically arranged neighborhoods. You know, one of the tactics that can be used in that situation is just to try to do everything you can to distance yourself as much as you can from any display of male ability. Because it can't be distinguished from psychopathy, can't be distinguished from the use of power. It takes a sophisticated woman to be able to make that distinction. So the other thing you see too is that young women are much more likely to be seduced by psychopaths than older women. Because the psychopaths mimic competence. That's what a narcissist does too. They're confident. And women read confidence as a marker of competence. And that's reasonable. But that opens up the, what would you, it opens up a space for exploitation. Because if you can mimic confidence, that's false confidence, narcissistic false confidence, then you look competent. And that works particularly well on naive young women. And of course they get exploited by people like that. And they think, well, that's what men are like. Right. Yeah. Then women like that, you know, they have boys. And then they're afraid of the boys whenever they express anything looking like masculine competence. And they basically emasculate the boys. And then the boys get bitter. And then they mistreat women and the whole bloody thing just spirals out of control. And so, and that's where we are. That's ways. What a strange place to be, isn't it? Yeah, that's for sure. Yeah. Unintended consequence of familial breakdown. Not a huge part of it. So we decided to have this conversation because of what's going on with you in Canada. Oh yeah. And your clinical psychology license is in jeopardy because you have opinions about politics that they disagree with, which is a very dangerous and bizarre turn of events. Well, it's your fault actually. You know, I told you, I think a week or so ago when we talked about this, that, okay, please let me give you some background here. So I don't know how it's my fault. I will tell you, tell you a lot of things are your fault because it turns out so. Oh no. Yeah, yeah. So the, the college of psychologists has basically levied what are equivalent to about 13 lawsuits against me, simultaneous. Now, the reason I call them lawsuits is because their actions undertaken on behalf of a complainant. Now the complainant can be anyone anywhere in the world who complains about me for any reason. They don't have to be former clients. They don't even have to be anybody I've ever met. They don't even have to have met anybody I've ever met. So you know, it's not going to be someone online. Well, it is. All this is pretty much all these complaints are someone online. None of them are my clients, although half of them claim to be falsely and the college didn't throw out their complaints despite that. So which is really quite interesting. And what are the complaints? Well, okay, let's see. One complaint is about the tweet I made about Eleanor Elliot Page. And when I said that a criminal physician cut off her breasts and the pride was the sin. So now I'm in trouble again because I just said the same thing. One was about sports illustrated cover. Yeah. They featured that overweight model and I tweeted out not beautiful. And I guess that was something like fat shaming. I don't remember exactly what the what the what the charge was. And then I criticized Justin Trudeau and a former staff member of Justin Trudeau and Jacinda Arderne. I made a joke about her coming. I was going to New Zealand and the New Zealand leftist press was freaking out. And I made this joke about bringing my alt right trolls to New Zealand and then I put in parentheses or maybe they're just, you know, ordinary people are trying to clean up their rooms. So apparently that was casting a profession into disgrace. And then they submitted one complainant from the US, submitted the entire transcript of our last discussion. So you know, I don't know how to defend myself against that because apparently everything I say and apparently everything you say too is bringing the profession of the psychology into disgrace. And I think they're most upset in that case about my comments about the inadequacy of climate models. And so you know what that has to do with my clinical practice is questionable to say the least. And so anyways, does that cover it? Yeah, it seems like this climate thing is a very rigid ideology that one must subscribe to wholesale. You can't have any nuance opinions on it and you can't have any... Well, it's a religion. It's a religion. Yeah. Actually, it's a, it's a pseudo, it's a partial pseudo religion. And I mean that technically, I'm going to write about this to some degree and I'm writing a new book which will come out in November called We Who Wrestle With God and I'll cover that in this. But Alex Epstein who wrote fossil fuel future recently to comments about this a bit. So the basic structure of the quasi-religious belief and so this is the set of initial presumptions. That's a way of thinking about it. You know, we were talking about how ideas are structured earlier. The Marxists believe that everything's about power. is a narrative at the base of any belief system and the climate pseudo religion is based on characterization of nature as something like a hapless, what would you call hapless, defenseless, fragile virgin. The industrial activity of mankind is characterized as something like a rapacious power mad, yeah, yeah, yeah. Demolisher of natural virginity and beauty and then the human being is the individual is characterized as nothing but a devouring mouth whose activity runs contrary to the untramelled beauty of the planet and that supports the activity of the tyrannical patriarchy. That's basically it. And so the reason that narrative has force is because it draws on underlying religious archetypes and so to characterize the world properly you do need to characterize the positive aspect of nature because you have to live in something approximating a reciprocal harmony with nature because if you just eat everything and you know, devour everything in your local landscape, well then you die. So that's a bad idea. So you have to have some sense of the value of nature. Now you also have some have to have some sense of the fact that if you were dropped in the jungle naked in the Amazon you'd be dead in about 48 hours. So you also need a figure to characterize the negative element of nature and that's completely absent from the environmental myth. That's part of what makes it pathological and then with regard to the rapacious tyranny, let's say, well, you know any industrial system or any human organization can exploit the natural world to the point where that's not sustainable and it can become oppressive and tyrannical. That's the evil king, ancient part of religious mythology going back as far back as we can chase it. So you need a representation of the negative aspect of society because you know you go to school, send your kids to school and they kind of get turned into these cookie cutter kids and that crushes their innate what would you say difference and beauty and it's all the pain of having to be socialized and you have to understand that there is this oppressive element of culture. And so but then you should also wake up and notice that you've got the wise king too and that means you put your plug in your damn toaster in the morning and the electricity works and you go out on the street and everyone isn't rioting and you know there's workmen who are deep, deep, deep in the sludge trying to keep everything going and you're not starving to death like everybody on the planet was in 1860 and so a little gratitude for the positive end of the patriarchy is in order to and that's completely absent in the environmental view and then with regard to the individuals like well of course you can be a selfish impulsive hedonistic consumer and you can facilitate the rapacious tyranny as a consequence of that rape the planet but by the same token you know we're not a cancer on the face of the earth we're not a virus that's mutating and taking out the planet you know and we're not trapped in a Melthuzia nightmare and you got to give credit where it's due and you know there's an element of people of everyone that's noble and generous and kind and productive and capable of living in an well-ordered state in something like sustainable and productive harmony with nature you only get half that story now if you have no comprehensive underlying cultural narrative which is increasingly the case in our society and someone offers you when you're attaining as you're half the religious story that'll just snap you up in a second because it helps you order your relationship with the world gives you a pathway to a so Jean P.S.J. great developmental psychologist he called the last stage of adolescence the mess ionic period the mess ionic stage now most people don't talk much about that i think because they're they don't know what to make of p.a.J.'s claim but he was a real genius Jean p.a.J. and he said you know when you're making that transition from from the group identity that you're chasing as a teenager to becoming an individual no and that's not a journey everyone takes because lots of people just get lost in group identity you're going to be looking for a pathway that's essentially heroic and what that pathway should be is that you identify with your culture deeply you are socialized deeply into the traditions of your culture but you're also capable of transcending it you know so then you become a culture creator as well as a as a disciplined member of culture but young people need to be offered something like a well a vision of destiny in order to catalyze their identity and we're very very bad at that except on the ideological front so the woke types come along and say you know the planets of virgin the great father's a tyrant you could be a hero if you just stood up to that and the kids think well i'd like to do something important with my life and so they're just caught into that immediately but because it's a one-sided story it's well it's a one-sided a one-sided religious story is an ideology and a great representation of that is what they've done with great a thornberg yeah exactly exactly so funny you know because i thought 10 years ago i thought we live in the delusion of a of a disturbed 13 year old girl how did that happen and then you know great a thunder showed up and i thought oh there we go we've now we've got the we've got the 13 year i feel sorry for her you know because she was chased into this apocalyptic terror that we're trying to enforce on all our kids and then you think about her position you know so now she's all afraid and her mother's facilitating that like mad and then you know she announces her fear her neurotic fear essentially it's driven by negative emotion and you know macron says to her oh my god gratty you're absolutely right bows like what the hell's a girl to think you know because what she really wants is to freak out a bit and for someone calm and reasonable to say hey look kid the maklips has always been honest it's always the case that the future has the possibility of being dreadful but you know we've conquered terrible things in the past and overcome massive obstacles and there's no reason at all not to assume that we can do the same thing that's a very important point yeah it's it's such an important point because there's never been a time ever or everything was perfect well that's for sure there's never been a time ever environmentally where earth was stable no if you go I mean stable you know currently kind of like guess what the weather's going to be but if you look at like models of like thousands of years it's never been flat it's always been up and down the earth with a nice ball many times many times yeah so yeah well Randall Carlson was saying there's been times in our like distant past where the CO2 levels and the oxygen levels were so fucked up that we were close to losing all life on earth right and then like distant past where the CO2 levels and the oxygen levels were so fucked up that we were close to losing all life on earth. Right. Right. And then this gives us hope. Yeah, well, see the antithesis to that is to believe in something like the paradise, the intrinsic paradise, the stability of well-balanced mother nature. Right. It's like, yeah, a bit, but no, not really. There's a lot of variability, a lot. A lot. Of course, that kind of variability. That's hard on people because you want a certain amount of stability so you don't die. Right. But it doesn't deny that human beings have an impact on this either. No. No. Well, this is why I like this is why I really respect Bjorn Lomberg, you know, because Lomberg's hard to grasp because he forces you to think complexly, you know, he says, well, we don't have one problem, carbon dioxide, which is, you know, I don't even think it's clear that carbon dioxide is actually a problem, but we can leave that aside. That'll get me in trouble with the college of psychologists again. But, you know, Lomberg says it's a factor. Yeah, it's a factor. Yeah, yeah, but there's lots of factors and God only knows what the most pressing problems that confront us truly are when I wandered through the ecological sustainability literature about 10 years ago. And, you know, I concluded a couple of things. One was that the best way forward to a sustainable planet is to make everyone whose poor rich is fast as you possibly can. And that's Lomberg's pleasure. Yeah, not to put limits to growth on because turns out if you get people above about $5,000 a year in average GDP, they start taking long-term view of the future instead of scrabbling around in the dirt trying to get lunch, you know, and you're going to burn everything up around you to stay alive if you have to. Right. So, you've got a bit of wealth and now you can think over, you know, maybe a 20-year period, which is quite the damn luxury, then you actually start being concerned about, you know, the quality, the aesthetic quality, the local environment. And so, I was so excited when I found that data because I thought, oh, this is so cool. It means that we could have our cake and eat it too. It's really hard to provide cheap, reliable energy, you know, at the lowest cost possible to the widest number of people worldwide and the emergent consequence of that would be the whole planet would clean itself up. So, that wouldn't that be great because we could make our goal, the eradication of absolute poverty, which we actually done pretty good at eliminating over the last 15 years, but we could really make that a goal. And then one of the consequences of that inevitable consequences would be a greener and healthier planet. And then you think, well, why aren't we doing that? And that's a question, all right. And I think part of the reason is I've been trying to understand the driving ideas underneath this globalist utopian tyranny that seems to be developing from the top down. And I think it's driven, at least in part, by this religious vision that already described, you know, that you have to construe culture itself, especially industrial culture as the tyrannical father raping and pillaging everything in its way, which is unbelievably dangerous way to think to one side of it. And the idea that you have to impose limits to growth on people in order to have a sustainable planet. And that's allied with a view that probably stems all the way back to people like Paul Arlick in the 1960s who really believe, really believe, truly that maybe the planet should only have 500 million people on it, or a billion, you know, in relative poverty or two billion barely scrape and buy because otherwise they're going to be wrecking everything and, you know, controlled by some top down authority that makes bloody well sure that no one's consuming too much. So when I look at ideas like that, that first assumption, you know, the planet has too many people on it. It's like, I don't like to hear people say that because when I hear that I think, okay, buddy, who exactly are you thinking about getting rid of? Well, it's not like that. It's like, yeah, it's like that has to be like that. It is absolutely like that. So, you know, it's easy to get all paranoid conspiracy theorist about the WEF say and maybe there's some utility in that. But, you know, I don't think anybody's sitting at Dave Oscoyne. Well, we got to scrap seven billion people. But if the underlying narrative is the one I just described, you know, virginal planet, tyrannical patriarchy and rapacious individual, and you believe, well, we're overpopulated like Paul Arlick has believed since really literally the mid 1960s, then how is it not going to be that the policies that you craft stemming from that narrative are colored by the the belief that there's far too many people. And like, I've already felt that I'd be that war for the last six months. And I would say it's war because what I observed happening in Europe when I was there last was that, well, you can see this. You don't have to be in Europe to see it. But it's more direct if you're there is that it's pretty damn clear that the globalist utopians are willing to sacrifice the poor for the sake of the planet. You know, and they're doing that by cranking energy prices up through the roof. And that means that people die. So, Lomburg is estimated that three, maybe you have to turn your thermostat down by three degrees, right? Save the planet. We don't have enough energy. We'll pay it not to use your electricity between five and six, which is what they're doing in the UK. You turn your damn thermostat down three degrees. That sounds like nothing. But if you're old, that radically increases the probability that you'll get a respiratory disease and die. You know, when a therapy in what it had a cold winter and that could still happen, Lomburg estimated about 135,000 people. It's like, well, you know, we're just making energy more expensive. It's like, what do you mean you're just doing that? So imagine the economic system. It's pyramid. There's a bunch of people at the top. They have almost all the money. That's par for the course for any productive system. Any system that's productive ends up with a distribution like that. It's pretty. It's like a law of nature. And then you move farther down the pyramid until you get down to the bottom where most of the people are. And they're barely clinging on to the edge of reality, right? Doesn't take much of a crisis to tip them into, you know, death. And then you crank up energy prices. Well, what happens is you just take a bunch of those people at the bottom of the distribution. The poor that the left is so, you know, hypothetically concerned with. And you just, they're just done. They go from barely hanging on to not hanging on. And their kids go from having some ghost of a chance of opportunity, having none. And I could see this coming. You really see what happening in Germany in the UK. You know, where we have this absolute rat's nest of way more expensive energy. And this is where it gets extremely perverse. You know, you might say, okay, look, we have to save the future poor. And so now some of the present poor are going to have to suffer. Well, that's convenient for you if you have not to be one of those poor people. But let's give the devil is due and say, okay. So like that'd be fine with me, not really. That'd be fine with me if the consequence of your actions raising energy prices, for example, actually produced an improvement in those things you wanted to improve. So for example, energy is more expensive, but now the air is cleaner. But that isn't what's happening in Germany. What's happening in Germany is energy is like five times as expensive and the coal plants are back on. So it's like even by your own criteria for success, you failed and you did it at the expense of the poor. And you know, the World Bank estimated, I don't remember how many months ago, it's probably nine months ago, that we're putting 350 million people on the brink of starvation. Because we're cranking energy prices up. And so for me, it's like that's 350 million people. That's three times as many as the communists killed in their six decades of trying. And if you're, if you're, cure for the planet is, well, you know, we got to put 350 million poor people in jeopardy just so that things are hypothetically better in 100 years. I think, yeah, I don't think so, buddy. And also it's a little bit too convenient for me that your prescriptions to save the planet are in company by this insistence that the only way forward to that is to give you all the power. It's like there's a bit of a moral hazard in that, don't you think? It's like I'm just saving the planet, give me all the power. It's like you want to save the planet, or do you want the power? And let's, let's put the first, the second one first because the probability that you're assain to or the Messiah is pretty damn low. So that's the danger of the Davos crowd. It's a very bizarre narrative that doesn't get challenged. And I don't hear this very nuanced, complex perspective, like what you're laying out right now. I don't hear that often. No, I don't hear it at all. I hear it from you and maybe a couple other people that I actively seek out. But you think that when you're dealing with such a complex issue that you would want to see the most brilliant minds think out, how does this play out? Yeah. Well, okay. What a consequence. Well, so let's think about what mitigates against that. Okay. So first of all, young people are looking for a, you know, a productive and visionary pathway for it. I've already covered that. But then there's the, there's a dark side of that too. And the dark side of that for everyone is that our reputations are very important to us. There are most crucial currency, you know, and what that means is that we're tempted to elevate our reputations in an undeserved manner. And we do that to gain social status with very little work. And so we're tilted towards being tempted by theories that provide us with an easy way forward to that. And so one is, well, I'm a good person. Well, how do I know that? Well, I'm concerned about the planet. Well, the, that's a complex problem, the planet, right? That's a trillion problems. Not one. I'm concerned about the planet. Therefore I'm good. But that's complicated. You got to take it apart. No, you don't. Well, the planet only has one problem. Well, what's that? Un-trammled industrial activity and the rapacious nature of the consumer. Okay. What's the output? Too much carbon dioxide. Okay. I'm against carbon dioxide. Well, bang. You're the Messiah. You know, with no work. And then someone, law, lawmberg comes along and says, hold on there, guys. We got like 30 problems, not one. And we need to rank or the problems. And we need to do a differentiated analysis. And your idiot interventions are going to cause nothing but unintended consequences. And no one wants to hear that because number one, it's complicated. You got to read the damn book and you got to think through his arguments. And number two, well, now where are you going to get your cheap moral virtue? You can't just be the Messiah by waving a band, you know, waving a band that says, I don't like carbon dioxide. And so that, that runs against a very, very deep narcissism. And so that's part of what stands in opposition to people, especially people like lawmberg. And that's essentially the social media. Yeah, definitely. Like, greatly. Yeah. Yeah. Well, social media is a great place to garner, unearned social reputation. I mean, it can be game and it is game. And we also even know the nature of the people of game it. There's a whole emergent psychological literature concentrating on dark tetrahed traits. So I could walk through that a little bit. So the standard personality models that produced the big five, extroversion or auticism, agreeableness, conscientiousness and openness, they were derived sort of with a primitive AI. That's a way of thinking about it that looked for patterns of description across huge corpus of linguistic data. How do people talk about each other? It turns out they talk about each other using five dimensions. And those are the dimensions I just described. But the people who derived the big five didn't use a value of descriptors. They threw anything out that looked like a value judgment. So for example, you might say of someone, he's a good person, and you might say of someone else, he's a malevolent person. Those descriptors weren't included in the big five corpus because they were trying to derive a model of normative personality. Okay. So, but that meant that the pathological personality wasn't encapsulated or well defined. Now, Skye Robert Hare, who worked at University of British Columbia, is world's leading authority on psychopathy. And he interviewed the hundreds and hundreds of psychopaths and was always fooled by the way. And then he had a student, Dale Paulus, who works at UBC and Paulus, developed a model of personality that base was based on pathology, like on the dark side. And he called it the dark triad. Machiavellianism. That means Machiavellian is someone who, so let's say, if I was Machiavellian in our discussions, what I would have done was think, before I came here, I thought, well, you know, what can Joe offer me? And then I think, well, how can I play Joe with my language so I'm most likely to get what I'm, you know, the narrow, impulsive selfish thing that I'm aiming at right now. So that's how Machiavellian operates. A narcissist, that's the next part of the dark triad, is someone who wants social status without doing any of the work. They want all the attention. If you're dating a narcissist or in a relationship with a narcissist, they'll alienate all your family members and your friends so that they get all the attention. And that'll just be the first of the games they play with you. Then you have psychopathy. And the psychopaths are parasitical predators. And so the predator will take whatever you've got and the parasite will live off you. And then here's a parasitical, ideological statement. Property is theft. A classic Marxist trope. Why would you say that? Well, if I want to live off you, the way I'm going to justify that ethically is by claiming, well, you know, Joe, look how privileged you are. You've got all this money. You just, you just took that from the oppressed. And if I'm manipulating you so that I get some of your money, that's only just because first of all, it's exactly what you did. And second of all, why not spread some of that wealth around? So that's Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy, dark triad. They've expanded that recently to add another dimension that was missing, sadism. And the sadist takes positive delight in causing pain to others. And the lulls culture, L-U-L-Z. The lulls culture online is a culture of sadistic Machiavellian narcissistic psychopaths. Lulls, loaning, like people are joking around shitposting. Yeah, yeah, I did it for the lulls. And it's plural of L-O-L, L-O-L-O, but like if you look at the urban dictionary, for example, the definition of lulls is positive delight in the suffering of others. It's like, yeah, sadistic. And bloody wealth, social media just facilitates like, I never thought of lulls as being sadistic. It's in and of itself, it's not a sufficient marker, right? You have to have like six or seven things going on before. It's clear that you're manifesting this underlying tetrad of personality traits. Like if you use odd acronym and you're thrown out a joke at someone, that this is a habitual pattern of doing nothing but provoking people online and using deception and lies to do it to attract attention to yourself. You know, it has to be a very consistent pattern. But Paul, I was first of all, and his crew of researchers and people who have been influenced by him have laid out this four-dimensional structure of the dark side, let's say. And they've shown that hyper-users of social media, Instagram, for example, and people who do a lot of anonymous shitposting are characterized by, you know, what would you call it, domination by those four traits? And part of the reason for that, this is very, very dangerous to our whole society, I think, is that you've got to ask yourself what keeps the psychopaths under control in the normal population. And the answer seems to be, especially on the male side, is that narcissistic aggressive men get put in their place by non-narcissistic aggressive men. And that usually has to do with something like the threat of physical intervention. You know how it is if you get a bunch of guys together. I can make a joke about you. You know, and I could even make a joke that was, that sort of put you down. But the joke would have to be funny. You'd have to have the opportunity to reciprocate, and you'd have to believe that I was doing it in good spirit. Because if I just used the opportunity to, you know, stick the knife in, we're not going to get along with each other very long. And we know that. And men know that when they talk to each other. And so part of what keeps dialogue among men civilized is the possibility that it won't be civilized if it goes two sideways. Everybody knows that. But there isn't none of that online. Because anybody can post anything about anyone, no matter how denigrating and derisive, especially if they do it anonymously. And there's zero consequence. In fact, quite the opposite. If they're good at it, they get a lot of attention. And the social media companies will monetize it. And so not only is it not inhibited, it's actually facilitated. And this isn't a trivial problem. Because if the psychopaths multiply enough, they take the whole society out. So I think virtualization enables psychopathy. And it's worse than just the trolling bit. That's bad enough. Because it pollutes political dialogue. And it makes everyone think that everything is more unstable than it really is. But online criminality is actually a terrible plague. You know, I don't think there's an old person in North America who isn't being targeted by some gang of psychopaths, who's, you know, documented all of their interests and their locale. And who knows how much money is in their bank account. And who's doing everything they possibly can at every second to leverage access to it. That's just happening continually. So let's certainly algorithm's right for a lot of people that get trapped into these sort of situations where people are constantly throwing at them things that are opportunities for them to either make money or get this. Or get a refund or refund. Yeah, get a refund. You bet. Or they befriend them. They get an end and some lonely old character who's not functioned cognitively quite like he used to. You know, he gets sucked in by someone pretending to be his friend and offered a great investment opportunity. Yeah, yeah. And it's very, very, very difficult to track this sort of thing online. So you get the real enabling of the criminals. Because how the hell, if they're anonymous, how the hell do you keep them? You know, how do you hold them to account. But and then the secondary derivation of that is something like trolling. That's really not so good either. Because if the psychopathic narcissistic Machiavellian sadists are dominating the political discourse, then ordinary people look at that and think, oh my god, everything's going to hell. Everyone's really extreme. And really, it's a non random sample. And so, you know, I can really see this in my own life. You know, because if you just looked at me virtually, you'd think like I was the world's most embattled person in something way. You know, maybe not the world's most. But I'm up in the top 10 maybe. But in my real life, then that, like I don't have any problems. You know, I go around from town to town or from city to city. And every interaction I have with people on the street is positive. They either don't know me, which is fine. Or they do. And then we have a positive interaction. And I've only had like three negative interactions with people in real life in the last six years. And like they stand out because they're not fun, but they're extremely rare. But online it's like, well, 50% of the people oppose Jordan Peterson. It's like, no, they don't. It's not even one percent. So we're building a virtual world that doesn't sample the real world very well. And that's not much different from building a delusion. So not good. Very very on very unsettling. That's Twitter. Yeah, certainly Twitter before Elon Musk came along. Yeah, well, Twitter's better, but it's still quite the snake pit. You know, one of the things I think might be done about that. See, I don't think that I've made this claim on Twitter that there's something cowardly about anonymous posting. And I'm not going to retract that because I believe that in 99% of the case is that's true. Now people say, well, you know, if you're a whistleblower, you have to be anonymous. And what about people in totalitarian states or in a company? Well, same, that's the whistleblower problem. Yeah, 1% of anonymous posters are heroes, but 90% of them are Machiavellians. And so, there's also the fact that people that don't want to get in trouble at work. Yeah, I know. I know. That's kind of the whistleblower problem. But not even whistleblowers. I mean, people that just have opinions that you might get them in trouble with the college of psychologists in Ontario. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I know. And so while I think one of the ways of handling that technically, what I'd like to see happen at Twitter, for example, you know, not that I'm in a position to know because I know it's complicated is I think the anonymous types should be separated from the real people. So you could go visit them and see what they have to say, but the verified people, you know, their comments are either at the top or in a different place. Because I don't think that you can, I don't think that we can set up a playable game online when the anonymous trolls have the same rights as the verified responsible people. And I also think, and I don't know what you think about this, Joe, but, you know, let's say you want to be a whistleblower. You want to say something that's going to get in trouble at work. So you want to do it anonymously. It's like maybe you're sure can your responsibility. Because maybe you have a responsibility, you know, and I could be persuaded, alternatively, but maybe you have a responsibility if you have something to say it in your own voice and to put yourself behind it. You know, and maybe you're taking the easy way out by not doing that. And, you know, I don't want to say that about every single person who posts anonymously, but, you know, tyranny emerges when normal, honest people are now afraid to say what they think. And when the tyranny is complete, the totalitarian state, no one ever says what they think about anything. Everyone lies all the time. And I see part of the pathway to that, the unwillingness of ordinary people to take the consequences of their truthful speech. You know, and I also think that's detrimental to them because I think that you find the adventure in your life. I think this is certainly true you. You find the adventure in your life by standing behind your words. Like, that's you, right? Those are your words if you're telling the truth. That's actually you. And there's going to be consequences. Sometimes they're going to be negative. But do you really think that the consequences of telling the truth in your own voice are negative? You think the world's structured like that? Jesus, that's a dismal view, man. Well, it depends on the amount of autonomy you have. It depends on the amount of resources you have. I mean, like, let's take for example, nurses. Who had contracted COVID during the pandemic and had developed natural immunity. There was already studies that showed that that natural immunity was superior to the immunity that was imparted by the vaccine. But yet, they were being mandated to take this vaccine. And a lot of them had some serious apprehensions about it that were logical based on people that they knew that had adverse reactions. And now we're finding out more and more how common those adverse reactions were. Now, if these women stepped up or these men who were nurses stepped up and said something about it publicly, they would be fine. Yeah, well, look, when I was working as a clinician, I had lots of clients who were in that position. They were at work and they're being tyrannized by some, while sometimes it was DEI types and sometimes it was just diversity, inclusivity and equity. The wokidy logs who were coming for them and not letting them say what they wanted to say politically. And sometimes they were just being tyrannized by garden variety narcissists. They're bosses where that sort. And it was crushing them. And it's easy to say to people like that, we'll just stand up to your boss, but they often were rather constrained in their employment opportunities and they had families. And so you can't tell people, well, just go shoot off your mouth stupidly, get fired and taken out and mobbed and let your family starve. That's pretty dumb strategy. But what we would always do in the therapeutic endeavor with someone in a situation like that was to situate themselves in their life so that they could afford to abide by their own truth. And so that might mean if you're in a job, let's say, where you don't have freedom of expression. You know, you get your resume or your CV polished up so that if necessary, you could make a lateral move relatively quickly. Maybe you send out some job applications just to test the market. And if you're not marketable, maybe you pop up your skills. And then maybe if you're in a position where you're vulnerable because someone else has got control over your tongue, maybe you work real hard to put some other ground under your feet so that you can't be taken out so easily. You know, like when I opposed the Bill C-16 in Canada, the mandatory pronoun bill, a guy knew first of all, I knew that that would cause a psychological epidemic. I told the Senate that back in 2017. I said, you guys don't know what you're doing here. You're going to confuse a lot of adolescent young women. And for every girl, you hypothetically save who has body dysmorphia. And that'll be a vanishingly small number of people who are actually saved. You're going to doom like 300. Of course that's exactly what's happened. That's why the TAVA start clinic shut down in the UK. You know, and so there was that. But I also had set myself up, you know, because I had three streams income. I had my university salary. I had a clinical practice and I had a business. And that wasn't accidental. You know, I knew from my clinical practice that if you wanted to say what you had to say, you had to put yourself in a position where you couldn't be easily taken out by the mob or the tyrant. And then I would say, well, if you're not in a position where you can afford to say what you have to say, then that's an indication that you haven't positioned to be in a position where you couldn't be easily taken out by the mob or the tyrant. Then that's an indication that you haven't positioned yourself optimally, existentially, haven't positioned yourself optimally in life. You're two, you're your fundamental, your foundation is two week. And so, you know, maybe it'll take you three years to fix that. You know, so that now you've, you're grounded firmly so that a casual objection from your boss or even being fired isn't going to take you out. It's not like that's easy. But I mean abiding by the truth isn't easy. The only thing, but it's a lot more preferable than abiding by falsehood. That's the problem right, of course abiding by the truth isn't easy. Obviously. But, you know, what sort of devil do you let into your head if you abide by falsehood? And some of that might be just not saying what you have to say. And that's not just, you know, mostly we regard sins of commission as more egregious than sins of omission. You know, an outright lie is worse than just failure to say what you know to be the truth. But enough people, when enough people are silent about things they know they have something to say about something to say something about. Then you have a tyranny. And so, well, we haven't sorted through all this, you know, very well in our society. But I think it's morally incumbent on all of us to set up our lives so that we can afford to tell the truth. And if you can't, well then you think, no, you're, you haven't got the hatches batten down, right? The walls of your towers, your fort aren't high enough. You're not properly armed. And you should be. Because, you know, the mobs coming for you. And so is the chaos of nature. And you bloody well better be prepared. And so I think if you're anonymous, you're depriving yourself of the necessity to put yourself in a position where you can tell the truth. Now, think about what happened to you. Now you tell me what you think about this. I mean, I've been watching you for a long time and it's quite remarkable seeing the impact that you've had that keeps increasing across time. But my experience with you is that, you know, you have your opinions, your perspective, and you'll put them for. But mostly what you do is you ask people questions that you actually have as questions. Right? As far as I can tell, you're mostly trying to figure out what the hell's going on. And so that's honest. And it's honest exposition. It's an honest, it's honestly exposes your own ignorance as well. And you know, you can take the audience along as a consequence of that. And for you, the consequence has been, you know, you've gone from just doing this podcast, the sort of the side thing for you, at least when it started, to be in, I don't know if there's anybody who has more impact as a single individual on the media environment worldwide than you do. And that's all a consequence of actually truthfully admitting your own ignorance and saying what you had to say. And I know you were set up to do that because you had multiple streams of income, you know. And you couldn't easily be taken out. You'd already accomplished things and you'd have to do the spheres. But think of the consequence of that. Think, well, without having to anybody who did everything they could to ask stupid questions and tell the truth. And the answer is maybe. You know, so you don't do that. You hide and have your reasons. You know, your family's at risk. It's like fair enough, man. But you, you deprive yourself of the great adventure of your life. And you contribute by remaining silent at path, pathologization of the whole society. So, well, that doesn't seem like a very good route to me. You're making sense. But it's a very, very complex situation for someone who has put all their eggs in one basket. Like, particularly someone who's a nurse who has to work long hours doesn't have another stream of income. And isn't really making enough money to have a nest egg saved away. Yeah, you bet. Yeah. Particularly someone who's a nurse who has to work long hours doesn't have another stream of income and isn't really making enough money to have a Nastig saved away. Yeah, you bet. Yeah, he's a single as a single mother and yeah, absolutely Well, there's a woman in Canada right now a nurse whose name unfortunately I forget who's being hauled over the calls by her college for You know making the radical claim that they're only two sexes and so I know and and you know part of the reason I'm pursuing this action With regard to the Ontario College of Psychologists while there's two reasons really what three one is You know leave me the hell alone guys. You've been on my case nonstop for seven years Not once before that in 20 years of practice. There's no complaints ever levied against me It wasn't until I started to become you know relatively well known publicly that the college came after me and seven years of that gets to be a bit much Especially now that there's 13 lawsuits compiled up and all of them are for political opinions and Half of them have been put forward on false grounds, but but even that's not enough for me to engage in the battle The reason I'm engaging in the battle is well first of all You want me to do social media retraining so I communicate better according to your experts It's like experts by what criteria exactly What's a social media communication expert? You got any documentation that that even exists as a field Now, do you know that if you have that social media expert train me that I'm gonna be a better therapist? There's no body of data that suggests that in the least so I'm not going down that route because This isn't a threat by the college This is what what the situation already is I haven't been hauled in front of their disciplinary board yet But they've already convicted me of Disgracing the profession and sentenced me to an indefinite period of reeducation And that's the second most serious punishment that they can levy against a professional The first is to take away the license the second is to undergo this Retraining and to publicly announce the necessity for that which they've already done in my case And so now I have to sit down with these experts at my expense for an indefinite period of time until I'm trained Properly whatever the hell that means by the criteria of the so-called experts and the college and that isn't pending an investigation That's already in place such a wild request to retraining just even the way they phrase it It's so bizarre so Orwellian. Yeah. Yeah. Well like I said The whole transcript of our last conversation. I don't imagine they'll be that happy with this one So but the other reason I'm pursuing it and to the degree that I'm able to keep my head cleared During this process because it definitely makes me angry and really made me angry over Christmas when I was spending Christmas Going through the minutiae of all these bloody lawsuits trying to figure out what the hell they were up to Instead of you know taking a bit of a break and having some time with my family So I was very upset about that but to the degree that I'm upset about it I'm not doing it right. Hey because it's can't be personal can't be about me Part of the reason that I want to pursue this and part of the reason we're pursuing an objection to what they're doing on Charter of Rights grounds in Canada as because they're interfering with my freedom of conscience and speech and Again, it isn't even the case that the reason that that's a problem is because it's about me The reason it's a problem is because the colleges in general like the regulatory boards of Professionals are doing this to everyone lawyers physicians teachers Massage therapists. There's all these licensed professions and if you're if you're a licensed profession the government establishes a board of Your peers to regulate conduct of the professionals now and in a functional time All that happens then is that generally the people who get in trouble Getting trouble with their own clients right with the people they've been dealing with directly and then the board steps in on the side of the person Who's been injured by a you know a pathologically practicing professional and fair enough But now it's been weaponized and it's not it's been weaponized as a political tool too, and it's not like activists don't know that You know and it's so preposterous because I have 20 million people following me on social media You know and God only knows how many views of my videos for example or the interviews you and I have done tens of millions and like What how many people complained? 20 out of millions and then the college didn't have to pursue those complaints. They can invent they have to investigate them So I don't know what they're doing now because of course they've been inundated by thousands of complaints about their own behavior So I have no idea what they're gonna do about that But they didn't have to investigate They chose to investigate and as I said They did that despite the fact that half the complainants claimed to be my clients and weren't so what we have here is we have 13 people Who complained about me hypothetically doing harm? to someone they didn't know To someone who they didn't know anyone who knew on as a consequence of things I said on social media and that All of them not only were they fourth hand claims of harm Which you know no psychologists would ever claim that a fourth hand account of harm constituted a valid measurement So the bloody college is violating its own measurement standards by even pursuing this But so not only are they based on fourth hand information and then an outright lie which is they were clients of mine They're they're also predicated on the assumption that It's okay to go after professional for expressing political criticism Because like literally half of them are Why said something about Trudeau? I said something about one of his top aides I said something about you send our dern. I said something about I don't want to say the counselor in relationship to the truck of convoy You know I said something about climate Every single one of the complaints is political And so why is that a problem? Well see if you can figure it out for yourself That'd be the first answer in the second is I have a friend in Canada very well-known physician international reputation and a reasonably decent secondary income stream And when this all hit I reached out to him. He's a very brave guy. He's done a lot of writing that could easily get him in trouble I said look maybe I could get you and Bruce party this lawyer at Queen's University who's gone after the Essentially the college that functions for lawyers I said we should do three letters same time saying you know that the colleges are chilling free speech in Canada with Psychologists with with physicians and with lawyers and he said he didn't have his house in order enough to dare to take on the college And the problem with that is that I don't know anybody in Canada who's a physician That's more well situated than him or braver and even he was low to do it He'll do it eventually but not now and so here's the situation. We're in for all you who are listening If you go to see a professional when you have a crisis psychologist or a physician or a lawyer Let's say you bloody well better hope those people are telling you the truth. So here's an example Let's say you got a 13-year-old girl and she has party dysmorphia That's very common among 13-year-old girls especially if they hit puberty early because When women hit puberty their levels of negative motion go up That's very well established clinical finding and the reason for that likely is that when women hit puberty The world becomes more dangerous to them, right? Because they're sexually vulnerable That's also when you get body dimorphism developed so men get bigger than women and so you know women Should be more intimidated in relationship to physical combat because they're not strong enough to prevail So they should be a little more anxious about that and so they're sexually vulnerable So they should be a little more anxious about that and then also They should be a little more anxious because they have take care of infants And if you're going to take care of an infant You should be a little more sensitive to threat because the infant is extremely vulnerable So anyways, that kicks into in women when they hit puberty It's very well documented. This why women have three to five times the rates of anxiety and depression worldwide It's because they're baseline levels of negative emotion or higher Okay, so So now but that also translates into something very specific for women So Anxiety and depression shame guilt all those negative emotions They make yourself conscious and self consciousness takes the form of bodily bodily shame in women much more than in men So if you're a Girl and you hit puberty early So you're dealing with the complexities of all that when you're still pretty immature and you get And your negative emotion goes up the probability that you're going to negatively evaluate your body is virtually 100% there's no difference especially in women between Feeling bad about their bodies and being high in negative emotion. It's the same thing So I just interviewed this Chloe Cole who's detransitioning and suing her medical So-called medical professionals who rushed her into a double mastectomy at 15 And the wounds have never properly healed by the way and so that's her life You know and I basically ran her through a clinical interview I said hey, kid. Oh, you know when you were 12 and miserable about your body. What the hell was going on? She said Well, you know I I thought more like a boy. She's a little autistic So she's more thing oriented than people oriented and so she didn't get along with girls that well And then she was dreaming that she turned out like Kim Kardashian But she turned out to have kind of a boyish figure Then she thought well, I'll never really be a good, you know full woman. So Maybe I should be a boy and she started to toy with that and then she went to her medical professionals with this body dysmorphia and instead of sitting her down and saying look kid you hit puberty kind of early You got a partially autistic personality style that That makes you a little more comfortable with boys than girls and every girl there is Sufferers body dysmorphia at your age So just you tap her cool, you know the fact that you're embarrassed about yourself and feeling inadequate It's like that doesn't mean you're marked out as pathological certainly doesn't mean you're a boy No one ever told her that That's like basic information man. They just rush her along the pathway puberty blockers At 13 and then a double mastectomy at 15. What is causing this rush to that? Like what how did this happen and how did this happen so quickly? Well, this is partly tied up with this issue of the college So so here's one way into it so now Professionals are bound by law to offer gender affirming advice They're bound by law. Okay, so this is what this means if you bring your 13 year old in to be evaluated by a physician or a psychologist who and maybe she has high levels of neurodicism Teltting towards depression and anxiety and then that's making itself manifest in bodily discomfort now that's being shaped by this cultural Fad that insists that if you feel uncomfortable in your body It's because you're of the opposite gender. That's the psychological epidemic part of it and we can talk about that in a little bit more detail But now you're duty bound by law if you're a professional to say oh you think you're a boy Yeah, absolutely You absolutely 100% you are what can we do to facilitate that move forward and that all got What would you call? What pushed into the law under the guise of the elimination of conversion therapy? So Unbeliev now the problem with that is you see if you're a therapist or a physician You don't affirm someone's identity That's not your job and your job is not to deny their identity either Your job is to help them explore their identity and hopefully to develop it and so someone comes to you Maybe they have body dysmorphia and so maybe they're anorexic. That's a form of body dysmorphia And so the first thing you do if you have any senses you note that that's stemming out of an underlying more global Proclivity to suffer from depression and anxiety. So that's the big elephant in the room Depression and anxiety so if the Transactivist type say well the body dysmorphia types are more likely to have suicidal thoughts It's not because they have body dysmorphia. It's because They're prone to depression and anxiety and depressed and anxious people are more likely to have suicidal thoughts And maybe body dysmorphia adds a bit to that but nobody really knows probably adds some but the fundamental issue is one of depression and anxiety Now you're suffering from you know unspecified self-consciousness and the culture twists around to offer you narrative and the narrative is Oh well you're in the wrong body and then that carrot is and this is part of it gets extraordinarily pathological a lot of these kids who are Suffering from this alienation Are unpopular and so and now they're being in tists like yeah, well you're not unpopular You're interestingly special So if you just take this carrot, you know, you're the opposite sex all of a sudden You're not a victim. You're a brave What would you call you're a brave seeker after your redemptive identity and now you can be elevated And you can be treated specially and my god, you know if you're an unpopular teenager How could anything be possibly more attractive than that? And then you also think Well, why are teenagers gullible in that way, you know, why do they go along with the crowd and the answer to that is That's what you're supposed to do when you're a teenager That's your job right because first of all you're with your parents And you're not yet a fully fledged individual and so what you have to do is you have to become part of the group And if you're not part of the group, well, maybe you're a stellar You know creative genius and you're exceptional in that matter But more likely you're just a loser who couldn't fit in And that sucks. That's for sure. So your job when you're a teenager is to fit in As every teenager knows You know and maybe not just to fit in but you know to fit in in a positive way that elevates the community But let it we could just settle for fit in and so Teenagers are wired to go along with the crowd and then if the crowd is offering something pathological That happens all the time you get a psychological epidemic And I knew that I told you I told the Senate this in 2017 and why did I know well, I knew the literature We've tracked psychological epidemics going back 300 years 300 years here's some of them multiple personality disorder It's cycles in society Disappears then there's one case then it spreads like mad then there's multiple personality Disorder everywhere teenage girls mostly Then people get skeptical about it And it dies and maybe it disappears for a whole generation or two then a case pops up Just does this. That's happened for 300 years Cutting was a psychological epidemic bulimia was a psychological epidemic Anorexia was a psychological epidemic The satanic daycare ritual abuse Accusations that came out in the 1980s. That was a psychological epidemic and the the rule basically is is that if you If you confuse people about a fundamental element of their identity Then those who are already So confused they're barely hanging on are gonna fall prey to that and all hell is gonna break loose Not exactly what's happened in the you know in the trans in the trans situation But the difference between this one as opposed to the other ones like multiple personality disorder Is that this one is being reinforced culturally? Like you you are rewarded. Yeah, well the multiple personality disorder that happened there too because You'd get a lot of attention from media especially the early The people who who are the first who display the first symptoms of multiple personality disorder You know you get a psychologist or a psychiatrist or an alienist if you go back far enough Who reports this fascinating case of multiple personality and you know there are people Who are dissociative? So they kind of have multiple personalities. They're united by memory. They're usually creative people Because creative people have multiple personalities. That's what makes them creative They're not the same from day to day. You could even say they have fluid identities You know and so the claims of the gender types that some people have fluid identities. It's like yeah creative people do They're the purple hair types with like nose rings and tattoos. That's all part of trade openness You combine that with high neuroticism negative emotion then you get people who are fluid in their identity who are also prone to depression and anxiety so That's that's also crystal clear and so Well, so Look if you're an outsider. Will you want to be a doll and contemptible outsider Or do you want to be an interesting and compelling and new? Exciting outsider. Well, you know if you're a teenage girl and you've been unpopular That's brutal because you know you get tied up with those mean girls They shun you and exclude you. It's absolutely brutal. You know, you're just living a peripheral existence. You got no friends Everyone's contemptuous of you You know and maybe that's partly because you have some Something that marks you out from the norm like a tilt towards autism because a lot of the people It was just released with the Tavistock staff You know the Tavistock closed down in the UK. That was the big gender Surgery performing institute How is those down what happened government closed it down? So yeah, because they knew that they figured out in the UK that wow the rates of Transgender transformation request were skyrocketing and even the people at the clinic knew that they were Russian people along the Transformation pipeline way faster than they should have without proper clinical evaluation There's a thousand lawsuits out against the Tavistock in the UK now a thousand yeah out of I think 30,000 Transition processes so what is the difference between the weather UK is processing this versus the way we are? Well, we're still where the UK was three or four years ago We haven't woken up to the fact that you know all hell is going to break loose on this front with people like Chloe Cole You know launch and launch and lawsuits. That's the only thing that's ever going to stop this loss. It's absolutely Yeah, yeah, or jail sentences So like it's absolutely appalling. This is part of the reason I've also part of the reason that I felt like I've been at war for like six months It's so crazy that much this what you're saying here although it's backed by the literature It's it's obvious you have an expertise in this area This is this is labeled as transphobic. Yeah, they transphobic It's even worse than that, you know because the data and this was known Let's say 10 years ago before this all became an issue Ken Zacher in Toronto He was the world's leading authority on transgenderism, you know He divided it into two parts. There's the autogonophilic types Those are the guys who get sexual kicks from dressing up in women's clothing and then go do drag queen story hour Say well, we're just you know pristine and pure. It's like no, you're not You're getting a sexual kit from dressing up in women's clothing and let's not bloody well forget it And you can't even say that now, but every clinician worth is salt new that for decades And then there's another subpopulation and those are usually gender non-conforming kids And you know like a conservative skeptic might say there's no such thing. It's like no other there is So your typical gender non-conforming kid would be this be the perfect target for this would be feminine boy or a masculine girl who's high in trade openness So has kind of a mutable identity who's also high in neuroticism And there's lots of kids like that and so they don't fit in that well with their peer group You know, they're tomboy girls or feminine boys and then if you track a lot of them Some of them develop body dysmorphia. They're not very happy with themselves at puberty because they don't fit in But Zuckers showed very clearly he ran the transgender treatment clinic at Cam H in Toronto for decades and he was one of the world's leading authorities in terms of publication I think he was the editor of the lead journal for years. They just took him out in Canada Fire at him and disgraced him and he battled on the lawsuit front for like 10 years and was eventually vindicated But he had have a political bone in his body. He's a clinician through and through. You know he wasn't playing political games Documenting auto-guinophilia. I was just clinical reality now. It's you've to become verbote and even suggest such a thing Oh, there's nothing sexual about this. It's like yeah, right You're dressing up in lingerie before your mirror at home Tucking your dick between your legs. Imagining you have a vagina for sexual kick. Oh, there was nothing sexual about that Yeah, right bloody Absolute liars now then you have the kids who don't fit in on the gender front. That's a different pathway But with them if you leave them alone So do no harm leave them alone 90% of them except their body Sex by age 18 or 19 and 80% of them are gay So what that also means is and the gay community is gonna wake up to this sooner later is that most of the kids being sterilized and mutilated are gay 80% of them So I don't see how the LGBT alliance is gonna hold up under that sort of reality So yeah, that's for sure man. What a crazy thing. And here. I'll let's add something equally ugly to it Since we haven't gone far enough yet So here we'll do a little bit of arithmetic So while back Disney executive mentioned on Video is when Florida went after Disney was all when this was happening She came out and said I think she was head of domestic programming for Disney She said well, I have two children five and seven one is trans and the other is pansexual And I just thought mathematically right away. It's like the chance you have a trans kid is one in three thousand That's not a very high chance And let's say the chance that you have pansexual kid is the same whatever pansexual means I don't even know how to calculate those odds But whatever that is Is rarer than trans because no one ever even heard about it until five years ago So the joint probability that you have a trans kid and a pansexual kid is one in nine million The odds that you're a pathological narcissist Sacrificing your own children to the glorification of your compassion is eight million nine hundred ninety nine thousand nine hundred 99 to one So like do you have a trans kid and a pansexual kid or are you a devouring mother? Well, you can look at the odds and decide for yourself. Jesus. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah No kidding look man Freud was no dummy When he pointed to the fact that the devouring mother was one of the major impediments to proper human development He knew that looking deep into the darkest families and seeing this proclivity of the overprotective mother To destroy the developing integrity of the child to keep the child infantile to cling to that Relationship instead of developing life for herself and letting the child go flourish. That's Hansel and Gretel Right you're lost in the woods. Why while your family's broken up you have an evil stepmother So now you're lost in the woods. What's your abuse rate if you have a step parent? 100 times normal So you're lost in the woods Well, what happens? Well, you come across a gingerbread house. Well, that's pretty damn convenient. You need a house It's a little it's more than you could even hope for it's not just a house It's a house made out of candy Well, what's inside a house made out of candy a witch who wants to faten you up and eat you And that's the devouring mother, you know, and that's an old fairy tale. Yeah, no kidding Yeah, and so you know we could we could dwell on that for a minute too One of the things we won't honestly discuss in our society one of many is the fundamental nature of female political psychopathology You know, and there's male political psychopathology Obviously, that's what the feminists complain about all the time when they talk about the oppressive patriarchy You know toxic masculinity. There's no shortage of toxic masculinity So is there any toxic femininity? Well, not if the feminine is just the you know oppressed virgin Goddess whose nature but how about we don't live in that fantasy world and we know yeah, there's female political pathology The tendency to infill it infantilize everyone And the tendency to assume that everyone who doesn't go along with the infantilization is properly characterized as a predator And so you know you wonder why are the universities turning into extended day cares? Well a lot of the a lot of the reason for that is that huh Women who don't have anything better to do are turning the university students into the infants they never had So yeah, I don't know when we'll be able to be mature enough to have that conversation You know 20 years from now What is a path to bring this back to some sort of rational Logical way of discussing these problems. So I tweeted out I don't know if you saw this that I was going to make an announcement on your show today and so I I set up an international consortium Based in London. I can't tell you all the details yet But we're we're trying to put together Something like an alternative vision of the future Say an alternative to that kind of apocalyptic narrative that's being put forward at least implicitly by organizations Like the WEF, you know, and that's the original planet rapacious tyrant You know all devouring consumer religion and it's more like something like well We want to ask people six key questions. Okay, so How do we get energy and resources at the lowest possible cost as rapidly as possible to the largest number of people around the world? That's one question and so there's a presumption in the question and here's one of the presumptions You don't get to save the planet by making energy prices so expensive that no one poor can afford them That's off the table If you want to develop alternative energy sources no problem You know because hey man the more energy sources we have the better But you don't get to impose your utopian vision in the service of your narcissism on the poor We're gonna try to make the poor rich can try to alleviate absolute poverty pro human view on Environmental stewardship front. That's the next question What are the major problems that are confronting us? How do we take a sophisticated multi-dimensional view of that? How do we prioritize our attempts to Establish our states and our international relationships properly so that we prioritize human well-being You know in harmony with nature to the degree that's possible But human-focused and not predicated on the idea that there are too many goddamn Mows on the planet to feed and that you're evil if you just think about having children So then on the governance front this where it gets kind of more left wing I would say is none of the people involved in this consortium so far very thrilled with global corporate fascist government media and And corporation collusion, you know, and we're seeing this at the high end. It's like a tower of babble is that the powerful players in the world are Increasingly collaborating to impose a top-down vision of the future on everyone And that's a future that's predicated on a zero growth model and the idea that well We need five planets really to Support everyone at the current standard of living that obtains in the west So the best pathway forward is to deny loans by the world bank to developing countries So they can't develop you know energy sources which all that will mean is they're gonna burn wood and coal Obviously so so that's the third question is you know, how do we arrange systems of governance to stop The march of something like pathological Jagan Tism this is why like people like Russell brand and also you to some degree politically, you know because you guys are very What would you say? Sensitive to the danger of that kind of corrupt collusion that regulatory capture that occurs when corporate entities and media entities and Governmental entities are all in bed together like the FDA and the CDC and and so forth and so on without end So that's how it's the third question the fourth question is what do we put forward as a vision on the family policy front to facilitate the What would you call it the encouragement and the maintenance of long-term? monogamous couples who are child centered and to make Increasing the birth rate part of that policy to put policies in place that would support long-term stable monogamous families two parent families and child centered, you know because in the West to put policies in place that would support long-term stable monogamous families, two parent families, and child centered. You know, because in the West, because we're very immature, we think that the purpose of a marriage is the happiness of the people who are involved in the marriage, the husband and the wife. And that's just not the purpose of marriage at all. The purpose is long-term facilitation of their psychological and spiritual development and the establishment of an environment that's beneficial to children. That's a responsible way of thinking about it. So we need to have a serious conversation about what that means. You know, it's tricky because, like I think the ideal has to be long-term committed monogamous heterosexual relationships. And I had a big conversation with this, about this with Dave Rubin. You know, Rubin's gay and he's married. And him and his partner now have two infants, and we talked through how that was. It was a very hard thing for them to arrange, obviously. Why? Well, they're both male. So that poses a severe problem on the reproductive front, right? And so they managed that. They have two infants, but it's very complex. And it isn't obviously not a solution to the problem of relationship and reproduction that's duplicatable across large numbers of people. It just takes too many resources. Now, I do think we have to have an ideal at the center of every concept. But the ideal can't be too rigid, you know, because people aren't perfect. You know, in my own family there's lots of people who are divorced, lots of people, and lots of people's families, there are people who are gay. You know, there are lots of people in unhappy marriages. Nobody attains the ideal. They said the ideal has to be surrounded by a fringe of tolerance, but that doesn't mean you sacrifice the ideal. And the ideal has to be, well, we know there's a literature on fatherlessness. It's bloody catastrophe, fatherlessness. For obvious reasons, you know, human children are complicated. You think you can maybe, if you struggle madly as a single parent, you could do a decent job and lots of single parents do, but you're asking a lot. You know, for a woman to work 50 hours a week and then spend another 40 hours with her kids and to do both of those optimally with no help. You know, and we know perfectly well that when women get divorced, especially if they have kids, they tend to fall down the economic hierarchy. So it's very difficult. So that's another one of the policies. Then another question. We're trying to make these into questions rather than, you know, we have the answer. The other question is, well, it's pretty clear that we have to live inside this story. And one story is power rules everything. But that's not a very good story. It's a very pathological story. It's more like a confession too if that's the story you insist upon. It's like, so you think power governs everything, do you? Okay, I know what you're like. So that's what you truly believe. So I believe the spirit of voluntary plague governs everything, not the spirit of power. It's like voluntary association. That's what we're doing in this conversation. You know, we're playing towards an end and we're doing it voluntarily and we're taking everybody along for the right. No one's forced to do it. So that's the other thing. No compulsion here. It's got to be infotational. And so we're trying to work out what the story has to be. And on that front, I just finished a seminar in Miami. And the first eight parts of it were released on the daily wire three months ago. Exodus seminar. We walked through the story of Exodus. Exodus means ex-hodos. It means the way forward. So it's the archetypal narrative of progression from tyranny and chaos into the future. That's what the story is. And we did half of it, released it on the daily wire eight episodes two hours long. And we just recorded the last eight sessions two weeks ago. And that was an absolute blast. I really stellar people participating. Man, I learned so much. I learned so much. It's going to take me like two years to digest it. But the daily wire is going to release it all on YouTube for free starting in two months, one episode a week for sixteen weeks. And then we're going to keep it on YouTube and the daily wire for free for four months. And so, and yet it lays out a vision of appropriate governance as an alternative to tyranny and to chaos. So in the Acts of the story, so here, here's this is very germane to the notion of what might constitute a proper story. So the question that you put forward in your life is something like, what spirit should guide you as you move ahead? And he might say, well, I don't need a spirit to guide me. It's like, yeah, you don't have that option. Some spirit guides you might be your stomach might be, you might be a worshiper of the God, if you're a biopus, right? He's the God of giant erections. That's what happens if your whole identity is staked on your sexuality. It's like, some spirit is going to guide you. That's life. The question is, what is the highest spirit that could guide you? So in the Exodus story, the proposition of the story is the highest spirit that could guide you is the spirit that objects to tyranny and that calls the enslaved to freedom. And that's the representation of God in Exodus. So that's what God is in the Exodus story. Now that's not all that God is in the biblical stories, but that's God in the Exodus story. And so that is the God that if you abide by that God, then you believe that tyranny is implicitly wrong even if you tyrannize yourself and that there's something implicitly virtuous about striving for freedom, especially if you're enslaved. So anyways, that's the voice that speaks to Moses. And the voice tells Moses to tell the Pharaoh the tyrant to let his people go. That's that famous line, let my people go. But the line is actually let my people go so that they may worship me in the desert. Okay, so anyways, God through Moses calls the Israelites out of tyranny and he punishes the tyrant. And so if you believe that fate punishes tyrants, you're already immersed in the Exodus story to some degree. If you believe that tyranny is implicitly wrong, of course most Americans believe that. Okay, so now the Israelites leave the tyranny. You'd think, hey man, great freedom. Because now you're out of the tyranny, but that isn't how life works. This is why people won't drop their tyrannical presuppositions. Because he go out of the tyranny into the desert, not to the promised land, desert first. And where it's what's the desert? Everyone's lost, no one knows which way to go. Everyone fights. Everyone turns to the worship of false idols. Everyone wants the tyrant to re-assert himself. That's the situation we're in in the aftermath of the death of God in the West. And so that's really useful to know because one of the things you might want to know in your life is why do people cling to their own tyrannical presuppositions? And the answer is, well at least they're orienting structures. Pathological is they might be. If you drop them, you're not redeemed, you're just lost. And the idea that being lost is freedom, that's preposterous idea. No one lost is free. They're just enveloped in chaos. Okay, so what happens in the Exodus story is now the Ezer lights are out in the desert, wandering around for like generations. And they get all fractious and fight, and bitch, and complain, and start worshiping false idols. And they're scrapping with each other. And that's because they have the habits of slaves. They don't know how to govern themselves. And so they ask Moses to sit as a judge. And so he does for stories very unclear about this, but for a long time years and years, morning dawn till midnight. He's judging the Ezer lights like mad and adjudicating their squabbles. And imagine what he's doing. If you had to make peace between a thousand people who were squabbling with their, you know, their wife or their friends or their enemies, you have to render judgment on that. You know, and for judgment to work, the people who are judged have to see the judgment as just. Because otherwise you have to impose it by force. Right? So if I hear you arguing with someone and I try to mediate, I have to come up with a solution that you'll both accept. That means I have to extract out of that chaos some principle of order. Imagine you do that a thousand times or five thousand times. So now you start to understand the nature of the principles of order. Okay, so now two things happen. Jeff Rowe, who's Moses, father-in-law comes along. He's in Midian night of foreigner. He says, you've got to stop doing this. You can't sit as judge on the Ezer lights. There are two reasons. They need the responsibility and you shouldn't turn yourself into another Pharaoh. So if you take all the responsibility onto yourself, you become a tyrant and the Ezer light stays slaves. So he says to Jeff Rowe, this is a signal moment in the development of Western culture, by the way. He says, you take the Ezer lights, you divide them into groups of 10, and you have each of the 10 elect an elder. And then you take the groups of elders and you have them elect a meta elder and you do that all the way up to ten thousands. And then you have the judgments that are necessary rendered at the lowest level of the hierarchy possible. So if I'm arguing with you first, we go to our elder. And then if the elder can't figure it out, he gets the elders together and maybe they render judgment. If they can, it goes to the council of elder elders and all the way up. And if it isn't mediated by the time you have the groupings of 10,000, then Moses gets to weigh in. And that's called Subsidiarity. And the idea is you have to produce a hierarchy of responsibility, distributed responsibility, as an end to this to tyranny and to the desert. And that's the model for good governance. And that's symbolically equivalent to Mount Sinai. And it's also the model of the arc of the covenant and the tabernacle. So Jonathan Pazio did a lovely job of explaining that in this. And so part of the model that we're trying to put forward in this group that I'm describing is based on this principle of Subsidiarity and the idea that we want to encourage everyone to take as much responsibility as possible at the most local level possible. So take responsibility for yourself until you're good enough at that. So you can take responsibility maybe for a wife. And then if you're good enough at that, maybe you can extend that to some kids. And then maybe you can serve your local community. And then maybe you can serve your state. And maybe if you really get good at it, you could serve your nation. Right? But you're taking the responsibility. And here's the basic rule. All the responsibility you abdicate will be taken up by tyrants. That's the cardinal rule of social organization. And so we're trying to build out this story that's based on the deepest elements of Western tradition. That's an antidote to the false claim that it's only power that rules. Because it's not right. And there is a model of proper governance in there. This idea of a hierarchical structure of responsibility. It's the proper computational structure. It's not top down tyranny with fractionated individuals. And it's not out of chaos. It's ordered freedom. And that's what God tells Moses to tell the Pharaoh when he says let my people go. Let my people go. Let my people go. No tyranny. So that they may celebrate me in the desert. It's ordered freedom. And it's the ordered freedom that comes along with being oriented towards the highest possible good. And so we're trying to work all that out. Now we're going to have a conference in London, October 31st, November 1st, and November 2nd. We're going to bring about 2,000 people together. That's an invited list. We want to bring in people who are cultural figures and political figures, business figures, and invite them to this discussion. But we want to make that completely public. And we want to open up the organization to broad membership as broad as possible. And then if it's a success, then we'll open up the conferences as the years progress to larger and larger numbers of people. But we don't have the expertise or the wherewithal to manage that first off. But we've got the venue. Already set up in London. I've got all sorts of people on board in Australia. And all through Europe and through the UK and all through the United States, South America, all sorts of people are interested in participating. And so we want to help put forward a vision that's enticing and inviting. It's like, imagine you could have the world you wanted. None of this. Melthusian limits to growth nonsense. We get our act together. Everyone can have it. Can have enough. And maybe more than enough. There'll be enough educational opportunity for everyone. No one will be scrabble in the way in the dirt, burning down, poisoning themselves. Enough food for everyone. There's also an idea in Exodus and there's a very good idea. And if people organize themselves properly, so they're oriented on a transcendent axis and they're oriented towards their fellow man. So you serve what's highest and you also abide by the principle of reciprocity and relationship to other people. If we organize ourselves in that manner, there's no limit to the abundance the natural world can produce. That's the actual generator of genuine wealth, sustainable wealth. You know, the balances, ordering chaos property, the balances nature and culture property. So the core idea is something like you get the hierarchy of social organization right. It generates unlimited wealth. And we've already seen that to a large degree. You know, we've lifted more people out of poverty in the last 15 years than really. But it's unparalleled. You know, seven out of eight billion people now have either have the minimum they need or something exceeding that. And instead of, you know, starving to death by the billions, which is what everybody who was on the Melthuzian side predicted back in the 1960s. And so I've been working on this for a long time and I've got a good group of core people who seem to be, you know, reliable and not motivated. We hope and pray by something approaching, you know, narcissistic egotism and everybody's sworn to try to make this as decentralized as possible on the principle that the most important thing is possible on the principle that the more responsibility you can offload to people, the better everything will work. That's a fundamentally conservative principle. Like a small C conservative principle, right? So you need a hierarchy of responsibility and you offload responsibility to the local where possible. I think that's a good principle. Let's hold that thought. Yeah, to pee. And I want to I want to explore that more. But I do have to use the bathroom. So back to this thing that you're doing. First of all, what are you calling this? I can't tell you that. Yeah. So you're trying to, one of the things you were saying is you're trying to generate a story. Yeah. We're trying to invite everybody to the table and we're trying to get the right story. And we'll know it's the right story because people will say voluntarily. Yeah, I could really go for that. What do you mean by story when you're saying the right story? Well, a vision. Well, I would say it's something if you want to think about it architectally. It's something like a vision of the promised land. A structure. Yeah. Well, you have to, okay, we could talk about that technically. A story is a description of a hierarchy. Sorry. A story is a description of a hierarchy of attentional prioritization. So what do I mean by that? There's an infinite number of things to look at in the world. So perception seems technically impossible because you just drown in the complexity. That's what happens in a psychedelic trip. You drown in the complexity. It's real that complexity. Usually that's shielded from you. It's veiled from you. Like God is veiled from you. It's the same thing. And so it's veiled by the fact that you regard some things as more important than others. And you do that implicitly. And so for example, right now you're devoting most of your cognitive and perceptual resources to my face and to what I'm saying. Right now there's a lot of things you could be looking at in this room or thinking about. Right, there's an infinite number of things. But you're not. You're waiting some things more heavily. Now why? Well, why are we having this conversation? Well, I could ask you why are we having this conversation? Because I'm curious. I want to know how you think. Okay. I want to know why you're playing. What goal do you think your curiosity serves? Better understanding of what you're trying to accomplish. Okay. Okay. Why do you think other people are interested in that? Because they're going to watch this. Why do you think people are interested in that? Because what you're saying makes sense. And we also recognize that there is, there's a real flaw in the way our society is constructed. And there's a real genuine threat in allowing these power structures to sort of maintain this narrative and create this narrative that's based upon them gaining control over resources. Our economics, our energy and socially what we do and what we don't do. Okay. So now that saves that. Okay. So you see that partially what you're involved in insofar as you're doing it right is something like what would you say? A cautionary tale about the possibility of tyranny? Yes. Okay. So you can see how that ties into the architecture. Yeah. For certain. And I think that's the big threat. And that's what people are terrified of when they see Klaus Schwab standing there with a Darth Vader outfit telling people that they're going to eat bugs. Okay. And so and you're using the technology of free communication as an antidote to that. Yes. And I would say, or, typically what you're doing is you're doing something like serving the divine word that makes habitable order out of chaos as an antidote to tyranny. That's a story. And that it's a deep story. And if you weren't acting out a deep story, you wouldn't have tens of millions of people listening to you. The fact that that's like it's like J.K. Rowling's like why is she so popular? Well, she told an archetypal story masterfully. It has a religious substructure. It just got people, you know, like hundreds of millions of people produced billions of dollars. You have to see the world through a story. You act out a story. And the reason we like stories is because it's actually pretty hard to see the world. And it's really useful to see the world the way other people see it just in case they know something you don't. And so we're telling each other stories all the time. We're acting out stories. A description of the pattern we're acting out, that is a story. And when you go to a movie, maybe you see the hero on the screen, you know, as James Bond. And that's the same narrative in some sense. It's a bit more stereotyped, but Bond is sophisticated, aggressive guy who's got his aggression under control, who's fighting the Hydra. And it's not the Hydra and James Bond. I don't remember the name of the underground organization there, but it's a Hydra for the Marvel hero. The Hydra is an amalgam of tyranny and chaos. It's a Hydra with head of snakes, paralyzes you when you look at it. It's an archetypal narrative. And the fundamental question of life is what is the proper orienting narrative? That's the same question as what God do you worship. It's the reason I titled my next book, We Who Wrestle With God, because you're stuck with that no matter what. You're wrestling with one God or another all the time. God's an animating spirit. That's one way of thinking about it. It's more than that, but that's one way of thinking about it. And so I constantly look to these old stories, these archetypal stories, you know, as a student of Jung, let's say, to find out what the proper orienting pathway is. And that's embedded in tradition. You know, the stories that have lasted, Richard Dawkins would have got to this conclusion if he would have pursued his thought far enough. Because an archetype is a stable meme propagates across time. And there's some memes, some stories, let's say, that stabilize you as an individual. They restrict your anxiety. They provide you with hope. They make you productive and generous. And when they're extended, they produce a structure that unites people and produces productive peace. You know, and it's not by fluke, for example, that the America itself is founded in no small part on the motivational force of something like the Exodus narrative. How it's certainly the case for the civil rights movement. It has to be that way because Exodus is an archetypal story about the establishment of proper order as an alternative to the tyrant and the desert. So everyone is always doing that in their life, whether they know it or not. You know, and you do it extremely well, if you don't mind the insult of a compliment. And I think the reason for that is that for whatever reason, you are acutely aware of your own ignorance and always trying to rectify it. And I would say that's a reflection of a practice of humility. You know, I know you're a competent guy and you're no push over and so calling you humble is kind of a weird thing to do. But one of the things that I've been very pleased about constantly when talking to you is it's a conversation, man. You know, what are we trying to do? Trying to make things clear. Trying to figure out what the hell is going on. We're trying to say what we think. We're trying to jointly make each other wiser. You know, hopefully to the degree we were able to manage it and we're inviting people along for the ride. And they seem pretty happy about that. And that's partly because people aren't just oriented by power. You know, there's all these truckers out there who are listening to this podcast, whether driving their rigs across the country. You know, what are they trying to do? They're trying to get their acts together. They're trying to understand. You know, they're trying to take their proper position in the social world. And that's a fundamentally compelling. It's not a drive. It's an orienting and integrating spirit. It's the same as the spirit of Yawa and Old Testament. It's exactly the same thing. It's the same thing. So one of the things I learned about the biblical narrative. This is so cool. This is what the next books about. So imagine there's two possible states. One of disunity and chaos. You're going in every direction at the same time and one of relative unity. Now the unity can turn into tyranny and the multiplicity can turn into chaos. Those are the two dangers. But imagine there's a proper unity that stops you from being anxious. Anxious anxiety is a marker of internal disunity of narrative. And I already talked about that with this Carl Friston, for example, who's the world's most cited neuroscientist. And I asked him, I asked him if perceptions were micro narratives. And he said, yes, that's quite something. That isn't how we've looked at the world for the last 3,000 years. In any case, to the degree that you're not anxious. Something is uniting all the directions you could take. Okay. Now to the degree that you're not at odds with everyone else. You know, in the chaotic state of nature where everyone's at everyone's throat. It's because there's a motive perception in action that unites you socially. So you can be united psychologically. Then you're not a host that's built on sand. And you can be united socially. Imagine there's a spirit that characterizes that unity. So the biblical corpus is an attempt to portray that spirit. And it doesn't using a technique called metronomy. So metaphor is something being something else. This is like that. Or this is that. It's a way of taking what you know to explain what you don't know. But metronomy is a technique where you take one story that seems to have one moral. And you juxtapose it with another and maybe do that with sequence of stories. And then there's an implication that there's a meta story that emerges across all the ordered stories. And that's what the biblical corpus is because no one wrote it. Not in any real sense. And the process is by which it aggregated or mysterious. They extend over thousands and thousands of years. But here's what the story, the book is. It's a library, not a book. Here's what the library is. There's a proclivity towards monotheistic unity that unites us psychologically and socially. And it emerges out of a plurality of potential gods. It emerges from the bottom up. Now you could argue that it descends from the top down too. But I'm not going to get into that at the moment. But the question emerges. How do you understand that unifying animating spirit? And the answer is, well, it's beyond our comprehension and we can more or less approach it with a story. So here's some examples. So in the story of Adam and Eve, God is the spirit that you walk with when you're unself conscious in a properly-tended garden. You might say, well, do you believe in that? It's like, well, do you have a garden? Most people want a garden. They want a house. They want a little fence off plot. They want to go be able to go back there and relax and recreate. Right? Unself consciously. Okay. So whatever's happening when you're there, that's what that is. That's that walking unself consciously with the spirit of the paradise of garden. So that's one picture of God. And then in the story of the Cain and Abel, you have another picture which is God is the spirit that punishes you if you make poor sacrifices. You say, well, what does that mean? It's like, are you giving it your all or not? Are you playing both sides of the fence? Are you just, you know, chipping in when you have to and trying to go along for a free ride? And that's what happens with Cain. He gets all bitter about it because his sacrifices are rejected. So God is the spirit that rejects false sacrifices. And what happens to Cain, he gets bitter and then murderous and then his descendants become genocidal. That's the Cain and Abel story and like two paragraphs. So then you have the story of Noah. So Noah in Noah, God is the spirit that calls the wise of his time because Noah is portrayed as someone wise in his generations. Right? So for his time and place, he's a wise man. He has the sense that the storms are coming and it's time to baton down the damn hatches. And so like in your own life, maybe your eyes are open to some degree and you think a storm is coming. You have an intuition that a storm is coming is do you prepare or do you ignore that? Because those are your options. If you prepare, then you're manifesting faith in that spirit. So that's the spirit in Noah in the Tower of Babel. You have God as the spirit that punishes the technological pretensions of mankind. So men get together to build the tower that stretches to the heavens. That's the Tower of Babel. And they want to do that to replace the transcendence. They want to replace the mystery of being with their own presumptions. And what happens is no one can talk to each other anymore. That's the state we're in right now. That's why Matt Walsh can make a movie that's entitled, What is a Woman? We can't even agree on that. That's the Tower of Babel. And so then you'd have the story of Abraham and God is presented in that story as the spirit that calls the over protected and privileged. That's Abraham to the catastrophic adventure of their life. Because that's what happens to Abraham. He's 83 lives in his father's tent, eats peeled grapes. He doesn't have to do anything. And this voice makes itself manifest within him and says, get the hell up off your comfortable bed. Get out there in the world. It's suffer your adventure. And you know, Abraham's life is just, he leaves. It's not like it's no promised land for him. It's like starvation and tyranny and war. And the Egyptian rulers conspired to steal his wife and, you know, his brutal life. But it's life. It's adventure. And so then you think, well, all of this is an attempt to characterize Yahwa. And this is the Jewish God with whom the Jews have a relationship. All of these stories are an attempt to characterize that. And so you could say, well, what is the spirit that you walk with, unself consciously in the well-tended garden and the spirit that calls you to adventure and the spirit that punishes tyranny. That'd be the Exodus story. What do they have in common? That's Yahwa, whatever that is. And so then there's an attempt to characterize the nature of that spirit. And then there's a twist on that in the New Testament, which is an amazing twist. It's an amazing twist because the conclusion is that the spirit of... There's a twist on that in the New Testament, which is an amazing twist. It's an amazing twist because the conclusion is that the spirit of Yahwa portrayed in all these different ways is the same spirit that calls people to voluntarily bear the catastrophe of their life and that that's the union of God and man. That's the idea. So it's a hypothesis, it's like, well, is that the same God? So imagine that, you know, you're confronting your horizon of possibility and tragedy is bravely and honestly, as you can. Well, that's the spirit of Yahwa making itself manifest within you. And if you do that properly, then you can bear up under that load. So that's a way better story than power. You know, so... And it looks to me like it's looking at it psychologically. I try to strip it to the degree that it's possible of its religious overtones. You can't strip it completely. Because, you know, there's an open question. So imagine that there's a pattern of existence that, you know, quells your anxiety and gives you hope in United people. Well, then you have an open question is, well, how much does that reflect the structure of being itself? There's a Greek idea of the logos that's intrinsic in the world that there's an order in the world, right, that we can discover and that benefit makes itself manifest from the bottom up. And that's the logos of the world, the logic of the world. And it's certainly possible that the logic of the world as expressed in human existence is the same as this spirit of Yahwa that's transmuted in the New Testament into the logos. And, you know, what happened, I did a lecture about this at Ephesus in Turkey. That was fun, which was where the logos was discussed 3,000 years ago, the Greek logo. So what you have in Western cultures, you have this Greek idea that there's an intrinsic order in the universe, bottom up sort of. And then the Christians come along and say, well, there's also an intrinsic order in the psychological realm. And then Western culture is the juxtaposition of those two, the claim that those are the same thing. And so that would be the same claim as if you, if you're honestly, if you honestly and truthfully confront the tragic limitations of your life, you'll discover the truth of the implicit order and that will redeem you. And that's the fundamental claim of science, for example. So even science, insofar as it's a practice, is embedded in this tradition. So, well, that's a way better story. It's a great story ever told, man. And this idea that you're putting together, how do you go about structuring something like this? And how do you go about getting people to agree upon the parameters and how it should be implemented? Like, yeah. Well, you seem like a massive undertaking. You figured out as you go, well, I'll tell you what's happened. Okay. Just because some of it's already happened. So I was traveling through Eastern Europe last year to all these countries that had been communist not that long ago. And I was fortunate because I was meeting like 30 to 50 people in each country. I had a team of people who were setting up meetings for me of cultural and political leaders in each country. And so I'd have dinner with them or an event, you know, and talked to everybody and I was listening to what their concerns were. And throughout Eastern Europe, it was the same concern. And the concern was what the hell are you guys toying within the West? You know, this woke neo-Marxism. They're terrified of that in Eastern Europe because it was just 1989 about that long ago. They said, I don't know what you guys are doing, don't you know where that goes? Very pro-American, by the way, all through Eastern Europe, unbelievably pro-American. And everybody on I met said, like we're really afraid of what's happening in the West. So I pause you there for a second. When you say pro-American, what do you mean by that? Like what about the fundamental ethos of the of the US is reliable. What is that fundamental ethos, you think? I think it's the logos fundamentally, but you know, if you differentiated that, one of the things that's really quite amazing about the US. And I think it's unique, really, is that your society is fundamentally not envious. Now there's plenty envy in it, because that's hard to eradicate. But one thing about you Americans is you're actually capable of admiring success and you're capable of trying to replicate it for yourselves and your children. And you actually celebrate that. Well, we think it's possible, but there's not a cast as a mayor. That's a faith. Yes. It's a faith. You believe that that's not only do you believe that that's possible. You believe that it's appropriate. And that's the American dream. And it celebrated. And celebrated. Not so different than worshiped fundamentally. Like the difference between those words is like, it's a semantic. It's so that. That's trivial. That is what is attractive. Yeah. Well, party too, because you remember like one of the countries I went to visit was Albania. And Albania was the worst of the Soviet countries. And that's a hard contest to win. Like there are caverns all over Albania that the government dug out because the whole story there was Albania was the richest, most desirable country in the world. And they were absolutely surrounded by enemies. It was like the ultimate paranoid totalitarian states. You know, and they're not very happy about the devastation that wreaked for 60 years. And you know, they look to the west, to the best part of the west. And think, God, don't lose that, guys. Like we had the totalitarian utopia. And it wasn't, I wouldn't recommend it. So I'm going through all these countries. And people are telling me this concern they have. And then they also say, well, we feel like we're voices crying in the wilderness. Like we're concerned about the direction of the culture war, let's say. But if we say anything about it, we get taken out by the mob. But then I went to like 14 countries and everyone said the same thing. And I thought, well, if the same thing is happening in 14 countries, you're not a voice crying in the wilderness, you're just people aren't communicating very well with each other. So I thought, well, why isn't there an international organization that's really centrist, you know, that would attract traditionalist, small sea conservatives and classic liberals alike. You know, we don't want the ultra nationalist types because they go off the deep end in one particular way. And, you know, the radical leftist globalist utopians who were under the grip of the Marxist idea, that's a very small minority of people. There's a huge number of people in the reasonable middle. But they don't seem to, they've abdicated their responsibility. That's a good way of thinking about it. So then I started talking when I went through Europe. I said, well, you know, I'm thinking about organizing a convention where I could bring people together to talk about a different vision and also maybe to share specific policy ideas that worked. Right? So that's more concrete. And everyone I talked to said, I'd really be interested in that. I'll change my schedule. I'll do everything I can to help. And that just happened in every country. And so I thought, well, that's weird because, you know, this is a preposterous idea. And what should happen is that people, you know, maybe they're pleased to meet me and they give some lip service to the idea and it just ends there. That's the destiny of most ideas. That isn't what happened. And then I went to the UK and started talking about it and exactly the same thing happened. People were just like, sign me up, man, what can I do? Then I went to Washington. I talked to the Republican Study Committee about this. And they make policy for the Republicans and the same thing happened. Whole bunch of Republicans came up and said, we'll change our schedule, make sure you have the conference at some time when the house is sitting. So we can attend. Is there anything I can do to help? And I realized then, you know, the conservative types, they're pretty good at implementing. They're pretty good incremental movers because they're conscientious, but they're not very good at vision. And so they get reactionary. You know, and what happens on the Republican side is they're always pointing to the left saying, you go too far, you go too far. But there's no vision. So it's hard for them to attract young people. But it turns out if you put forward something that approximates an the Invitational Vision, there's just all over that, like a no time flat. So then how to implement it? Well, we got together a group of people in London twice, very diverse group of people. And we hashed out these five questions that I presented to you. And everyone basically agreed, despite a wide range of political opinions in the room, said, yeah, those seem to be the key questions. And then we figured out that we needed to put this forward as an invitation and not as a top down, you know, compulsion based. You have to do this or the planet's going to be doomed. It has to be an invitation. And so now we're trying to work out the details. And well, the first real move will be to open this up to public participation, figure out how to do that, to get a dialogue going. But then also to have this conference, October 31st, November 1st, to November 2nd in London. And I plan to do three lectures at night there, one on the crisis of the West, one on environmental stewardship and one on metaphysics, a public lecture, to kind of anchor the convention. And we've got, I think, the Apollo in London already set up for that. And, you know, and our goal, God willing, is that we develop a vision that people, everyone says, yeah, I'm in, I'm in. What can I do? Instead of division being, you're emitting too much carbon dioxide there, buddy, and enough cars and comedians for you. Yeah. So we'll see. But the thing that's been striking is how rapidly this came together and how motivated people were to participate. We had people from Australia, for example, who have lots to do, the people who came. They flew all the way from Australia for a two day meeting three weeks ago to discuss this. They were only there for two days. People came from Washington and from all over Europe and it's weird. But I think the reason is, and you know, you can, you know, this is that what do they say, the people perish for lack of vision? Absolutely, man. And this vision we're being offered is this dire bloody apocalypse. And, you know, we have to limit our consumption. We have to make energy expensive. Everyone can't have enough. We have to accept limits. There's too many people on the planet. We have to run around like frightened tyrants to clamp everything down. It's like, all that's doing it's demoralizing young men like mad. You know, young people aren't even having relationships anymore. Because especially the men, if they're not bloody patriarchal tyrants, they're virgin raping planetary disboilers. You know, it's like, what kind of vision is that for young men? It just makes them sick, you know, and I've seen believe me. I've seen plenty of that. Their people are so grateful if you provide them with an alternative that says, you know, that ambitious striving that you have within you, that's something that's making itself manifest in the optimal way. is as something that's the highest, not just a manifestation of your tyrannical, patriarchal, rapacious nature. That's what we tell young men, like nonstop from the time they're three onward. And then what? You know, then they're all timid shells of themselves embarrassed about everything they want and do. They don't even have enough spine to approach a woman and try to establish a relationship. You know, they're in love with Tinkerbell, the porn fairy instead is horrible. And so we're hoping to put forward a vision that's an invitation, you know, to the table. And with the idea that if we got our act together, especially given our technological power, God only knows what sort of world we could build, you know, but definitely one where there was enough for everybody. Enough of everything basic and enough opportunity, education, resources. I'm working with Bjorn Lumber gone this. So I'm very happy about that, because Bjorn like he's the real thing, you know, he's done the work and that's very good to have him on board. Yeah, I really enjoyed talking to him. Yeah. I got a couple other projects underway until you're back in real time for other projects if you're doing this subsidiary organization. You know, like I got a lot of people around me who are doing their work, you know, so if I don't micromanage and provide people with maximal autonomy and try to get committed people, can distribute the effort which you have to as much as possible. And then who knows what's possible, you know? So I'm working with my son. We have this app called essay, which we launched back in November that teaches people how to write while they use it. And he just developed dark mode for that. That was released this week and we got about 8,000 subscribers on that. Dark mode, me. Well, you can use it at night, the blinding yourself. And so it teaches you how to teach you how to write while you use it. It's a word processor, but it teaches you how to write and to think. Because if you learn to write and you learn to think and it teaches you how to add it, you know, to concentrate on each word, to evaluate every phrase, to evaluate every sentence, to evaluate the organization of senses within paragraphs and paragraphs within sequenced properly within the essay and to think about how to produce a set of thoughts and then how to critically evaluate them. So that's fun. That's going very well. We have like I said about 8,000 subscribers now and about, I think it's about 80,000 users. And so that's a good project because we like to teach a million people to write. I think the ordinary person, if they used essay instead of a standard word processor, the first thing they wrote would be the best thing they ever wrote right off the bat. Because we built the tools right into the software and it steps you through the process of writing. How so? Well, one of the features for example is, so imagine that you imagine that you want to write about something, whatever it is. The first question is, what problem are you trying to solve? What's the question here? And then there's an injunction in the documentation. If the question that you're trying to solve doesn't grip you, then you're starting the whole bloody thing off with a lie. It has to be something you care about. It has to be something that grips you. So it has to be a question you want to answer to. You like the questions you ask in the podcast. Then what? Well, then you write down what you think. And if you don't know enough, go read. And then write down what you think. And don't worry about ordering it. Just get it down. And then it steps you through. It's like, okay, here's a paragraph you wrote. Well, break the paragraph into sentences. Now, here's a little box that opens up. Write five variants of the sentence. Shorten it, make it more concise. Write five variants that makes that sentence precise. When you get a better sentence, hit click and it'll snap into the essay. Then there's another module that helps you move the sentences around. So here's your paragraph. Well, maybe there are too many sentences in it and the sentences aren't in the right place. Order the sentences so that each paragraph is like a little coherent essay. And so then do the same thing with the paragraphs. If you run through the, so we ask people, separate production from editing. Get the question right. Do your research. Separate production from editing. Overproduce, then edit. Edit for words. Did you use the right word in every word, the right word? Is every phrase the right phrase? Are the phrases organized into proper sentences? Are the sentences sequenced properly? And so that's the editing. And that's, there's no difference between that really in critical thinking. So that's the essay app. And I used that process for my students earlier iterations of this and by the third draft of the essays they wrote there was the best essays they ever wrote in their life. Like this actually works. It's how I write by the way for whatever utility that might be. You know, it is how I write. I tried to formalize that and. And then with my daughter, Makayla, I've started this Peterson Academy and our plan is a funny plan. We want to drive the cost of a bouncer's degree down to $4,000. And so we've got 30 professors on board so far. I've been able to identify stellar lectures from all over the world. We bought a studio in Miami. We have the professors come there. We try to be very hospitable and to treat them well, which doesn't generally happen at universities by the way. And they lecture for, they give four, two hour lectures on whatever they really want to teach about. And we just, they have a lot of autonomy, you know, we're not constrained in them. Says the rule is we'll put an audience together for you in the studio. We want you to teach what you love at the edge of your ability. And we'll offer that too as many people as we possibly can. We're pursuing accreditation through a variety of different avenues. So we hope to be able to, what we'll do is take two or three of those eight hour lectures, bundle them together. That'll give you one university credit. We want to, we want to get actual credit for it. And then we're planning as well. We hope. So imagine we sell, we have charge tuition and we'll try to keep that low cost. Like I said, we want to knock the cost of the whole degree down to $4,000. That's 95% reduction in cost. That's the plan. And then if you're in the developed world, we'd like to offer you the opportunity to pair yourself with a student in the developing world who couldn't afford it. And we'll give them the opportunity for free. But they'll be like your partner. So that should produce some interesting partnerships between people, you know, but also give people who don't have access to high quality university level education, a real in. And we are talking to some different institutions, you know, more to break institutions about how accreditation might be pursued and how we could partner with them to also offer people other elements of the university experience that you can't easily virtualize. And we've developed a good app that adds a social component to it so that people can discuss the lectures well. They're, while they're watching them and, you know, can make social contacts and maybe have meet up groups in different cities. So we want to universalize higher education. And then we're going to set the grading system in stone. So the grade you'll get for this university will be your performance. So there'll be no grade inflation. So what we're hoping to is that if we're going to also, you know, amalgamate it with this essay program so that all our graduates are able to write, we're hoping that a degree from this university will indicate to employers a true level of competence. And so that's the plan. And we've got, like I said, we have 30 professors on board already. I recorded three lectures for it now. One on the Sermon on the Mount. So that was really fun. One on it'll be a two part one, but I did the first half of Nietzsche's Beyond Good Naval. And I did an eight hour summary of my book maps of meaning. And so we have all sorts of other people who are, you know, from Cambridge and Oxford and Stanford MIT. And then people from outside the academy too who are brilliant Jonathan Pazio just did a series on symbolic thought. He's absolutely brilliant. Deepest religious thinker I've ever met. Old Testament prophet man, something to see. So we're going to roll that out. We hope in November. And you know, I'm working with the daily wire and that seems to be going great too. They've, they've been great partners. They leave me the hell alone. I can still do my YouTube channel and offer it for nothing. You know, I do some extra work for them behind the scenes. I do a 30 minute interview after my, my YouTube interviews and put that behind the paywall. And I've done a bunch of documentaries for them. Someone Western civilization and they've been really good partners. They, like I said, they leave me alone and they help me. That's a pretty good deal. So. So and my wife and I are cruising all around the world, you know, doing these lectures all the time. That's fun. It's ridiculously entertaining. And she's getting really good at it too. She opens the show. She usually tells about a 10 minute story. But one of the rules from my latest book ties that in with her life. She's getting to be a real good public speaker. So that's really fun. She's got a good comedic touch. And my son's going to tour with us starting on the 30th. He's a musician and I've had a musician, David Carter opened my shows for the last 30 lectures. And he plays classical guitar. And so he does a 20 minute set while everyone's coming in and sit down. You know, and so that kind of sets a nice tone for the lecture. And then we do this exploration of an idea and I do Q&A with my wife. And that's the lectures. But it's an amazing amount of things you're doing. Like how do you have this energy? Like where are you getting all the energy to do all this stuff? It's got to be overwhelmed. Well, I'm not sick anymore. That helps. Yeah. Well, you seem this is what you're the better. You're the better. Yeah. You seem better now than you were even when I saw you a while ago. Oh, definitely. Yeah. Yeah. I've never done an interview with you where I was healthy. Wow. You know, like the best I ever got with you was about 60%. And so I'm about 80% now. You seem greater. You seem like completely there. Much better. Well, it's hard to be completely there. And there are people who would debate that. Right. A short. But yeah. But the lectures, it's such an adventure. It's so crazy. It's so positive. You know, I don't talk about political things much at the lectures. I'll make a joke now and then not about it. But mostly it's metaphysical exploration, you know, exploration of narrative. I would say and people come there because for the same reason they listen to you, you know, they're trying to figure something out. Yeah. Well, there's a deep hunger for that because there are a lot of people that don't feel served by the narrative that they're being fed. Yeah. And they also don't feel like there's anyone around them that they aspire to. Yeah. There's no one around them that seems to be living a life that looks satisfying or rewarding or attractive. Yeah. And that's more, so one of the things, so I was doing a different lecture every night for about 70 minutes and then doing a Q&A. And that was wearing me out because it was sort of like writing a whole book chapter every night, you know, because I want really want to do something different. And, you know, I draw from stories that I've aggregated. It's not like 100% new content, but it's like variations on a theme. And that was wearing me out. So Tammy suggested at one point that we just try a straight Q&A. And that doesn't take as much preparation. And I kind of like the pressure of having to spontaneously answer. And people like that just as much. And so that made it a bit more sustainable, but was also cool. And we didn't realize this. People like to see her and I interacting, you know. And that was a real revelation to us both because we were doing it more for reasons of necessity. You know, knowing that people would like the Q&A's, but it simplified things. because we're, you know, I don't know how many shows we did last year. It's 200 maybe like a lot all over the place. So it's, it's, you know, it's, it's man, it's time to get to the next venue and be prepared. So it was tiring. But one of the things that happened was that people were seemed really pleased to see us interacting. And we realized that there is a lot of people out there who never really had a good model of couples communication ever. And that's pretty sad, you know. So yeah, there's, there's plenty of wandering around in the desert. But I'll tell you something else that's cool. You know, when I first did this back in 2018, did a mean greet after. And I'd say a third of the people were in pretty bad emotional distress. You know, often when they came to meet me after the lectures, they're in tears or, you know, they had some pretty brutal story to relate and pretty emotionally grueling to see that night after night. And now there's way more women who come. There's way more couples and the guys are way more put together. So that's pretty cool. You know, and lots of them, especially the ones that get the mean greet tickets, they've been listening for five or six years and they've really been trying to put their lives together. You know, and so most of the stories I hear now are stories like I was in a pretty rough place. But I started to put my life together. And you know, now I have this girlfriend and we're getting married or we're just having a first child and now I have a business. And here's what I'm doing that's really working and they're all standing up and a half of them are in suits or three-piece suits. And that's something, man. I mean, that's partly why we keep doing it. Tammy and I, you know, it's like it's so positive. Think, well, why wouldn't you keep doing that? That's an overwhelming responsibility too, right? Like the feeling behind that that you've had this enormously positive impact on these people's lives. And then that's not something you set out to do as a person. Like this is almost something that was thrust upon you as an adult. I mean, you became very famous as a professor who was, you know, fairly anonymous. You just teaching. And then all of a sudden you've been thrust into the public conversation worldwide. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's some of it's, it's what would you say. It's utterly unpredictable and it's utterly surreal and entirely predictable. Both at the same time because I knew that what I was dealing with when I was working at Harvard, when I was writing maps and meaning I knew that there was something about that was core. I knew it. And I could tell partly because of the effect that was having on my students when I was teaching. Because I was watching that and the typical comment for my course, evaluation was this course changed the way I looked at everything. And so, and that's a pretty radical claim. And you know, I had 20 years of that practicing doing that. And then I started lecturing on TV Ontario because my classes were popular. And that got an audience and then, you know, I had a pretty big corpus of work online by the time I object it to Bill C16. And then all that brought a huge audience in partly for the scandal, but I had all that content. So they came for this scandal, but stayed for the content. But it is, there is an element of predictability to it because I am a clinician. So I'm interested in helping people and that's a deep interest. You know, and part of that's curiosity and part of that's fear of hell, I would say, you know, so to speak. I've always been interested in being an educator. I like lecturing. I like having students. And so, you know, I'm a clinical educator. And then I started playing with YouTube and turned out that could scale. You know, and then there's this hunger for a uniting narrative that, well, was identified by people like Carl Jung, you know, 60 years ago. So there's an element of it in some way that's inevitable. God died, you know, that's Nietzsche's pronouncement. Well, that sets up a certain kind of stage, a certain kind of hunger. You know, it's the hunger for the revivocation of the dead father in archetypal terms. And that's responsibility, most fundamentally. It's discipline. That's the sort of thing, jocko pushes, you know, on YouTube to a large degree. Because young men, they're clamor and for disciplined responsibility, weirdly enough. And you can't offer that if you think that all male activity is just toxic masculinity, you know. But you're wise enough to know that's not true. And so it's our jocko last night by the way. So that was last night or the night before. So that was quite fun. It's the, there's a thing that men need, they need difficult tasks. And they need to know that they can overcome difficult tasks. And through that, you develop your, your human potential, you develop what you're capable of doing. And if you don't encounter those things in life, you remain feeble. And you may see the evil. Yeah. And very, not just immature, but insecure. Well, not just insecure, but insecure, then bitter. Yeah. Then resentful. Yes. Then dangerous. Yes. Right. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The alternative, like weak insecure, bitter men are not harmless. No. No. And they try to damage people. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And they try to damage people oftentimes because in comparison to those people, they're trying to damage, they feel they, they come up short. They don't like it. They don't like the. And they try to damage people oftentimes because in comparison to those people they're trying to damage They feel they come up short. They don't like it. They don't like the feeling and they they try to Destroy the thing that makes them feel bad. That's Cain and Abel. Yeah That's and it's so interesting because in the biblical story That's the first story about human beings right because Adam and Eve are made by God They don't count the first two human beings are fratrous side of brothers Engaged in a war of envy that degenerates into the flood and the tower of Babel It's stunning It's stunning. It's so relatable. I mean if you are a person that You know strives to work hard and accomplish things and you have grand ambitions You will find so many people that try to destroy that. Yeah, but but I mean What's your life like when you go out in public people friendly? How often mostly 99% more more than 99% right? I'm friendly. Yeah, I know I know but still it's remarkable right I mean because you you're you're What would you earn access of contention online? But I mean you're very good at handling people. I've watched how you treat people But but it is the case that when you go out in public I mean how many bad encounters if you had with people in public very few very very few right? Yeah, well, that's the same with me. Yeah, and so it's also like when I'm in public. I'm in public doing my things, you know I mean either what if you're just walking around on the street though people are friendly. Yeah, and I suspect that's true wherever you go. Yes. Yeah, so so it's so interesting You know because there are people who are Motivated at least in part and sometimes almost completely by envy but most people aren't like that and even the people who are like that Mostly aren't like that 100% right. That's the thing right is that people are different depending upon the circumstances and I think most of the people that you either even interact with Negatively online if you choose to interact with them at all But most of the people that will post things negatively about you online if you could be alone with them and have a conversation with them Just a one-on-one conversation where you could find common ground. Oh most yeah, like most most student activists If you went to their parents house for dinner with them, you'd think well that kids like 85% like every other kid. That's a good way of thinking about it too, you know because If you don't understand this you get conspiratorial. Yeah, so Imagine there's a system of ideas We're talking about the system of ideas that might motivate some of the WEF You know top down shenanigans and you talked about the religious substrate and the idea that the planet has too many people on it It's not it's not like there's anybody there Who's fully possessed by those ideas? It's the ideas have a relationship That's part and parcel of the set of ideas and each person is a partial carrier of those ideas But if you get 200 people in a room who are partial carriers of that set of ideas You've got the whole set of ideas there. That's an animating spirit then it acts like a conspiracy And that isn't to say that there aren't sometimes also actual conspiracies, but it's very Interest useful to separate out the conspiratorial nature of a set of dynamic ideas From the people who are partial carriers of the ideas. So Jung Carl Jung said at one point People don't have ideas ideas have people and there's a religious idea That's reflective of that that the cosmos is a battle between principalities so that'd be like a battle between spirits and There's a real truth in that because the culture war we're in right now is a battle of Systems of ideas. This is why what's happening on the conservative front say in Florida has some danger It's like well we want to ban CRT it's like well That's a war that has to be raged in the realm of The abstract it has to be raged it has to be raged in you know metaphorically in heaven It's not as soon as you concretize it you fall prey to the same pathology. You'll end up Enabling sensors. It has to be debated Yeah, it has to be discussed. It has to be thrashed out for a number of ideas Absolutely. Yeah, you can't defeat bad ideas. I don't think you can defeat bad ideas with law You have to defeat bad ideas. I think you have to defeat bad ideas with a better vision actually I don't even think you can defeat bad ideas in some sense Right because there's always the danger that well fighting them you turn into a monster You know, what's that Nietzsche and statement if you gaze to don't forget that when you gaze into an abyss That the abyss also gazes into you and that someone who spends all their time fighting monsters can easily turn into a monster Themself, well isn't it also that there's different people at different stages of their lives That will adopt these ideas because they seem to most attractive at the time And it doesn't necessarily mean that that person will hang on to that their whole life and oftentimes people Shed terrible ideas that they have adopted early in their life because they recognize the flaws and the only way to Well everyone's like that. He doesn't get ossified. You know right and the only way to recognize those flaws is to have those flaws Exposed you have to you have to have conversations you have to have and they have to think yeah They have to be honest conversations and you have to have the ability to analyze them Yeah, well what happens? You know when you have an honest conversation that's in grossing is that you're actually optimizing abstract death so you know Maybe how your head's full of stupid ideas? Why are they stupid go act them out and you die? That's why they're stupid or you suffer and so What you hope happens is you can kill off those ideas before they possess you to the point where you act them out So what do you do you go test them in conversation and hopefully? You know you and I we've been talking all day and hopefully the consequence of that is that we both come away from this discussion Somewhat less stupid and blind than we were and the reason that that happened is because each of us have let go of some presumptions that were tyrannical you know not enough to you know if you lose your whole system of belief it just takes you out You're in the desert but you can do that optimally So just the right amount of you is dying then you have to do that to sustain your life because To sustain your life biologically parts you were dying all the time like unrestricted growth is just cancer Right so you have to optimally die all the time to live and it's the same on the idea front and you Experience optimal death and growth in meaningful conversation You know you can do that well thinking too, but most people think by talking In fact thinking is internalized talking. Yes, so most people think by talking. That's what the danger is the podcast Thinking out loud. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, but it's also one of the things that makes it exciting right because if it's real Then people are long for the and it's cool because I kind of do the same thing in my lectures I don't prepare my lectures I have a question in mind that I'm trying to answer then I go on stage and I try to answer the question Hmm or investigate the question at least, you know and as I've got better at it Usually what happens is I go a bunch of different places Then I can snap it together at the end and that's fun, you know, it's like Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, and you just bring them all together at the end It's like the punch final punch line of the median set exactly like that. Yeah, exactly like one bits are constructed All back that's yeah, that's what you're trying to do when you're constructing bits you're trying to figure out how to tie it together Ultimately, yeah, yeah, well it dispense with what's unnecessary Right to get to the gist and to tie it together and it's so fun when you can land on your feet I've been watching Tammy do this when she's learning how to tell a story on stage, you know and her stories are about 10 minutes long She has an opening here's the problem set and then she lays out some narrative and says well Here's you know how we could explore this and now and then she can go and Nice oh, it's so nice. Yeah, you got to the point. Yeah, and the point a that's the direction The moral of the story jokes do that all the time. Yeah, so let's go. I think the closest thing to what I do On stage is probably what stand-up comedians do You know although you guys usually run through a prepared set but you have a universe of potential jokes, right? And my suspicions are that you're Watching how the audience is reacting and crafting what you're selecting to you know to bring everybody on board And you want to tell a story that has a narrative arc and it comes to a conclusion Have you noticed in your podcast that if you're really paying attention to the dialogue that the podcast has a narrative article by itself. Yes. It's so cool That it'll you'll see oh we're halfway done and then Well now here's the natural ending. Yeah, and so and that's cool that that narrative emerges Just as a consequence of focused attention, but it's definitely the case. Yeah, so Yeah, it's um It's a very fascinating way to explore life publicly right it's a very fascinating way to explore life publicly and Allow other people to take in some of these thoughts and form their own. Yeah Because that's what a lot of people are doing. Yeah, they're listening to this and they're they're actually a Thinking about various aspects that resonate with their own life. Yeah, and then applying their own unique View of the world to that. Yeah, and you know and seeing how they could maybe Use it to enhance them or whatever they disagree on well why they disagree on it and solidify that position Well, and the good podcast does Just two things at least it Presents people with some new information which it was part of why I love doing podcast I could such a privilege and you know this perfectly well to call anybody You think the world up and say I'm pretty curious about this right and you look like you know more about that than anyone else in the world Would you like to talk about it? Yes, it's like that's a pretty good deal. Yeah, so you get to have that experience of learning and But at the same time You can model the exploration of ideas. Yeah And so then people they learn two things they learn whatever the The facts of the matter are let's say but they also learned how to conduct an exploratory dialogue and both of those You learn those both at the same time. That's perfect You know and that's really you're basically using the socratic method of instruction Right because the socratic method was all inquiry What do you think about that? What do you think about that? Like you're not asking the audience But you are essentially because you're a proxy for the audience It's like I don't know what this means. Do you want to explain it? Well oftentimes I am too because I might not even I might know what the answer is But I have to ask it anywhere because I want other people to know it right so instead of saying it I have to ask Yeah, and I have and also it's like I want to know how people think and how they come to these conclusions Which is really fascinating in and of itself because everyone's path to Whatever their own conclusions are very different. Yes. Yes. Well one of the things you learn in therapy as a therapist is You can't really provide people with the answer So maybe you know someone will come to me with a set of problems And I'll think well, I know how to solve that I could just tell them but what happens if you tell them is they just don't do it right So what you want to do is you want to Ask them a bunch of questions about the problem and about what they might view as a hypothetical solution And then they develop the intermediary steps Along the way to the conclusion then they're actually likely to act it out same thing happens with kids You have to walk people through the process and you know a lot of what Well what we both do I think in our podcast is we invite people along for the ride right instead of presenting a package of Pre-programmed options. Yeah, of course. Yeah, you know you get that a bit because you select the people you talk to but What you can't talk to everyone and you're gonna have a viewpoint so that's you know as long as you're not playing games with that or any more than you You know Then you can avoid yeah Yeah, it's uh for me this has been like an unexpected Education in a very bizarre way when I first started doing it. I didn't think I was gonna get educated I thought I was just gonna have fun with my friends and fuck around And then along the line bringing guests on and then it just sort of evolved on its own Hmm. Yeah, right. I always I often think that this thing made itself. Yeah As far as that sounds well Okay Yes, and no way it made itself in some way but You followed the golden thread of what was meaningful and interesting You know and that is a spirit that that's the golden thread that leads you out of the maze You know and something you'll be conducting a podcast and something will grip you and you think oh there's something There and then maybe if you're awake and aware then you start doing more of that, you know and that has a life So that's what happens in the story of Exodus When Moses encounters the burning bush because it's a bush, hey, it's not an oak tree. That's 300 feet tall Right, this is the bush and so the story goes Moses is walking along and some catches his eye He didn't have to go over and look but catches his eye and he thinks What the hell is that and then he goes over and he starts to pay attention and the more he pays attention the more The more the voice of God manifests itself to him. That's what that story means is you know so something catches your interest in glimmers Then that's the gold beckoning in the distance it captures your interest and then if you pursue that like it leads you into the depths We've I don't know if we've talked about this before but what do you think about those scholars in Israel that believe that the burning bush Was some sort of a psychedelic experience? Oh? Well, I think we have no idea how psychedelic experience shape Religious presumption have you read Brian Murr? Yes, absolutely. I interviewed him. Oh, yeah I mean look that we know that the shamanic tradition which is God only knows how many tens of thousands of years old You know might be is it millions of years old? Maybe you know human beings have been using fire for two million years. It like it could be really really old and the the shamanic Tradition is definitely a psychedelic tradition and one of the things Marescu did was show quite clearly that the all of Greek culture was Embedded in what looks like a collective psychedelic experience and so Yeah, I think that I think the evidence night Murchay Ali had a great religious scholar studied shamanism And he thought that the use of psychedelics was a degeneration of the original tradition But I don't think that's true at all. I think that the psychedelic tradition is part and parcel of the universal religious heritage of mankind and Like I don't know what that means, you know I've talked to people like Robin Carhart Harris who studies the neurology of psychedelic experience and he said that what it does is produce something akin to a to a Hyper-stress Experience imagine you're extremely stressed like your life's in danger And so you have to open yourself up to the possibility of radically new ideas Well a psychedelic substance puts you in that state of mind And so that can be hellish because you can you can collapse into like a catastrophic fight or flight Defensive response and magnified by the hallucinogen that you're just in hell But that isn't the only necessary outcome And so the psychedelic experience definitely mimics something like radical learning and it does it also seems to Reduce the effect of memory on perception Because most of what you see in the world is memory It's just a short. That's why you know when you look at a word printed word you read the word You can't not read the word. That's because you you see in the memory Not seeing like when I looked the sign behind you I'm not lost in the yellow in the details. I see the Joe Rogan experience Right it's part and parcel of the perception. It's all memory What a psychedelic does in part is remove the inhibition of memory from perception That re-emurses you in the complex world And shows you how remarkable and beyond comprehension everything really is that's real But uh The question is what to do with that. You know Timothy Larry his doctrine was turn on Tune in turn on tune in drop out and that devastated the whole culture that idea It's like well if we just shed our presuppositions and the whole industrial nightmare We'd all be freedom loving hippies wandering around need and it's like No, I wanted to do a line of psychedelic products a turn on tune in grow up Right That's much much much funnier much better. Yeah, and that's also possible That's a possible path through this sort of Quest for spiritual and light yeah, and it's not it's the Timothy Leary thing was I mean It was dismissed by a lot of other psychedelic pioneers of the time they they saw the flaws. Oh, yeah Yeah, definitely the people who are already experimenting with ideas of proper sat and also that back in the early 60s Yes, and also the people that had no desire to run a group of like-minded people Which Leary did yeah, he wanted He'd be counterculture and also I think he fell into the cult of personality Felt into this thing that happens when too many people are paying attention to you. Yeah, you think you have all the answers Yeah, it's very dangerous. Yeah, especially if you combine that with psychedelic Yes, yes, yes That turns out to be a problem right and they the intoxicating grip of that the power that you have over these people which is very It's unavoidable and if you are a guru, you know air quotes You're the person doing that like how many of them just start cults and how many of them? You know it winds up being sexual Well, you was asked once to comment on psychedelic experience I think he was asked about what Huxley was doing and Jung's answer was beware of unearned wisdom Right very smart very very smart. Yeah unearned Because with all almost all wisdom comes at a price and a long long road to get to that. Yeah, right Yeah, it's not a quick fix. There's no quick fixes. It's the idea that you're just gonna trip balls and figure it all out Yeah, and then you've got it. Yeah. No, no, no And everyone that I know that thinks they've figured it out or the most lost yeah, they're you know though Especially the ones that are housing into the experience like that No one that you know like Socrates can Socrates may have learned this from psychedelic experience seems quite probable because he participated in the Illucinian mysteries. Yes, he said I know that I don't know you know He was radically open to the revelation of his own ignorance and certainly Psychedelics can provide that. It's like oh, I see I don't have a clue. Yeah. Yeah, that's the first step That's the first lesson you learn is you don't know shit And also that just that the overwhelming Understanding that this is available but this experience is available and it's so alien to modern experience and it just an average Every day experience that this thing is behind the veil man. Yeah, and it's right there It's so scary for people. Yeah, well, maybe this time You know there are wise people working on that front like Roland Griffiths who unfortunately is very sick at the moment and You know, he's he's approached this with a lot more reverence and respect than more casual experimenters like Larry and maybe this time You know God willing will get it right and introduce these strange ancient chemicals back into our culture without blowing the lid right off it Right, and I think one of the best gateways to that is dealing with people who have trauma Soldiers with you know PTSD whether they're doing the MDMA therapy and also other people That have had violent experiences in their life with MDMA Yeah, well, and Griffiths has helped people deal with you know paralyzing death anxiety consequential to cancer diagnosis Yeah, you know in those studies. They're very they're very dry You know, we gave so the cyber into a group of people who are suffering from cancer and their Relationship with death radically transformed. You know the implication is somehow that's a chemical transformation And it was to some degree it is because it was induced by a chemical, but there's a mystery there It's like well what happened to those people in that six hours that Transformed their vision of death right? That's a yeah And what happens a bit of a mystery there during the most profound psychedelic experiences Are you actually in the presence of God? I mean is it are there moments during those things where you kind of see it? You know that the veil does get lifted and you do briefly for a moment I think the same thing happens to you to some degree when you fall in love Hmm, you know like when you you're in love with your kids as well You see them Better than you've ever seen anyone. Yeah, you see deeper into them than you've ever seen into anyone. Yeah So love is the partial lifting of that veil of ignorance. Yeah, I think that's true of romantic love too is you you see into the soul of the other Person so to speak you see what they could be yeah, that's what you and they see what you could be and you fall in love with that Possibility and that's not a delusion. It's not a chemical delusion. It's the basis of life itself It's real. I think it also applies to all love I'm just love for your fellow human being and just that an approaching people yeah If you can manage it but approaching people in that way Even people that have wronged you even people that are you know that are lost Yeah, apply yeah, it's really good to remember that. You know one of the things I try to do with my family when we get You know sporadically attacked often by people who really would like to let's say take me out and along with me my family We sit and talk until we find a pathway forward that is Characterized by the least amount of you know desire for revenge and anger possible after contemplating that yes They anger and the revenge quite deeply, you know because you have to let that voice have it say too Yeah, that's there's no You know there's no positive outcome in revenge. No, it's a horrible path to go down and in the moment It also there's a extreme desire To feed that monster and that's that's what's dangerous with people that's for sure I mean, that's a narrative that's been going on for I mean Such a satisfying narrative too like the revenge film whether revenge novel well Yeah, and it's hard to distinguish that from justice Right, because you don't want the wrong doer to escape Scott free right, you know So it's a very thin line but with regards to your enemies is just like well What what do you hope maybe for your enemies while you hope they wouldn't be enemies that would be good? Wouldn't it be better if they realize that would really be good Would it be okay if they only suffered enough to learn? You know assuming they're wrong and you're right and I'm careful about that assumption But sometimes you know you do get attacked by people who are clearly bad actors It's still be better if you could have what you really wanted it still be better if they could be transformed into people who could see the light and oftentimes their suffering is their knowledge that they were wrong Yeah, and when people have wrongly attacked you they and then realize that they have to realize in themselves this flaw that they have in their personality That's why Tyrant's double down. Yes, that's that's another thing that's so cool about the Exodus story Yeah, you know even when God himself reveals himself to the Pharaoh Essentially all he does is double down. Yeah, that's you know when you might say well, that's what tyrants do It's like no, no, that's that's what people do when we're talking about groups like the world economic form Do you think there's also there's a there's a draw to that? I don't know if it's people are true. Do or people that go there You're at the in crowd. Oh, you're with the people that are the big decision makers that are going to be in power You're with the people that know where the bunker is if the nuclear bombs drop You're with the people that are making the decisions that are shaping Politics behind the scenes that are manipulating the relationships which we incorporateions and politicians and lawmakers and across the board and so there's this Desire the people always have to be a part of the in crowd or the part of the secret group That's running things which is why groups that are running things are so dangerous Yeah, well, this is also something that we're concerned about with regard to this new organization. That's what I wanted to bring up Oh, yeah, man Absolutely I mean the last thing that we're hoping is that we create a new thing that just turns into another WEF in 20 years, you know regardless of what we want, right? And it's a tricky problem because there has to be some degree of international communication and consensus Right because we all do live on the same planet and we're pretty integrated now and so there has to be something approximating Well, like I said an international conversation But the danger is the Tower of Babel and the danger is that even engaging in that conversation Let alone leading it leading it right, you know just ends up producing exactly the same outcome. That's hopefully we have people who are wise enough to First of all not want that for themselves because they know about the danger You know the danger is he lose yourself in real sense and and and also who are humble enough in With regard to their conception of their own ignorance that they actually do Genuinely want to hear what other people have to say so you need extraordinary people to be a part of this Well, and then you loop then you get looped right back into that problem as you're surrounded by the extraordinary people I think what you part partly want to do is you want to remind yourself that part of the endeavor is to Help everyone reveal what's extraordinarily extraordinary within them. Yes, I just out staring everyone. Yes job is to call it out and I've seen Like I've seen extraordinary people in the worst possible circumstances You know people who are laboring under lives that were so bloody dreadful that it would take you a year just to describe it who were still Doing everything they could aim up Right poor people psychotic people alcoholic relatives devastated community ill like brutalized horrible childhood no friends. Yes, you know and still Looking around to see if they could find something good to do and you would never wish those circumstances upon anyone Because most people don't survive them. Yeah, but a few people get through those with incredible character Yeah, that's for sure like young me park. Yeah perfect example an amazing example Like her her childhood her life experience in North Korea is one of the most horrific stories I've ever heard my life But because of that because of that Horif the horrific nature of the experiences that she had she came out of this with this extraordinary character In this friend Charles Joseph a native carver from the west coast who He was in a residential school in Canada. It was one of the ones that were genuinely bad And it was like it was bad. It was like Auschwitz level bad. It was really bad and he was brutalized man You can't listen to him talk for 10 minutes without like the tears rolling down your eyes and You know, he was devastated when he emerged and but he put himself together You know he was on the street for a quick drink and Quit mocking about started carving like turned himself into quite this stellar creature You know amazing moral again. You would never wish that on anyone But but it's incredible how through that adversity you create this extraordinary person And that extraordinary person could be a great light to so many other people that are going through terrible times and define Themselves by the terrible circumstances that they find themselves in which is a real problem with people Yeah, well, that's part of that victim narrative Yeah, you know and one of the things that's so comical about the Exodus narrative is that that's really what happens to the Israelites When they're in the desert is they they turn into whiny back-biting victims Mm-hmm. That's what happens and it's like it's the same thing three thousand years ago It's like we don't know where we are we're lost. We're we're resentful about it We wish the tyranny would return Yeah, aren't we hard done by and and and Gossopy Same old story, man. It really is the same old story and this constant quest for meeting and understanding and fulfillment and life worth living Yeah, well thing I think the thing that's really being catalyzed for me You know over the course of my life but particularly in the last five or six years is that I don't think there is anything more real than that meaningful story And I mean real in every way. I mean real as a manifestation of the central structure of the material world real metaphysically And I mean real in every way. I mean real as a manifestation of the central structure of the material world, real, metaphysically, real, psychodelically, real, practically like real. So and I think that instinct that orient you towards meaning, that's the deepest connection you have to what is most real. You know because people say, well life isn't meaningful in its essence. That just means you're a reductionist materialist atheist in your initial presuppositions. It's easy to flip that and say no, no, the instinct that orient you towards engagement meaning that is the most real thing there is. Yes. So and I believe that it's also what helps you stay on the straight narrow when you're in pain. So how can anything be more real than that? What orient you when you're suffering? There's a definition of real. Real is that which orient you properly when you're suffering. So that's not the same claim as the object's real. Right. It's a different idea. But it's still real. It's more real. It's very real. Yeah. Yeah. And we are, I mean the thing that we have in common is we're all just human. And if we're all human there's always going to be this weirdness to existence and trying to figure out why and what it is. And also recognizing that some of the people that are defined why are so inherently flawed and they're very selfish in their definitions and you have to kind of sort that out and parse through it. And one of the things that's been amazing about having a podcast is to present people with these different minds that have found their own way through it. Yeah. Yeah. That's funny. Yeah. And what I'm going to be doing is to see how different and crazy and strange and interesting people really are. You listen to this like, you know, I had lots of clients in my practice who were pretty, they weren't people who would ever be put on a pedestal. You know, they were people who are in the dirt suffer in a way. But man, if you listen to them, they were so interesting that you just could hardly stand it. So how was a good thing to learn? Even that you see, you know, you find gold in very unexpected places, like I learned a lot from some of my most damaged clients. I would imagine just what's possible. Yeah. Well, and how much people could still strive towards what was good, even if they had every reason to be, you know, I had clients whose lives were so terrible. You'd think no matter what they did, you think, yeah, what's the wonder you did that? Because look what you went through. Right. And our presence, our sexual slayers, our prisons are filled with people like that. Right? Yeah. Well, Jordan, we just did another three hours of flu buying 10 minutes. Yep. Good to see you, Joe. It's great to see you. Thank you, George. I appreciate you very much. Oh, listen, the moment that that was happening, I had to reach out to you because I'm like, this is just so bizarre and crazy. And it just, it needs to be discovered. Well, like it's my fault. So I had to have you on. Yeah, yeah. All right. So when this does launch and when it's official, we could talk about it further, we will. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, my friend. Appreciate you. Bye, everybody. Bye.