The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night All day Oh Yeah, anyway, I'm just a giant fantasy video use it constantly. I guess it for Like I use the roll-ons for muscle aches and I use gummies and CBD MD is one of my sponsors, but this kill clip company. This is a this is actually a drink that I designed It tastes really good. Thank you. I like it Yeah, so many of the questions I get are about anxiety people like how do I control it? Yeah, people are stressed so the CBD is supposed to help with that it's supposed to help with that and I think it does a little bit One things that I found is a CBD with THC alleviates even more I can imagine a little THC to it. Yeah, I can imagine THC probably takes the edge off But it's also a balancing act, you know the problem like I used to get CBD with THC from a local company in L.A And they were so inconsistent in that like I'd take like I had a thing I do like three droplets. I'm like, okay, I got three droppers full and then one day I did three droppers and I was on the fucking moon I was like what are you what have you people done? Street side chemistry. Yeah, they're all bathtub chemists. Well, that's the thing the I think with supplements. They're so poorly regulated. Yeah, I'm not pushing for regulation last thing when you use regulation But it's like melatonin. I was talking Matt Walker about this who I'm sure and Matt amazing sleep scientist and turns out that the Amount of melatonin if it's listed like three milligrams or six milligrams It can vary anywhere from being 15 15 percent of what's actually listed on the bottle to 85 percent more and if you look at how much Melatonin is actually made by the pineal gland. It's a tiny fraction of the three milligrams that's supposed to be so Melatonin it's all over the place does that mess you up if you if you take melatonin? Does your body say well, I don't need any melatonin. I don't need to make it It might the bigger problem I never suggest melatonin for sleep for a couple reasons one is the reason kids don't go into puberty Until a certain age is because they have chronically high melatonin really melatonin Suppresses puberty. So does it suppress your endocrine system? So in humans, it's probably not as dramatic as it is in animals that are seasonal breeders But long ago when I was a graduate student at Berkeley We would do these experiments on these little what are called Siberian hamsters these little hamsters and these hamsters only breed in long days because light Basically suppresses melatonin. Okay, so in short days long nights seasonal breeding animals shut down breeding right humans can breed all year long of course But if you give melatonin to a male Siberian hamster It's testies go from the size of Standard marbles to the size of a grain of rice within a week. Wow, and the females They're ovaries in volute. They basically turn into like little shriveled not even raisins but little specs So when I hear about people taking a lot of melatonin and you've got this whole issue with falling testosterone dysregulated estrogen in men and women I just think it's not the best sleep aid the other thing and Matt and I have talked about this a lot recently Just we've been hanging out and chatting about science or as he would say splashing around in the science of sleep You know, he's a bird after all The problem with melatonin is it will help you fall asleep But it won't help you stay asleep and so some people have this problem They take melatonin they fall asleep and then they wake up three or four hours. So they wear his off Yeah, there are much better things for sleep much. What do you choose for sleep? Yeah, my favorite sleep cocktail based on really good solid peer reviewed science is magnesium three and eight. It's threo nat three and eight and Something called apogenin a p i g e n i n which is basically a derivative of kamomile Those two things work really well to they essentially shut down the forebrain thinking and dissipating part of your brain Allied it drift off into sleep really well. I need that all day then if you shut that down Well, and then theanine is also that is the third thing in the cocktail is anything I mean that is also a new tropic so theanine Also turns on what's called the GABA system It's like an inhibitory neurotransmitter and it helps suppress anxiety and kind of turn off thinking helps you make the transition into sleep Yeah, so it's magnesium three and eight. I'm gonna write sure thing I think I do need this. Yeah, and sleep is obviously pretty good, but it's always these are a game changer I'll be amazed if it doesn't help so it's magnesium three and eight t h r E o n a t e and that's important because there are a lot of t h t h r e o n a t e e o n a three and eight he's got it right there There it is young Jamie on the ball as always and basically you know people will probably want to know about source in this case You just go for price right? I'm gonna go for if you have a favorite brand go for that would go for price, you know So Magnesium three and eight can cross the blood brain barrier because when you take magnesium it goes into your gut Doesn't necessarily get into your brain you've got a barrier around your brain that prevents certain things from getting in because this tissue doesn't regenerate right so The three and eight form has it gets brought across the blood brain barrier by a Transporter other forms like magnesium mal eight magnesium citrate those are good for other things magnesium mal eight's great for muscle soreness magnesium citrates a great laxative But magnesium three and eight is gonna be the one that's gonna allow you to drift into sleep But you know it's interesting that you're saying this because one of the things that I've found that relaxes me more than anything is Epsom salts you know I'm a big proponent of the isolation tank in the sensory deprivation tank is all filled with magnesium It's all filled with with Epsom salts and it can go transdermal. Yeah, so that's a really unusual situation where if you you know You get and there are some magnesium creams and things like that, but you're not gonna get it in the kind of volume that you get it When you lie in it like that and when you do in that what what magnesium is that so that's usually a magnesium by glistinate which is another one of these forms of magnesium that can get transported into the brain really easily and Most people actually are magnesium deficient. I think Most people could would do well by increasing their magnesium intake. I supplement, but I think I supplement with citrate Yeah, so citrate has its value malate again It's good for muscle soreness, but three and eight what you want to take is about 300 to 400 milligrams But what you'll notice is on the bottle it'll say elemental magnesium and then magnesium will be 300 to 400 and then they'll say Equals 1,000 milligrams basically just go for 300 to 400 milligrams and you're good And then the other thing is Apigen and API GENIN and This stuff is terrific it basically that's the only source I'm aware of this is one cocktail Yeah, and I should be very clear that maybe because I've been blabbing about how is this this cocktail put together Did you just put this together? So I want to be really clear. I have no relationship to these brands or anything okay I've been blabbing about this on my podcast. Oh, that's why and so someone is clearly gonna making money out of the Amazon Partnership thing or whatever that's why they put it, but those are the three things. Well, I've been a bunch of people just started buying it together Yeah, this is just frequently bought together right so those are the three that I recommend and then L3 and and so for Apigen And it's 50 milligrams women see the prostate health thing and they freak out 50 Women see prostate health thing and they freak out. I think I was at testosterone Oh forgot I yeah, whereas all the the gym rats are like testosterone They get sick bro. Um, so Apigen and turns on a chloride channel The way neurons work is you got stuff going in and out of them and the chloride channel tends to turn off neurons a little bit in a good way and creates a Kind of a little sedative role. It kind of helps you drift off into sleep and it's the same stuff that's in Camomile tea so this has no negative side effects for women not that I'm aware of oh, I hate that term well You know, okay So I know a number of people including women that use it and are fine are still fertile You know, I don't know I mean I've haven't tested their fertility personally The idea of it the what the benefits for prostate health So it does seem to have a small amount of estrogen and Taganism it can block it just your gender receptors a little bit, but it's a very weak affinity Calm some ladies down We could not not mr. Huber. Thank you. Well just a joke years ago. Stop screaming Years ago. I worked on hormones and development. We could we could go there hormone effects on the brain That was my master's thesis, but the but theanine the ai n and e is also has a little bit of an anxiliotic and anti anxiety effect and There is something to think about with eating people now put theanine in energy drinks So that people will drink more energy drinks and not get the jitters Interesting and so it's it's showing up I recommend taking these 30 to 60 minutes before sleep and what do you recommend for a dose for theanine for a theanine? It's gonna be 100 to 400 milligrams However, if you're a sleepwalker or you have what are called night terrors where you have really disturbing dreams Leave the thing in out because the dreams on theanine are intense. Really? I like them But but I'm into dreaming. I think dreaming is a really interesting thing. Theanine is in That neuro gum isn't it young Jamie? Yeah, I think it's in there They're putting it at everything now the one thing about magnesium three nad I should mention is that there are some data not a ton that it's also neuroprotective So there's at least one study peer reviewed independent You know not not a company paying for the study but done by a laboratory with no bias The shows that magnesium three nate can offset some forms of age-related cognitive decline So that's all that's another reason to so is the cocktail of the three of them The reason for putting the three of them together There seems to be some sort of synergistic effect because some people of course will take something for a long period of time And then it'll stop working you can take these they're not habit forming I mean I've taken them consistently and then taken breaks and then go back on them and they really In most cases. I mean I guess if someone had a heart condition a serious heart condition anytime you mess with magnesium Because you have neurons in your heart magnesiums are involved in neuron function Obviously the usual things check with your doctor, you know, and obviously I'm not a doctor and professor So I profess things I'm not prescribing anything, but It's helped a tremendous number of people get into sleep better and stay asleep and and I think Walker would generally agree I can't speak for him. He's really into all this new like I don't want to take it away with his next kind of he's planning some really amazing Public education stuff. I've pulled him into the mix. He freaked a lot of people out on my podcast Well, he scared people a bit. Yeah. Yeah. So we talked about that. I mean like I think First of all, that was an important podcast. It just what it wasn't just a brilliant podcast It was important because people were ignoring sleep We heard be a heart go hard driving hard driving Yeah, and it's very important that people understand that the fundamental layer of health mental health and physical health is Regular quality sleep so he scared people appropriately I think and now he's shifting to how can you get better at sleeping and We're joining forces in that mission, but I want to be really clear. He's doing it on his own too He's got I don't want to give away what he's got planned, but basically he So Matt Davidson Claire me, you know, and Lex all the nerds were kind of like we're trying to get out there with the scientific Information and help people and so Matt's got some really terrific sleep science and actionable sleep tool Plans for the world. Well, when is he gonna do that? I'd love to have him back on when he's ready to launch that okay Matt I'm gonna out you know, so um, oh, yeah, so he and I had a discussion recently he is talking about doing a Brief weekly podcast on sleep health. Mm-hmm launching sometime in August or September. Oh, right Which I just think is gonna help so many people sure and brief would make it nice because it's easy to digest Yeah, I still haven't learned the brief thing. I'm not well known for being concise Well, you're talking to me, man. I can't shut the fuck up. Well, I would say I have kind of a Scientific Tourette's like some people would Tourette's they shout out like executives like I'm shouting out Scientific information. I can't help well. That's great. It just means you love what you do. I do. I can't help myself now Fending using the ending to help sleep is seem so strange to me that it would also be a Neutropic that it also be something that enhances brain function because it kind of I take Alpha brain just released it today alpha brain Alpha brain black label the strongest version of alpha brain which I've been Testing over the last six months Actually more is it alphac you PC high dose? No, I'll tell you exactly You know we we had our original alpha brain from on it and then there's an ad for it that they just put out today There's a new version of alpha brain that's been Really beneficial to me. It's just for me like you know We did some double blind placebo controlled studies at the Boston Center for memory when we first released to alpha brain So what do you think about this stuff here? So it's got theanine in it? Yep So the theanine is gonna take down some of the stimulant effect of the caffeine and kind of you know The best way to work the best neutropic is something that's gonna put you in alert but calm right? You don't want to be super jazz. You don't want to be on the infatomines. No, I mean if you're on them You think you want to be on them. You don't want to be on them So the theanine is gonna take the edge off the caffeine and hydroces the right form of caffeine Yes, so good people working on this The phosphidylstaring is gonna be it's gonna actually be a little bit of a reduction of cortisol which is good most people are riding high on cortisol and not a good way You want cortisol each day and we can talk about how to time it But you want to time that peak in the right way the citricoline is is going to increase acetylcholine Which is involved in the brain's ability to focus to create that tunnel of attention? Mm-hmm, which is critical right? I mean you can't be all over the place And the Ludumax 2020. I don't know that looks like a proprietary blend. Let's see Mary Gold Crap no it's oh luteen. That's gonna be good for so that those those are gonna be good for eye health and actually I looked into it based on our last discussion. Mm-hmm. So for moderate to advanced macular degeneration The data on lutein are good. It supports healthier vision. Yeah, I take lutein every day now I spoke to my chairman of ophthalmology at Stanford asked him what's the story on lutein? He said from moderate to severe macular degeneration it there seems to be a positive effect there for People that have mild or early forms of macular degeneration the data aren't there yet and I said But is it reasonable to consider taking it as a preventative? Yeah, I think that's a reasonable whatever has happened with me over the last year or so My vision has stopped to Deuterate that's great. Yeah, I have another theory. Okay, which is your living in Texas now no joke and because this isn't a joke Because you're living in Texas. You're actually getting longer vist of you as you're looking at things at a distance Mm-hmm. I'm guessing I don't know your home environment or your lifestyle terribly much but at all really but We know that long distance viewing and getting outside into sunlight can offset macular degeneration in myopia near-side in this there's a huge meaning thousands of subjects Study that was done in the US also overseas so their multiple site clinical trial showing that if children get outside For two hours a day even if they're on their phones Hate to say it but even if they're on their phones and they're reading and doing their thing They don't develop near-sidedness and just being outside in natural light seems to help Offset vision loss and the reason is that when you look at things up close The eyeball actually lengthens and because there's a lens there the light gets focused in front of the retina Not on the retina which is what you need in order to pass that information to the brain So that when you put on eyeglasses You're basically giving it another lens to focus to the right place when you look at things at a distance You would you use the musculature of the eye in a process called accommodation people can look it up We don't have to get into the details that lens becomes and and remains bendy the lens in your eye bends It actually squishes and bends. It's not like a standard rigid lens and so looking at things in the distance Getting natural light actually blue light is good for us in the sense during the daytime Improves eye health it reduces myopia near-sidedness and can offset the progression of Atrial A macular degeneration now people shouldn't be blasting themselves with bright light because that can cause other issues But if as long as the light isn't painful to look at your your in safe territory So if someone is experiencing the beginning of macular degeneration You recommend going somewhere where we could see long distances and just concentrate on just how often? Which should you do something like that for every 30 minutes of looking at a screen or a phone You should look off into the distance for about five minutes now that doesn't mean you have to do the thousand mile stare Just get outside I mean we I hate that we weren't designed because I wasn't consulted that the design phase and no one I know was either so I but we we evolved from lifestyles of looking at things up close and Far away and we're just spending a ton of time now looking at things up close in the visual system and the brain will adapt to that So kids that grow up only looking at computers and screens and don't go outside They require like coke bottle thick glasses right that the nerd thing like that nerds wear glasses part of that is because nerd spend a lot of time reading Right, so it's it's real. It's a real thing. Yeah. It's not just that they have glasses so that they become nerds Right people pick on them right self-defense nerdiness I guess you'd call it and you mentioned last time I think maybe it was offline that you have a friend who's a hunter Yeah, who's got great vision into his later years. Yeah, that's my friend Cam Hanes. That's mother. The runner. Yeah, he sees perfectly Yeah, it's ridiculous. Yeah, how old is my age that fuck I see his his running videos it's impressive. Well, he's a mule. David running and they're both mutants. Yeah, they that's right Yeah, like legitimate mutants. Yeah, absolutely. I don't understand how his joints are holding up That's what's driving me crazy like my knees. I'm getting stem cell shot into the PRP I do kind of shit. I'm just trying to keep him active. I think running I guess has got to be different than kicking things kicking things and and Jiu Jitsu are very hard in the knees. Yes, I've been very hard I think it was because maybe Jamie mentioned it or you mentioned the knees over toes guy. Yes. Yeah, I'll tell you why I love this guy He's amazing. I don't know him, but I'll tell you why I love him. I have always had an anterior tib machine in my gym Ah, because and I didn't know why I needed this thing, but I knew I needed it for that I would get hit problems and like a sciatica on one side because I like lifting a lift instance I was younger and it just makes me happier sane or human being and I noticed I would get this tweak on my right side and then I started using the anterior tib machine and it went away Now he could probably tell me why it's but got to be some ankle up to hip alignment So I bought one of those and people always laugh like then in my my home gym I got a tib machine a glute ham raise. I got one of these Louis Simmons reverse Oh, those are the best because of last time you yeah, made the top great is that machine amazing My posture is better. It's still not perfect. I still you know, I'm kind of that thing is saved my back Really amazing because I'm still doing stupid shit with my body. You know at 54 almost 54 next month beating it up though and the the reverse hyper is kept it strong enough so that I can be really active and Still do things like jujitsu and kickboxing and well you look at measures of longevity and of course in Claire is the is the ninja on all this But how fast people are able to stand up, you know somebody would say okay, let's go and they Like a slow low gear movement that takes half an hour, you know and other people they just pop up the ability to jump Very well correlated with health and well being and ability to I think that Sinclair says you know hip fractures or because of You know early death. It sounds weird. You think it's a hip fracture, but then your sedentary Circulation slows down everything gets messed up, but knees over toes guys I love his stuff because he's really pointing to the fact that this this muscle and the shin right is so vital for knee health And for me it's really helped with the lower lower back thing and it's an odd thing to sit there and kind of point your toes like Balorine exercises, but you feel stable when you run so strong feet strong shins Anyway seems it's really interesting when you realize how many of these things are connected to each other Like one of the things that I've found is that stretching your quadriceps Also stretches your lower back You know that stretch where you sit down on your heels and then you lean all the way back. Oh, yeah You know, he's amazing the knees over to yeah, the stuff he does all the way back and with no hands comes up I can't really do that I can't go flat on my back and come back up But I can go flat on my back and when I do that I feel a deep stretch in my lower back And it makes you realize like oh like there's some Tension in my thighs that's fucking with my lower back like for me stretching is so Imperative it's so important stretching and massage and I went without Well, I've kind of always stretched at least a little bit You know like maybe at least 10 minutes after after training But I've been doing a lot more I've been giving myself a full 35 minutes after training to just a stretch But then massage every week. I've been doing that every week for the last month or so. Is it that deep tissue like oh my god It's so painful these little thing out of me the role thing I wish this deep tissue. It's just horrific deep tissue painful massage like when they do my thighs I don't know what it is it about that guy that guy's a freak this guy. That's a freak. He's a freak And he's a sacrament or something. I don't know why things that I really love about this guy is that he gives away all this Information for free. Yes, like all this stuff that he puts on his Instagram. This can benefit so many people in his program It's very intensive if you go to the you know his I think it's called the the athletic truth group as I would as But just go to knees over toes guy on Instagram. He shows all these different actresses That shit that he's doing in that one that is so hard to do. That's like a Jefferson dent with the toes Yes, with the toes up That angle like that to be able to do that with a box and to drop a kettlebell down He's going way below his toes. That's incredible flexibility. Yeah I you know, I think somebody who is big on putting information out on the internet free free public education I love what he's doing. I also think that he's also can do all the things he's talking Yeah, Duncan basketball. Yes, and he's had multiple knee surgeries too. Oh, yeah. Yeah, multiple knee surgeries I believe he's actually had a Cadavre meniscus graft which is crazy. That means his his knees are faucet dead people in his house I've got dead people in one of my knees. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This knee. I got a Cadavre ACL It's actually not an ACL they take the Achilles tendon, which is thicker and stronger So it's 150% percent stronger than the original ACL and then they replace it and then the other one I have a patella tendon graph ACL Wow, yeah I mean I agree with completely with your statement. It's it's all connected Mm-hmm and the you know, this is a these days I'm still neuroscientist obviously thing about the brain a lot But the connections between the brain and body and all the stuff going on in the body We know knowing packs the brain. I mean it's a it's a whole system and I think that Maybe he was on here a few years ago Kelly star at yeah, yeah, oh, yeah He's a great guy And he always says you know if you injure a joint you want to work things above and below that joint You know and for years he's been telling me, you know I've got it like a shoulder that sits and the sciatica thing and he's like well train your neck Train your ankles train your you know It seems crazy. Why would I train my neck if my hip is off? But you know Kelly just replaced his knee. Did he really? Yeah? He had a bad ski accident a couple years ago and really just mangled the inside of his knee And he was doing his best to to try to repair it and try to help you know keep it healthy And just wasn't working anymore couldn't squat couldn't do a lot of things. He's a big guy He's a big guy, and he just had a near replacement Wow. Yeah, the resurfaced his knees, but if you go to his page Or they call this a ready state. Yeah, the ready state the ready state on Instagram. He's he had the knee resurfacing multiple months ago I think it was like five or six months ago and He's already deadlifting doing all kinds of crazy stuff and apparently the way they do it now if you go to a really good doctor You know, there's obviously you want to be real careful with something like this because this is something that It's not necessarily really permanent You know if you beat it up if because they're using different surfaces different people using different plastics and ceramics and different things to resurface the knee but You know, he's able to do all kinds of wild shit that he couldn't do anymore So for him his it was it was one of those choices that it's an unfortunate choice But he had to make it Michael Bissping UFC former UFC Middleweight champion He actually just got both of his knees resurfaced Wow. Yeah, because he's too fucking tougher his own good He was running while his knees were just mangled. You know, so the inside of his knees at carto It's all shot and the meniscus is shot because all the years of wrestling and kickboxing and all the fights that he's had and Yeah, he just got both of them resurfaced and he's running again. Wow. Yeah, Marshall our team is really hard on the knees I grew up skateboarding. I wasn't real close with them, but Danny way they got to jump the great Well China and all that he says his knees replace so many times. I need to get him into oh and recently he's been posting some stuff He said his knees replaced more than multiple times and Danny he put videos up on Instagram of them suctioning all the stuff out of the knee Oh, and he was doing some of this no anesthesia. Just like it. Why because he's a he's evil can evil Why is he doing that? I think to put it. I don't know. I don't know why I was doing it I mean when we were kids he was he was like that With her and page. I think at the doctor office. Oh my god. It wheelchair assistance. Yeah, so they went down to Columbia I think we're getting the bioe accelerator place. Yeah, they do and bring inside of the knee joint and the Danny's my age right and I mean so what's interesting based recently there's a lot of discussion about broken ankles Uh-huh. So when Danny way jumped the Great Wall of China sick I think it was 16 years ago recently it was in July when he did that That's one of those Steve. Oh there When when he jumped the Great Wall of China, he broke his ankle legitimate break of the ankle the day before and and then jumped it three times On a broken ankle and I have validation on this because the photographer for my podcast has a guy named Mike Blayback He's the DC photographer and he shot all this they got all of this on film So that the ankle was like this big. Oh my god. So the other night when I saw that fight Yeah, I'm just I don't know much about UFC So we're learning from friends and I saw that ankle break my first thought was well, you know You know, Danny might just wrap it up. Keep going. That was a different ankle break. He broke his tibia Tibia and his fibula. Yeah, it looked higher than that. Yeah, it was it was higher It was an injury that they had sustained That he had sustained in training He got it scanned if you go to Laura Senko's page. She's the zisim. This is on a broken ankle. This is him getting practice. Yeah, so oh my god So oh my god, what's wild is a week before this Next day with a fractured ankle a guy in a mountain bike died doing this a week before really yep On a mountain bike. Yeah on the same ramp. This is on a broken ankle. Look at this motherfucker. Oh my god Yeah, when we were kids. What a bad motherfucker. He is Jesus Christ. That is so wild. The amount of air he's getting is insane Wow, that's incredible. Well, we were walking like that with a broken ankle. I mean shit When we were kids we'd go to these what are called lock-ins they'd lock up the skatepark at night You could skate our own night But if you left you can come back in and Danny and his buddy call him a K They were this little gang that called himself the red dragons and they would just For every time it's like one run when you drop in and take a run Danny would get 20 runs to everyone's run. He just start I mean that he's always had that Just in the sleigh or like just that's why and well, that's you know That's that so John Kavanaugh whose con or Greg Excuse me whose con or Gregor's coach said that that's Laura Laura Sanko is one of the UFC commentators and she Did an excellent interview with Kavanaugh and they went over all the things that happened and one of things that happened in training camp was they think it probably cracked in training camp and He got it scanned and you know they said they might have been something there But it's hard to tell it's probably some sort of a hairline fracture and They did their best to just stay healthy until they get into the fight But if you go to Laura's interview, it's really excellent and Kavanaugh explains that and it looks like John Wayne par picked up something too It looked like the the shin was compromised on one of the leg kicks too Not the one that Dustin thought Dustin thought that Probably it's probably damaged more than once because Dustin checked one of the kicks and then pointed to Conner's shin like I know that hurt that hurt you But this one this is from John Wayne par's page. He throws this kick if you watch Conner's shin See look it kind of buckles right there see That hurt you. But this one, this is from John Wayne Parse page. He throws this kick. If you watch Connor Shin, see you look, it kind of buckles right there. See that? Oh, yeah. No, there's, that ain't good. Something's right. Now right after it buckles there, this is what John put up right afterwards. Connor then throws a front kick and that's it right there. And that front kick hits the knee. Now as it puts it down, his knee, his shin is shot now. Now he goes to throw a punch, he throws a punch and then as he steps back, then he doesn't have it on his. If you go to mine, you'll see that. If you go to mine, go to my Instagram and you'll see I reposted it from Eric Nickcick from extreme couture. So he throws this front kick and as he throws the front kick, it hits the elbow at the point. He's throwing it up. See that and bam. It catches it and then it goes down. And right now he's standing on that fractured. So he puts it behind him, watch. He puts it behind him and then he throws the punch. And then when he goes to throw the punch, he picks the foot off the ground right here's the left hand. That almost looks like it, but watch this. It did bend back, but watch this bang. Then it just gives out completely. See it folds over. So it snapped above the ankle. It wasn't actually the ankle. It was above the ankle. Here's it's really crazy. There's been so many fights in the UFC and to have all these breaks in a row. There's been the Jacques Christ Sosa got his arm broken, Chris Wiedman got his leg broken. There's been a ton of breaks over and over and over again over the last one. It's just people getting good at breaking people's bones. People like it's really what it is. And the Chris Wiedman was a freak accident. The crazy thing is Chris Wiedman, there's only been I think one, two, three, four. There's been four leg breaks like that in the UFC and the history of the UFC. Chris Wiedman's been involved in two of them. The odds are in stain in stain. Anderson Silva threw a kick. He checked it. Anderson broke his knee. He threw a kick. You're right. A hall checked it. Anderson broke his leg, rather. He you're right. A hall checked it. He broke his leg. Crazy. It's crazy. The odds of these things happening like in this number are nuts. That is crazy. Yeah. Brutal sport. Like I said, I'm only recently exposed to it. I do not understand the ground game because as an outsider, there's just no way to comprehend. I can't tell who's in control basically. Yeah, it's complicated. It's like watching chess if you don't understand the rules. Like why is he allowed to move like that with that piece? It's a real problem for judging because a lot of the judges don't understand the ground game either. It's getting better. The ones in Nevada are getting really good and that's the gold standard. But the problem is in other states, we'll go to these different states and the MMA commissions are very new. So they're using boxing judges. And the boxing judges don't understand some boxing judges. Don't understand these submission techniques. If they've trained, that's ideal. Ideal, you really should be at least a blue belt or above as a referee or as a judge rather. Seems right. And science, we don't let people review papers unless they have been in the game a long time. Yeah. It's careers are on the line. Ground game is complicated. I've been training since 1996 and there's still some shit that I don't understand. There's some moves like when I, there's a local Austin internet streaming Jiu Jitsu competition that happens every month. It's called Who's number one. It's the elite of the elite. It's really amazing because we get to go see it at the Marriott here. We'll go live and watch it. And sometimes there's techniques that these guys are doing. Then I'm like, what is it? Oh, the ankles. Oh, okay. Oh, I see. Oh, how did he do that? And then I'll have to go watch a video and go, oh, he sets it up with the wrist. And you see like these weird ankle locks or some new foot lock or some new way to set up a heel hook or some new kind of like a choke and you're like this, it's wild. Like Jiu Jitsu is, you know, there's two arms and two legs and a neck. Right. These are the basically the things that you're trying to submit. But the combinations and the variables when you add them all together, there's just so many possibilities of things that you can do to someone and things that you can do to counter someone when they're trying to do something to you. Sounds super scientific. I keep asking Lex Friedman to give me a tutorial. He's be perfect for it. Yeah, he'd be great. Break it down like a scientist like an urgent nerd just tells us how it works. And he's a legit black belt. So it would, yeah, you would enjoy it. I think I think you'd enjoy it, especially because you're such a physical guy. I mean, I like, I like physical effort. Yeah. It's a serious time commitment. Right. I mean, you're not going to do 45 minutes in now. You're there for a couple hours. You're there for a 90 minute class. Yeah. And you recommend if someone were going to start, they maybe two, two, three times a week or is it a daily commitment? No, you don't have to do it every day. I mean, if you did, you get better, but you'd also get injured. So I think, uh, I think in the beginning, two times a week is really good. And then build up to more if you enjoy it. I think you probably enjoy it. Um, but I've seen people get pretty damn good inside of six months, especially someone like you as very physical and already in shape. I'm going to go to shot. It'd be fun, man. There's a lot of lazy. I'll make you. There's a lot of places in, uh, where you're at out near, uh, in the, the Bay Area, but there's a lot of places here too. So there's, um, and this is, uh, John Donahur is actually moving here now. And he's moving. That's the literally the best Jiu Jitsu team on the guys saw your podcast with him and, and Lexus. He's a, is he a New Zealander guy or? Yes. He was a philosophy professor at Columbia. Wow. And fell in love with Jiu Jitsu. And now he's I mean, his dedication to it is obscene. It's, it's so, I mean, he's seven days a week. He teaches a class seven days a week. And, uh, he never takes days off, including holidays. He does, he takes no days off. He has no family. He has no girlfriend. And Jiu Jitsu. Just Jiu Jitsu. And when he's not, uh, doing classes, he's studying tape. Sounds like a scientist. Well, he's the literally, you couldn't ask for a better coach because he's so obsessed. And because of that obsession, it's almost impossible to get a better co, no, it's impossible to get a better coach. Literally impossible. You get a really good coach. There's great coaches. You cannot get a better coach. It's not possible. There's guys that are probably as good as John. I never met him, but there's guys that are really good. You know, Eddie Bravo is really fucking good. I mean, he might be as good as John as a coach. But to get a better coach is not humanly possible. And to get a more dedicated coach, they don't exist. You're not going to find someone that can teach the way that guy does seven days a week. And also afterwards, study tape all day. So like something will happen in class. Well, someone will catch someone with some sort of a technique. And then they'll say, okay, how, what is the counter to this? Like how does, how does someone get out of this? Let's start in that position and let's analyze it. So they'll do that. Now he'll go home and he'll find instances of this technique being used in MMA. This technique being used in wrestling and he'll analyze it and it'll break it down on slow motion and then it'll take notes and then it'll come back to class the next day with some new strategies. I love it. It's wild man because it really is a science. Jujitsu is a science. Yeah, the way you describe it is the way a science gets a scientist gets obsessed with a problem. Yeah. And then it starts thinking around and lab and it's it's a process. It's an amazing art. It really is. It's just too bad. The human body breaks so easy. Well, there are things. There are things. I mean, I think that the, you know, we hear a lot about age longevity, you know, living a long time, but there's the other one, which is performance longevity. Yes. And I'm very interested in that. And Stanford has a whole growing interest in human performance. And I've had an interest in this for a long time. I mean, you know, there are all the things that we talked about for normal health and well being for the general public, all the stuff before 2020, no one thought about it. Now people are saying, oh, maybe I should take some responsibility for my mental and physical health. Yeah, sleep, hydration, physical exercise, all the things that you talk about and that I certainly believe in wholeheartedly people should do in the hyper, in the world of high performance. You know, those same things, it's going to be light, temperature, hormone, you know, the hormone augmentation thing is always a little bit of a complicated discussion. But there's so much that's happening there right now that's really interesting. Like, well, for instance, sort of back to the topic of supplements, I always say, look, their behaviors are the fundamental layer. You have to do the right things. If for anything, for sleep, for learning, for sports performance, but then there's nutrition, supplementation, prescription drugs, and then off label stuff. And so we always think of it when you hear hormones and sports, you always think just the raw conversation by anabolic all the banned stuff. We can talk about that stuff and how it works. Years ago, I used to work on androgens testosterone and its derivatives and how it impacts brain development and body function, fear and also mental states. But there's a category of supplements that are very interesting that for most people who aren't exploring testosterone augmentation for sport, work very well to increase testosterone by about 100 to 200 points. Not, you know, 300, you know, not a tripling or anything like that. And the main ones are two substances. One is called tongue got alley, which is. Oh, yeah. Which is stuff's real. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Because the what happens is the testosterone molecule, it's basically carried in a cargo. So it can be in its free form, unbound form, free testosterone. And everyone says, oh, I want more free testosterone. You want more, but these what are called sex hormone binding globulins. So there's something called sex hormone binding globulin. And albumin, they carry the testosterone molecule to the different tissues of the body. So you don't want all your testosterone free. You want some of it bound up so that it can be delivered to the different tissues, including your brain. But if you have too much sex hormone binding globulin, the testosterone can't really do its things. Okay. So tongue got alley about 400 milligrams per day has the effect of raising free testosterone and overall testosterone by about 100 to 200 points. And so we're not talking about full TRT or blasting or now that I haven't always amused on YouTube, they now call it sports TRT. That's when you get above 200 milligrams per week. Supports. This is basically, you know, you've got TRT, which is typically about 200 milligrams for you. And we say 200 milligrams when you're looking at a syringe. What is that? So that's that is that a thousand milligrams. So the typical dose of testosterone replacement therapy is 200 milligrams given once every week to two weeks. But when you look at a full syringe, what is that? So for one cc one mill, that's 200 milligrams typically of sipionate, which is sold once cc a full cc is only one cc is not going to be that much. It's it. So it depends if you have a little narrows thrinz. Okay, right. But if you have a syringe that goes up to 10, that's that's 10 cc's that's 10 cc's. Yeah, that's a thousand. Oh, that makes sense. Right. So it would be two on that. And that's 200 milligrams. That's right. So well, okay. So as long as we're going down like two full syringes, I mean, I actually think that a lot of people who think they need TRT when I hear about guys in their twenties and thirties, look, I'm in my mid 40s. And I can tell you that you can get and maintain very healthy testosterone levels without TRT if you do the right things, the behaviors, the nutrition, all the other stuff early on. There's sometimes people are a pipe with canal syndrome and things like that. There's a lot of issues with guys that head injuries and with head injuries and absolutely and we be an interesting conversation and talk about the role of testosterone in neural repair it's very interesting. But when you look at TRT, I mean, the way that the clinics and the doctors typically do it is to give 200 milligrams and then send people out for two weeks and then they come back because they can charge them to come back repeatedly. It's clear that on without any TRT, the testes normally make anywhere from seven to 15 milligrams of testosterone per day. So taking this massive dose and then waiting two weeks is absolutely foolish. It doesn't, it's amazing to me that the medical profession does this because it doesn't match anything about the normal patterns of endocrinology. It's just not how the body works. The way it's been described to me to do it is to do it with an insulin syringe and to do a tiny amount every three days. Right. That's correct. So point two millig, you know, point two mill, so maybe you know, 20 to 60 milligrams every, every few days, every third day or so. That much more closely matches the normal pattern of release and avoids these estrogenic crashes and a lot of problems that are, that are layered onto estrogen are actually problems with prolactin, which is a molecule that's involved in milk, black down and lactating women, but it actually shuts down the sexual desire and aggression. You know, when this is interesting about prolactin, so this happens in brooding birds and it happens in humans. They've done this. A study published in the journal Nature, which is our kind of apex journal, showed that when the husbands of pregnant because of something, maybe a pheromone, maybe some odor of the pregnant woman actually increases the man's prolactin when they're pregnant puts body weight on the guy starts laying down body fat, presumably to prepare the father for the long sleepless nights ahead because humans have always co-parented. Wow. My mostly co-parented. We all know we all know we don't do far more, but it's true. You're out there who get fat. Don't feel bad. Yeah, so that's going on. The dad bodice is important due to an increase in prolactin and testosterone in prolactin, you're kind of working in opposite fashion. So it's a very interesting thing, but the way you describe it is correct. Now, for people that aren't getting prescribed TRT, but want the increase in testosterone, there are these plant compounds like Tonga Ali and another one, which is very interesting. It's a Nigerian shrub called fadogia agrestus and it mimics lutinizing hormone, which is the hormone that comes out of the hypothalamus that stimulates the testes if you got those in ovaries if you've got those to make more testosterone or estrogen. So those two herbal supplements together can give a significant boost in free and active testosterone. So you said Tonga Ali can give you 100 to 200? Yeah, about that. What is the other one, give you a fadogia? Fadogia has usually taken it about 600 milligrams and the most dramatic effect I've ever seen, what somebody you had is testosterone down in the low twos, or I think it was like low twos, and he got it up to the 700 range, but that's it. But that's an outlier, right? Most people are going to see about a three to 400 point increase. And that's what the two of them synergistically don't you will actually make the testes grow. It's a noticeable difference. So everybody wants that. Well, the reason I know about this stuff, a people are probably thinking like, you know, humans running gear out of the bag of his cars. And that's not what this is about is that I do a certain amount of work with military and I do a certain amount of work with professional athletes who cannot take and judging compounds out of a syringe because they'll lose their job. Right. Or they've been doing that and they want to come off, although, and I'm not going to out the organization, but there is one major professional sports organization where let's just say, if somebody gets injured, they have permission to take up to 200 milligrams a week of testosterone. Soccer. No. No. No. No. But good guess. You almost got me there. Because I almost countered with it with the actual thing that it is hockey. No, although those guys have the head injuries. So actually, so that the head injury thing is a serious problem obviously. So testosterone has the effects we're all aware of like deepening the voice facial hair, muscle growth, recovery, etc. Mostly because testosterone increases protein synthesis. You look at a young male in puberty, it's a protein synthesis machine. They eat the A.D. and they just grow and grow and grow and they're putting on muscles and they're lean and you know. So most often they're lean. But in any case, testosterone has some very interesting effects on the brain. The major mental effect of testosterone is it makes effort feel good. Oh, that makes sense. And the reason it does it is that the amygdala, this fear center in the brain, this anxiety center in the brain has androgen receptors. It has testosterone receptors. And so the way this works in animals and in humans as well is that for most species, the males of that species never get a chance to mate. So if you think about, I'll probably pick an example where you'll know the exception because I know you know a lot about natural animals and animals that are hunted. But if you think about animals with antlers, like rams, there's been a lot of research, believe it or not, on rams. It'd be fun. I'd love to to work on this. You know rams have enormous balls. And they have to fight for the right to mate. Yes. And the fighting is a choice, right? And the decision to walk away is a choice usually. They usually don't kill each other. Although I know some of the injuries can lead to death. So testosterone, these surges in testosterone that happens seasonally in certain species like rams or even these little hamsters, the males will rip each other's testicles off in order to fight for the right to mate. So males of a given species have to actually overcome the fear of pain and punishment. And the surgeon testosterone is what causes the shift to the willingness to engage in battle. And so when humans are taking low doses or reasonable doses of testosterone or they're increasing their testosterone, or they're going through puberty, effort and leaning into pain and challenge actually has the effect of making the body feel soothed and good. It's a drive. Just like sex is a drive or drinking water when your thirsty is a drive. This stuff is all anchored deep within the hypothalamus. This isn't the cognitive thing. That makes sense why young men in particular are really driven to hard exercise and sports that are very difficult that require extreme effort. Completely makes sense. Yeah. And why when people are testosterone depleted, they feel depressed. And when people have a surge of testosterone, they feel relief and anxiety provided it's in the appropriate range. My friend Steve Renella has a podcast called Meadeater and he had a squirrel expert on and they were talking about squirrels and squirrel estress. So when the female is an estress, the males only have a small window. They have like a six hour window and it doesn't happen very often. And so when you see squirrels chasing each other around screaming, going, that's generally what's going on and they throw each other out of trees. It's like the last call at a bar. It's a lot worse than that. So the last call at a bar barion compound because like when the male will be breeding with the female, another male will come along and pull him off and throw him off the tree. So these squirrels will fall like 60, 70 feet and bounce off the ground and run right back up the trees. They actually can survive falls. It's amazing. It's nuts, but they were saying that, you these squirrels, they're only in estress for a short amount of time. So when the males recognize that she's ready to go, they just start chasing there and then all the other ones come around. They start fighting. Yeah. The animal aggression is amazing. I saw this nature show. I forget which one of the adenborough ones it was, but it was a lion that was getting attacked by the hyenas. Oh yeah. And the hyenas know to go after the testicles and they know to go after the hyenquarters. They're just innately, maybe they learn it like wolves. Like wolves do that as well. What's interesting is another male lion comes along in this particular segment. Normally these two male lions would fight, but this other male lion comes in and essentially saves the other one, runs off the hyenas. And if you think about that behavior, it's incredible because this is an animal whose natural innate drive is to kill the other competition within his species, kill the other lion. And instead puts his own life on the line to try and rescue the other member of his species. And lions don't sit around and think like, oh, I'm going to post this later in Instagram or this is the right thing to do for my species. It's a switch in the brain. And those switches reside in the hypothalamus. This kind of core area of our brain right above the roof of our mouth. This is where all the fundamental drives are managed and regulated. And there are chock-a-block full of testosterone receptors and estrogen receptors. On the female side, it's also really interesting. So in species where there's pair bonding, humans are really good example of that, but also other animal species where there's strong elements of pair bonding, there is female female competition. Female animals have a given species start being nasty to one another in different ways. Sometimes it's actual physical aggression. Sometimes it's resource allocation. They start blocking other females from getting access to the the sires, the males that were desirable. They're so they're playing this game around DNA, but they're not conscious of it and humans do this too. When female female competition, when there's a male desirable male in the equation, can be brutal. Remember, I think there was this astronaut lady who was like drove in diapers down to kill somebody who was, you know, she was having an affair with this guy and she there was either the guy's girlfriend, the guy's wife, but she drove for a full day to go to meet the lady, master, try to get it open up the door. The girl wouldn't open up the door. She master and she'd worn a diaper so that she didn't have to stop to go to the bathroom. So she's fucking nutty. It's a nutty story. It's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. It's really wild. And you know, there are all sorts of interesting facts around how hormones regulate brain development. One of the ones that always makes usually men kind of kind of go wide-eyed is that during development, the testes give off testosterone. No surprise there. But the actual masculinization of traits within the brain and there are certain traits that anatomically you can see the masculinization of the brain is not by testosterone. It's by testosterone that's aromatized, converted into estrogen. So estrogen is actually what masculinizes the male brain. What? Absolutely. Wow. And so going back to the sort of the TRT discussion and the testosterone discussion, these days there's a lot of discussion around, oh, you know, if your testosterone's too high, then you know, it converts estrogen and that creates these effects like, you know, gynecomastia, growth of the male breast tissue, reduction in libido, all these things. Most of those effects are not actually caused by estrogen. This is a common misconception. Those effects are created by excessive levels of prolactin. And the more common medical practice now is to not include estrogen blockers when people are doing testosterone replacement. No one has to resolve none of those things because they actually have very bad effects on the vasculature of the brain. Is that clomophine as well? I don't, I'm not familiar with clomophine. If it's an estrogen antagonist or more in a romanase inhibitor, then you want estrogen. You don't want a ton of it, but for longevity of the brain and health of the brain and for repair over the brain, you need ample levels of estrogen. So prolactin is what's causing that growth of breast tissue because I went down a rabbit hole the other day and I watched a bunch of YouTube videos of guys having their, their, uh, what they call bitch tits have been removed. Yeah. And gynecomastia is, it's, it's a mass. It's, it looks like it's fluid. And it's vascularized. I spent some time with kid average, I teach an organatomy and I years ago, we used to do, I would do the labs also now. I don't do the lab part. Um, you occasionally see this as I have a colleague. He's a physician and he always says, you know, the male breast tissue, it's, it's, it's one of those things. It's there. It's just not very interesting. Um, it's just happens to be there and it's very small. But if there's a big increase in prolactin, then you will see that people who take, uh, opioids like with the opioid crisis or heroin users, the reason why they get breast development is because dopamine inhibits prolactin. So dopamine and testosterone are close cousins. And this will, this will immediately be familiar to you or anyone else that has had that experience of really being in the zone and hard driving and you're, you're getting wins. And we know that testosterone goes up as you're succeeding. We know this. I mean, I didn't do the blood serum analysis, but you can bet that the, in the pore a mygregor fight, if you did blood draws before, I don't know who's testosterone would be higher. It doesn't really matter. But afterward, you're going to see a significant decrease in, in the loser. And you're going to see a significant increase in the winner. You see this in day traders, you see this in school teachers, this day trainers. Yeah, because testosterone feeds back on the brain and releases more dopamine because the brain is trying to learn what was the behavior that led to the win. Is this a similar thing that happens with women when women succeed? Yeah. So women have some testosterone. Uh, they mostly make it from their adrenal glands, these little glands that ride atop the kidneys and the lower back. And at the core of the adrenals, they can release these androgens. Occasionally, um, and just as I kind of aside know, occasionally a child is born with a female child is born to the very in large clitoris. There's oftentimes you'll find like a, uh, a tumor on the adrenals in the pregnant mother. It's not entirely uncommon. There could be other reasons for that, but it's from elevated levels of androgens testosterone. And when females have a given species, you know, humans included when they have a win, they succeed, you know, get a a degree or something good happens to them. Whatever that is, they will release more dopamine and testosterone will go up a little bit. And testosterone is responsible. A little, um, increase in testosterone each month during the menstrual cycle is responsible for an increase in libido about 10 to 14 days before, uh, uh, ovulation that kicks in right around ovulation for the purpose of trying to fertilize the egg. Wow. And so is it a, can you measure the difference between the way a man's increases versus a women's increases? Like is there so, you know, this is, um, yeah, this gets into an interesting area because there aren't a lot of good studies on exactly what you're asking. Um, there's another androgen, another testosterone layer molecule, which is called DHT dihydro testosterone. That's what causes you to go bald. It's what causes you to go bald. And it's what causes beard growth. It has an inverse effect on the, on the hair follicles of the face and on the hair follicles and how much, um, how many DHT receptors you have is very strongly genetically determined. You go some areas of the world like Chile and the men are all bald with like serious spirits, legit beards, not like mine like which is an attempted a beard, right? They have real beards or in Afghanistan, serious beards. That's genetic. Okay. So DHT has 600 times the affinity for the testosterone receptor than actual testosterone, testosterone and nandralone, DECCA that the bodybuilders take to give that really hard look and the females in particular female bodybuilders like that gives that really hard kind of crisp grainy look. Um, DECCA has, it's basically, it's anabolic, but it's not androgenic. It causes a lot of the muscle growth, the muscle repair without creating the deepening of the voice. Actually, an Olympic runner was eliminated sadly, um, because she was a phenomenal runner for a, um, you know, uh, you're in, you're analysis that was positive for DECCA recently. She blamed it on a pork burrito that she had from a taco truck or something a couple nights before. And my mind on this is, I hope she did DECCA only because if she lost her career from a pork burrito, that's tragic. Right. Right. But if she took DECCA and lost her career, well, then, you know, the odds are, she took back, all right. It would be very unusual for a meat to maintain that, especially if the, if the meat was cooked. So no one asked me, but a few people reached out and I have some relationship to some Olympic committees, uh, not the ones that drug test, but Olympic teams, I should say to be specific. It, if that pork was cooked, the DECCA is destroyed. And you can't. Yeah, that's not cooked. Yeah, it just seems, it seems very unlikely. Yeah, it seems extremely didn't. Canelo Alvarez use as an excuse for why he had test test or some, some sort of steroid in the system. So he, um, as you can tell, I'm fascinated by this topic, I'm fascinated by the relationship between hormones, bodily changes, but also brain changes. Um, he, I believe, got, um, popped for clean butanol, which is a beta three agonist. So you've got receptors on your heart and on your blood vessels that dilate or constrict them. And there's a, uh, drug, climbuterol that is it creates a lot of increase in core body temperature, helps you burn fat, but it also has this effect of, of maintaining muscle. So it's not really a steroid. It's not working on hormones. It's working on this. So called autonomic nervous system heating and cooling of the body. And this is, I believe, because he cuts a lot of weight. And yeah, I don't know that. Yeah. Because when guys cut weight, one of the things that happens during these, uh, mean, it's not just starvation, but it's also massive dehydration. And you have a lot of decreased bodily function that's directly related to that. Yeah. The kidneys don't like dehydration. Those terrible, you know, and salt balance is so key. And I mean, gosh, you know, I always say this, you know, people who think they have low blood sugar, please try putting a little bit of salt in a glass of water and drinking it first. You know, most, my sister used to think she had lay bowel blood sugar, like pass out all this stuff. She's a bit of a hypochondriac anyway. But there's a genetic thing there. But the, um, I said, look, just consume a small teaspoon of salt in your water completely transformed everything. You, and especially if you're on a low carbohydrate diet, you're going to be extruding sodium neurons require sodium to generate what's called the action potential, the firing of neurons. So you're doing keto and trying to lose weight, drink a glass of water. And if you're drinking distilled water, you're pissing out all your, your electrolytes. So that's why fighters do that. So you're doing keto and trying to lose weight, drink a glass of water. And if you're drinking distilled water, you're pissing out all your electrolytes. Well, that's why fighters do that in this way. Yeah. So don't do that any more, by the way. They're getting injured. Yeah, they stop doing fighters used to drink a lot of distilled water, but there were some disastrous weight cuts and one Brazil that I'm aware of, where a guy died. Yeah. I think somebody builders died from Klunbuterol. So could he have gotten Klunbuterol from bad meat? Very unlikely. If you think about the cattle industry and what they want to do, they want to make a bigger, heavier cows, but they don't want to make big, heavy, super lean cows. They want marbling in there and all that stuff. Again, I didn't look at the blood analysis. If he got popped for Klunbuterol and he didn't take it, that's tragic. If he got popped for Klunbuterol and he did take it, it doesn't seem to be harming his career. That's the same, dude. I don't know what he's doing. But I do know that he is... He's one of those guys that's maintained his power as he's gone up and weight, which is really rare. It's rare that you can knock a guy out at 175 pounds. He used to be a world champion when you were 154 pound champions. Very rare. Doesn't mean it's unheard of. Some guys just carry that kind of punch and power. Manny Pacquiao won world titles in eight different weight classes, which is insanity. It's insanity. There's also always been talk of him being elevated. Well, they have great knowledge of these plant compounds and how they affect the hormone system overseas. Over here, we are... I'm a serious patriot, so it hurts me to say this, but we are miles behind what other countries are doing in terms of hormone, augmentation, and sports performance. In the realm of hormones, but also temperature modulation, there are incredible plant compounds out there. There's this thing that's now going wild on the internet. I've never tried it, but it's called Turkestarone. Turkestarone. They call Turk, and this is basically... I actually reviewed... I did one episode of my podcast All About Hormones, and I went deep into this literature and Turkestarone side by side with DECA or another testosterone derivative. It essentially acts the same way. It increases testosterone and performance and recovery. How much does it increase it by? Equivalent. Real. You know, your... This plant compound is equivalent to DECA? Essentially. Wow. Where do you get this stuff? People buy it on the internet. People buy this belt. Turkestarone, T-U-R-K-E, Stareone. And I want to be clear, I'm not recommending people cowboy their endocrinology. Too late. Turkestarone on Amazon. Yeah, that's probably not real. It's not? No, because... See, this is the problem. If you're not getting it prescription from a doctor, how do you know what you're getting? Oh, so the stuff that they're selling on Amazon is fake? Yes, so this... So this actually... I thought it came from Turkey, and that's why they're... So these... These DECA steroids... You said that... Where it says DECA-Stareone... DECA-Stareones are actually known to... They are insect hormones. That doesn't mean people are ingesting insects, but in insects, they have hormone systems that are similar to ours, but different, and they get their hormones often from plants. You might appreciate this one. There's a very interesting relationship between the marijuana plant and estrogen into testosterone. And I want to say this is a very controversial area, and when I say this, a lot of pot smokers get upset. For some people, not all marijuana and certain components of the plant, including the seeds. Do you remember that rumor way back when, when I was in college, they said, you know, the seeds will make you sterile? Turns out that certain elements of the marijuana plant increase aromatase, the enzyme that converts testosterone into estrogen. And in talking to some of my colleagues who are plant biologists, they said, yeah, I'm not surprised at all. There's an active component of plant to animal warfare, where in order to control the populations of animals that eat a plant, a plant will make certain hormones that will sterilize the males of that species. So I'm not saying smoking pot will make you sterile. There's one study that shows that it increases testosterone and several studies that show that it decreases it. You know, the literature all over the place. And this is consumed in what way? Adible or smoking. They had people smoke marijuana in the two out of the three studies. The other one it was that it was edible. But I have to say the studies that I was able to find are not what we call published in Blue Ribbon journals. They're okay. But it is interesting. So some people who will smoke pot during puberty will get the gynecomastia, the growth of the male breast tissue. And that means that they probably have a genetic predisposition towards high levels levels of aromatase. So it's all over the place. Just like some people do real well on the carnivore diet. Other people do well on a vegan diet. And some people like me are omnivores and we're happy that way. There are going to be people that just don't do well, or monally, on marijuana. And there are going to be other people that do. And you know, it's highly individual. It is highly individual. And it's so interesting when it comes to whether it's diet or when it comes to consuming something controversial like marijuana that everybody wants this one size fits all approach. And it's not realistic. It's not realistic. Diet, it's not realistic. It's not realistic for exercise. It's not realistic for anything. Yeah, you have to try certain things. Like for me, I know that fasting in the early part of the day, I'm more focused. And I can, and I'm a little bit high strong early in the day. And so I train that and then I dig into work. And then I eat low carbs throughout the day. So I'm effectively low carbohydrate. And when you're low carbohydrate, because carbohydrates trigger the release of serotonin, they have a calming effect. We know this. You have a big plate of pasta. It kind of mellows you out. It sues you. It blunts cortisol. Whereas if you don't eat carbohydrates, you tend to have a little bit of adrenaline in your system. And it's go, go, go, go. And then in the evening, I eat pasta and rice and less protein so that I can get to sleep easily. And I repack all the glycogen that I burn throughout the day, training and doing a bunch of things like that. And this idea that you have to be low carb every day all day or you have to be high carb. That's crazy. I mean, I think I do know people who've done well on the carnivore diet. I only learned about it through your podcast and through, forget his name, the guy with satsale, which is weird because he has salad in his name. What is the, someone point that out to me. I was like, you're right. That's so true. Well, he used to be a vegan. Oh yeah. Yeah. So he's, that always is reassuring to me when someone's done it both ways. Yeah. And he's a rich role. I know rich well and, you know, he thrives on a vegan diet. Yeah. And, you know, and guys got, you know, cows this big and he's like, you know, runs like a machine and runs ultra marathons. Yeah. And he's a strong, you know, he functions well. Yes. So I do think that people should try it and they should be scientists. Yeah. For themselves, they should just be a scientist. Run the control experiment. Be a vegan for a month. Be a carnivore for a month. Try it. I, when I eat any kind of high carbohydrate meal, I crash. That's the true sleep. Yeah. And that's great. If it's late in the day and you want to go to sleep, it's terrible if it's launching you. You've got to do a three hour podcast for a few years. If I am, if I have like something with like a five sushi, right, like a lot of sushi with a lot of rice, I just want to nod off. Like immediately my eyes get heavy and I start talking slowly. And I'm a sedative. Yeah. But, but most days, if you're not doing that, do you sleep okay? Can you transition? Yeah. I sleep like a brick. But I'm always so tired. By the end of the day, I'm so exhausted. I shove so much shit into my day. What time are you up? Are you up early? Seven. Yeah. And I'm almost like every day, there's some kind of heavy exercise going on. Pretty much, except for Sundays. Sometimes Saturday, as I take off too, but most, unless there's something crazy going on where I can't work out during the day on a weekday, most week days, there's a pretty brutal workout session in there. And so by the time the end of the day comes with podcasts, then I'm doing stand up at night a lot of these nights, I'm tired. You know, so I just, I can crash. That's probably because you're training early in the day. So you're always, so your temper, one of the reasons you wake up is this increase in body temperature. And that's going to increase throughout the day. And once your temperature starts dropping in the late afternoon evening, you're headed for sleep. I want to ask you about this. There's quite a few of these companies now that are, I had one for a while. I forgot the one that I had. It was one of our sponsors, Jamie. There was a cooling pad that puts over the bed. But Jamie uses one called what is it? Eight something? Eight sleep. Eight sleep. Yeah, Lex is big in eight sleep. Do you, do you use any of those? Like, I don't. But so there's a really interesting thing around temperature. You know, we hear so much about light hormones, nutrition. Yeah. To me, temperature is the untapped power tool. It's just amazing what you can do with temperature. So, so when you wake up in the morning, your temperature is a little bit of a little bit so when you wake up in the morning, your temperature is increasing. If you exercise early in the day, your temperature will undergo a further increase. And then what you effectively do by exercising early in the day, especially viewing light and exercising early in the day, is you time the onset of that melatonin pulse to come on 16 hours later, which is going to put you to sleep. So, but in order to get into sleep and stay asleep, your temperature's got to drop. And that starts for most people around four or five o'clock in the afternoon, although it depends on when you're waking up. As that temperature drops, it's going to be much easier to get into sleep. So there are a couple ways to accelerate that transition. One is to get into a sauna, which sounds counterproductive or take a hot bath or a hot shower. But when you do that, the body actively cools. And when you get out, your body is dumping heat like crazy. And then you can, you would have that kind of almost coma like feel where you get into sleep. That's interesting because that's something I also do. I get into sauna almost every night. Oh, that's magic. Yeah, before I go to bed. Well, there you also get something really powerful. I know a ronopatric has talked a lot about this and knows more about this than I do. But in researching some of the literature, if you do 20 minutes of sauna or so in the evening and you crank it up, you're getting up to the 210 zone or 190 to 210. And that has this huge effect on growth hormone release. 16 fold increase in growth hormone release. If you do it regularly, you kind of adapt to it. And you might say, well, how does that work? Well, temperature. One of the ways to coordinate the systems of the body is by changing core body temperature. And it sounds so obvious when you hear it, but we don't often think about that. So when you wake up early in the day and you view sunlight, you're creating an increase in body temperature by the signals that go through the eye to the hypothalamus and to the systems of the body. And then that exercise in the day also sets you up for a lot of energy during the day. And then kind of a crash into sleep later that night. The other thing is they say to keep the room cool at night while you're sleeping. Or if you need it, one of these eight sleep things or chili pad, I think is the other one. I don't have any relationship to either one. I asked my colleague Craig Heller at Stanford who is a world expert in thermal regulation, temperature regulation. I said, why keep the room cold? And he said, well, that's interesting because it turns out that most of your heat dumping occurs through three locations on your body. It's called a globorous skin. It's very interesting. It's the hairless skin, which is on the upper part of the face, the palms of the hands and the bottoms of your feet. Now you can dump heat through those, they're like portals where you dump heat and you actually can pass cool and heat into the body too. But this is a separate conversation. So you're asleep in the middle of the night. And if you start heating up, what you'll notice is you start putting a foot out or a handout and what you're doing is you're dumping heat in order to stay asleep. You just do this subconsciously. Whereas if the room is too hot, what are you going to do? You're going to put your hand in an ice bucket. You need to have some cooling device in the room. So this is why it's good to drop the temperature in the room at night. And these surfaces are super interesting. They have what are called AVA's arteriovenous astimoses. It's a fascinating aspect of how we're built and how animals are built. Normally blood goes from the heart through arteries, then goes through the little capillaries, which are like the little fine ones, and then the veins and then back to the heart. There's some exceptions that's basically how it works. In the palms of our hands, in the bottoms of our feet and in our upper face, it goes direct from arteries to veins, these AVA's. And animals and humans where there's, because there's no hair follicles there. Even if you're not really hairy, you have hair, little tiny hair follicles everywhere except these three locations. And we dump heat very readily from the body through them. And so this is why I was going to say, you know, in the hot months, it's actually really hot here in Texas. If you're overheating, people will put like a cold ice bucket or a blanket or something around their neck. It's terrible. It's cools the blood going to the brain. The brain thinks that you're cooling off and the hypothalamus starts to heat up the body. This is how people cook their organs. The best way, and they do this now with firefighters, have done some work, and we're starting to do some work, Craig and I with military, and with the UFC guys, with Duncan French, we've got something planned here that's spinning up now. You want to get the palms or the bottoms of the feet into cool water. And that has the effect of cooling off the core of the body much, much faster. And this has profound effects on athletic performance and job performance. We always think about the athlete stuff, but there are a lot of guys working construction sites around the desert, you know, sitting around like shooting bad guys and doing all sorts of stuff. And you need hyperthermia is dreadful. So you can cool the body by effectively taking like something like this. There's a device that Craig has, they have, there's this company called Coolmit. It's only available now to athletes and to military, but it's shoot be available to consumers soon, where you can cool the core of the body simply by holding something of the appropriate cold temperature. Now if it's too cold, it'll constrict the vessels and it just shuts down the system, not good. So this is amazing. They've done some experiments in Craig's lab with the guys from the 49ers who could come in. They give them 10 sets of dips. This is wild, but it's published peer review data 10 sets of dips. One of their athletes I forget, because these pro athlete did 40 dips on the first set, and then it kind of drops 10 to the three minutes rest in between. It comes back in a few days. And now they have them in between sets for three minutes. I think it was three, maybe two minutes. Hold on to the appropriate temperature cooling device. Now he punches out six fold more dips. He can just go set after set after set. He's increasing volume and repetitions. So he's not getting stronger. He can do more. I know it's crazy, but but the way it works is is very well understood. Do you have when your muscle works, like let's say you're doing curls on, yeah, this is cool. So this is it at work in a lot of special special forces guys, 49ers. We're watching a video by folks who are just listening. And it also, okay, that's it. So what's on his knee? He's got his hand in it. Oh, yeah. He's on a cold pad. And it's only one hand. It's only one hand because you're passing, you can't really pass cool into the body, but you're cooling off the heat of the body. And we don't often think about the relationship between heat and performance, but it's very straightforward. So when you, let's say you're doing a set of curls, curls always seem to be the example, but you're doing a set of curls. The bicep is heating up and eventually you hit failure. The reason you hit failure is not because you don't have the strength to do it. You just did a rep with that. It's because muscle contraction is dependent on it on an enzyme called pyruvate kinase. And as the muscle heats up, pyruvate kinase can't work and you can't convert energy into ATP. And that's failure is the heating of the actual muscle tissue. So when you cool the body at its core, pyruvate kinase can continue to convert ATP into energy and the muscle keeps contracting. And they've done this with endurance also. It's a, it's a really interesting area. And this literature actually goes back about 10 years, but no one had ever devised this. So they could do this to fighters in between rounds. So what we're planning with UFC is we're going to get, so there is to have people cool between rounds properly, not by putting ice on the back of the neck, which just feels good or by dampening the, but by actually cooling the core of the body. And we think this is going to have important effects, not the hypothesis is it will have important effects, not just for performance, but also a lot of the brain injury that occurs, you know, part of is the head hit. But part of it is the hyperthermia, the dehydration. You know, if you look at the history of fights where guys died in boxing when they went to, from 15 rounds to 12, fewer people were dying. It could be more head hits, but the idea that we're going to test Duncan and folks out at the UFC and the folks at Stanford is that we know it improves performance, but that it will also help with recovery and hopefully that it'll help with some of the brain injury issues. I think one of the things that happens with, with boxers in particular with deaths is most of them, like the vast majority in the lighter weight classes, which indicates that these guys are again, they're dehydrated themselves, they're cutting weight, which is one thing that I've been really vocal about that I've tried to get people to listen to, but right now it falls on deaf ears, except for fans and athletes who agree is to cut weight cutting out. And I think there's got to be a way to do it. My position is that it's legalized cheating. I think when you look at what weight cutting is, weight cutting is essentially you are pretending you're lighter than you are. And then they usually like eat afterwards, right? They come back up. Oh, way up. How long between the weigh-in and the actual walking in the sky? More than 24 hours. It used to be around 24 hours. They used to have to weigh in at 4 p.m. in the afternoon or whenever it was, depending upon the local commission. And then they would fight the next day. The fights would start somewhere roughly in that same range. Now they start early in the morning. And what we do is we'll call the ceremonial weigh in. So I'll host the weigh in, but they've already weighed in. So I say when they step on the state's scale, it's kind of stupid, really. They're on a scale for no reason. Like we already know what they weigh. It's kind of some weird fucking game we're playing. But people like to see the weigh in. I guess, but you say official weight. And so now I say, you know, Jamie Vernon, official weight, 190 pounds and Jamie flexes and then he gets off the scale. So the thing is, that person is probably when they get on that scale for the official weigh in anywhere in the range of 10 pounds heavier. And then as the day goes on, they'll continue to slowly rehydrate. They have it down to a science. You know, there's people that are very, very good at it. And they know exactly how to dehydrate these athletes and to get them to this literally death door. I mean, you see guys shuffling to the scale. You're on some small, narrow ons and needs salt. Potassium and magnesium, the electrolytes to fire. You take away those, you piss out more water, but you also, the brain's ability of function goes. Imagine you're doing this 24 hours before you engage in a cage fight. It's the dumbest fucking thing we do. It is literally the dumbest thing we do in sport. And I would love it if they instituted some sort of a radical change where they, there's a company called one F.C. I don't know how they do it. They're out of Singapore and they have some sort of a hydration test that they use on athletes. I know they also have this in wrestling. They have hydration tests that they use, particularly, I believe in high school and college wrestling. They want to make sure these guys aren't because in those days, they're making weight the day of the event. At least the UFC athletes have ample time to rehydrate, but it's still, it's a ridiculous stressor on the body to make someone dehydrate to the tone of, so for some guys, it's 30 pounds. That's crazy. Well, what I don't understand is it seems like one of the reasons athletes take steroids is because they want to break records and crowds love it when athletes break records. No one wants to see everyone run progressively slower in the Olympics every year. So, you know, now you don't let them take in a ball, it's just at libidum because otherwise I would just be a mess, although they do it anyway. Let's be honest. There are so many ways around these tests. But in terms of dehydration and weight cutting, you would think in the UFC that the fans would love it because they would see better performances. I think you would see better performances. I think you'd see longer careers because there's some guys that I think there's quite a few issues. And some of them are just related to the organization itself. I believe we need more weight classes. There's not enough weight classes and there's large gaps in which we need weight classes, which encourages this dehydration. Especially when you get it to the heavier weight classes, like there's a gap between middle weight and light heavyweight, it's 20 pounds. That's an enormous gap, 85 and 205. It's just enormous. Like, and if you're a guy who's walking around at 195 or whatever and you decide to fight at 85 pounds, you're cutting 10 pounds, you might have a guy who's 215 pounds and decides to get down to 85 pounds. And when he gets down to 185, what he's going to do is try to grab a hold of you. A lot of these guys or they'll have more punching power or they take a shot better because they're just larger human beings. And again, there's bad weight cuts that where it doesn't work out well and the guys have poor performances and they blame it on a bad weight cut and it's true. I would like all that to be factored out and I think it's 100% possible. If the, and I've spoken to the UFC about it multiple times, but I'm like, all right, I'm no one's listening to me. It's like, it should be too big of a change, but I think it would be very important for the health of the athletes, the longevity of the athletes. And then also the integrity of the sport, you're pretending like, like I'll give you an example, like, take a guy like Camaro, Uzman, he's the UFC welterweight champion. One of the best ever do it. He weighs in at 170 for a bow, fucking an hour. He's 170 if he's that and then he gets up to around 200 pounds. He's fucking dig. You stay next to him. That's a three pound dumbbell. You stand next to him and you go, how is that guy? 170. Well, he's not. He's 170 at the way ends and he's not even the most egregious. There's been guys that have cut way more weight than that. I mean, maybe I'm wrong. I mean, maybe he's maybe on fight days 190. Maybe he's a big guy. There's no way he's 170. He's not even close to 170 and he's the 170 pound champion. And this is not a knock on him because I'm a giant fan of him because everybody does it. You go down to 155, the champion Charles Olivera used to fight at 145 and he was killing himself to make 145 and he kept losing. It just, well, it just, it wasn't sustainable. And you could see he lost, he missed weight a couple of times and then he goes up to 155 and then he becomes the champion. But even then, he's really not 155. He's probably 170. You know, he's probably walking around at 170 and then he dehydrates himself down to 55 and then weighs in and then rehydrates himself up again. It's just bad for you. It's just bad for you and it's a terrible thing to do a day before you're about to do the most difficult thing in all sports. Where you're, yeah, where your life is essentially at risk. Yeah, that's a big difference between these fighting sports and other sports. Like if someone misses an Olympic left, sure they can get hurt, but someone else has been trying to put them to sleep. Exactly. Someone is trying to get you. And so because someone's trying to get you, you want to get every advantage you possibly can. And a lot of these guys, they just want to be as big as they can be. And that's totally understandable, but it should be illegal. And the only way to really make it so that it makes any sense is you got to give these guys more options in terms of weight classes to compete at. I think at the bare minimum, there should be a weight class every 10 pounds. And in boxing, it's a lot more than that. You know, in boxing, you have 147, which is welterweight, but then you have junior middle weight, which is 154. That's nothing. You know, that's seven pounds. That's nothing. And then you have six pounds more than that is middle weight. That's nothing. Yeah, that's one pork. Yeah, exactly. And then eight pounds over that is super middle weight. Right. I mean, it's, and then seven pounds over that is light heavyweight. 175 is light heavyweight. So it's like boxing has a better system, in my opinion. I think there's more weight classes. And I think it's more exciting. I don't think, I think one thing that people have a problem with is just too many champions in boxing, but that's because there's four massive governing bodies that are, the you have the WBC, the WBA, all the belt, the totally confused. There's too many belts. That's why when you get a rare, the very, very rare undisputed champion of the world, you know, where the guy owns all the weight classes. It's so rare in boxing. That's the last person to have that. Good question. Somebody probably has it today. I don't know. I think Tyson Fury had the opportunity if he fought Anthony Joshua to, or, you know, either one. Those guys are so big. I'll tell you when I saw the heavyweight fight the other night, as UFC fights is Donald Strayling guy. Yeah, Australians that were fighting just scare me anyway. I've been to Australia. People fight for fun in Australia. Well, he's the most scary because he drinks out of people's shoes. Oh, yeah. What was that? He drinks beer out of people. He calls it a chewy. They all call, I guess they call it, maybe he's a rug who shoots that to some random dude. Random dudes would give him a shoe and have a little beer in it and drink the beer. I love Australia. He's a size and animal. He's an animal. He's a crazy person. Try to drink a beer out of my shoe one day when I was interviewing him. I go get the fuck out of here. Amazing. Australia's amazing. And this is like Davidson Claire, everyone's in Wild Hill, say something. I just, you know, he's hilarious. He's brilliant, any is hilarious. And he's Australian. So he's very irreverent. They just, they think outside the box. I don't know what it is down there that makes them think they just, they don't worry too much what people think about them. Well, used to be a prison colony. True. What a dumb move England did. They sent all their prisoners to a way more beautiful place. It is beautiful there. It's an amazing place. It's incredible. I mean, it's definitely filled with a lot of shit that can kill you. There's a lot of spiders and snakes and crocodiles and sharks and a lot of stuff that can kill you, but it's also beautiful. Yeah, they're really comfortable with it. Years ago, I was down in Australia for a meeting called Vision Down Under and it rained the whole time we were on this little island called Fraser Island. And on the last day we were boarding the boat and it was beautiful. And I said to the guy who was, you know, riding the boat, I was like, oh man, I wish I'd gone swimming here. I wish the weather had been nice. And he said, you know, you can't swim here. This place is loaded with tiger sharks and these jellyfish that will kill you. I said, but there are no signs. You know, in the US, like they got a sign for everything. And he goes, oh yeah, well, everybody knows that. And I thought, oh my goodness, like basically the bad weather saved my life. Because I would have just gone during one of the breaks, probably during one of the sessions. The jellyfish will fuck you up. I think scare me because I've been around the little ones that can't hurt you. And you think you can just push them away. But they're everywhere. They're in your shorts. They're everywhere. It's bad. Yeah. One of my kids got zapped by a jellyfish, the smallest of jellyfish, like some like little tentacles touched her in Costa Rica and she was in agony. Oh yeah. And it wasn't even that bad. It wasn't like a poisonous one. I mean, it was poisonous, but it wasn't something that can kill you. They have buckets of vinegar on the beach. And so you would grab vinegar and pour it onto the wound. That makes sense. The acid will kill it. In the laboratory, we have all these toxins, fougutoxin from the huffish T.T.X. We've got alpha-latrotoxin, which is from black widow spiders. You have alpha-bungro toxin from the pit vipers. These are research tools that are used to block transmitters, what the chemicals that neurons use to communicate with one another. And they were all derived and discovered from these animals. And the animal actually that can kill you the fastest is one of these cone fish or there, it's a cone snail. It's like a snail that sits on the bottom of the ocean and it shoots this little tentacle up into the body of the fish. And then it puts in these neurotoxins that their potency, they work at what we call a yosa, pico molar concentration, which for the non-scientists out there just means very, very tiny concentrations. And so in the lab, you have a tiny vialis that could kill, you know, 40, 50 people. They're all regulated, of course, because these are biowarfare. They're actually botulinum neurotoxin, you know, from cans, remember cans could have a botulinum that would cause freeze up of the muscles. That's how it kills you. You can't also check skip Botox. That's some strange guys. Blah, blah, blah. It blocks the, seems like more and more nowadays. So, you know, it's so hard. We talk to a man and he can't move his forehead. It's pretty good. It's like, hey man, is this worth it? It looks, it's progressively worse and worse. There's this runaway effect of the Botox. That's the, yeah, well, they get shiny. For some reason, it's, it doesn't move. And why is it shiny? Like I'm shiny. Oh, that's where they got it on a Botox. I'm guessing it's because the, so the sweat gland, as entering, we're talking about temperature, the sweat gland is actually controlled by the same receptor, the acetylcholine receptor, as is the muscles that contract. When you move a muscle of any kind, it's because you have acetylcholine receptors, Botox, a acetylcholine receptors, it's alpha-bungarotoxin from the pit-viper. They're injecting it there. So there's, acetylcholine's released and the muscle can't contract. It just sits there, flaccid. So it's this like flaccid paralysis. So there are all these things that can kill you that you have in the laboratory that uses a research tool. You're obviously very careful with them. But it was reported, I don't know if they ever verified it that before he was killed. Saddam Hussein had botulinum spores. He was growing botulinum in laboratories over there because all you would have to do is release a small amount of these spores into the air. And you could kill an entire city with botulinum easily. You would just everyone would just have to fixate their lungs when work. You couldn't move your lungs. You couldn't breathe. Jesus Christ. So bio-terrorism is something that we don't hear about as much these days because, you know, now we hear more about information terrorism and control over, you know, information grids and internet viruses and the whole thing. But these toxins work at extremely low concentrations and they all come from the natural... You know, information grids and internet viruses and the whole thing. But these toxins work at extremely low concentrations. And they all come from the natural kingdom, you know, pit bunkers and the black widows. Spider one, I can imagine be it particularly bad death. Alpha-latra toxin causes the nerve that releases acetylcholine to vomit all the acetylcholine it wants. So if you had a lot of alpha-latra toxin injected in your body, every muscle would be completely flaccid. Every nerve cell would dump all the acetylcholine and you just it's got to be the most horrible death ever. Is that extremely toxic to the point of death? Absolutely. The black widows, spiders? Yeah, so it's very low concentration in one black widows, spider. But in a vial of alpha-latra toxin, which we use at the time of... I've heard of people getting stung by... Yeah, it wouldn't seem to be a long time ago. But it wouldn't seem to be a long time ago. Yeah, they're... I don't like everything. The wood piles, they love those things. Yeah, well, they were everywhere. I do not. You know, it's weird. I don't really have a problem with spiders, but snakes freak me out. Yeah, I'm not a fan of anything that's cold-blooded. They freak me out. Like, I don't like reptiles. So how I feel about organ meats. I don't like smooth muscles. Oh, I do. I love organ. I only like skeletons. But I try to buy... It's kind of an asshole thing of me. I try to buy as many alligator products as I can. I fucking hate alligators. When I was a kid, I lived in Gainesville, Florida. And I remember a lady got hurt. It's hard to remember because I was 11 years old. Either I was there or I heard about it. You know, it's one of those things. But I saw a lot of alligators. And a lady's dog got snatched by an alligator. She was walking the dog. I definitely didn't see it. I would remember that. But I was either there when people were screaming or they were warning me about it the next day. And this lady was walking her dog along the lake. And a fucking alligator just jumped out and snatched up her dog. And then recently in Orlando, a fucking baby got killed at Disney World. Are you serious? A baby got killed at Disney World by a monster. A monster came out of the lake and ate a baby. So there's little toddlers walking around by the water. And this fucking alligator came out and snatched the toddler and dragged it into the water and ate it. Yeah, I don't like alligator here. I fucking hate those things. So since I was 11 years old, I fucking hated them. and I buy alligator skin as much as I can. Like whenever if I find out that something's made out of a lever, I'm like, hmm, I want to make it out of alligator. And I try to find 226 alligators removed from Disney World since Toddler's death five years ago. Imagine. Yeah, let's just hope it's too much. And let's just hope they start around the rides all the time. People have a cotton video. Like, hey, look at that giant. That number is so crazy. 226 alligators at the happiest place on Earth. They're getting invaded by monsters. Yeah, I can't say it like alligators. I have this friend. You may know him. I don't know if you've ever crossed by his name as Michael Muller. He's a famous celebrity photographer and Hollywood. Does all the Marvel stuff. But he also thinks pictures are sharks. Oh, that's where we're. Yeah, he took some of Whitney's early photos. Cause he does. He does. He does. He does a lot of photos. Anyway, he I've gone out there with him to go out and loop and he dive with the great whites. And he does this thing of KJK sitting in the whole thing. He was down in Cuba when they opened up Cuba. And he was getting virtual reality footage. He's doing these incredible underwater movies for sake of conservation. It's got one now. I think it's called Into the Now. It's amazing. It's amazing to see in VR these sharks coming right up close. And but then they were swimming with these saltwater crocodiles. And I remember he came back and he said, check this out. Those scare me. The sharks are kind of more reasonable because I've been down there to go out of loop A with Michael. I've actually done the KJKs thing. I don't recommend people do it. But the sharks are busy grabbing tuna doing their thing. They're not really hunting you. They're kind of checking you out. And if you understand their behavior a little bit, you can maneuver there. But these saltwater crocodiles, they have no, they have no soul. I'm with you on this one. They're something they're just a killing machine. They just sleep and kill. And when so he had the VR camera and he's got this crop, whatever the salties or whatever the Australian is called. But they're in Cuba and it's coming at him. And after that, I was like, I was like, Mueller, you have three kids. You know, you're going to love him wife. He's got great wife and kids. But you know, get out of there. Get out of there. I'm my friend Jim Shockey. He is a, he's a famous hunter. He lives in Canada. And they actually hired him to go to, I think it was Zimbabwe. It was some, there were some river in Africa where the local people were getting preyed upon by crocodiles at such an alarming rate that everyone in the village had scars. There was the guys missing an arm. A lady would miss a leg. People with like bites taken out of their thighs. These things would just snap. And while he was there, setting up one of the women who was washing clothes got snatched up from the beach. They're everywhere there. And they're fucking huge. These are enormous like 18 foot crocodiles. They're just snatching people. It's crazy. And they actively hunt people. And so he was hired to go down there and set up shop and just start whacking them. Just put away as many as you can. But you know, you're putting a dent in a population of super predators. It's probably established itself very deeply. Like the roots of those things. It's probably so many of them. You're not really going to do enough to keep these people safe. But they would put these poles in the ground and set up almost like a crude fence around an area where they could gather water and then, you know, and wash their clothes and stuff. And they were crocodiles that figured the way through it. They're dinosaurs. Yeah, they've been around for, yeah. In that form, I think they're older. They are dinosaurs. Because they're older than the impact, the impact in the eucatan. So I think they go back more than 100 million years. Yeah, they're primitive. They're primitive. I've seen alligator brains. I spent a lot of time, I worked for a journal called The Journal of Comparative Neurology, where you compare the eyes and brains a lot of different species. And when you look at the brain of a given species, you get a really good picture about what that species cares about. If you look at the brain of a centound, these are centhoms that went down in veterinary clinics. Never want to kill a dog, love dogs. But they have huge olfactory bulbs compared to a site hound, just small olfactory bulbs. Or a bulldog, which basically has no olfactory bulbs. Because it knows this whole smush dog. Yeah, it's not a good breather. But the bulldog is interesting. The bulldog has a tiny amygdala, the fear region. And you know, you always think of the bulldog. They're fearless. We're at a bulldog. Unfortunately, I put him away. I had to put him down last week. It was terrible. But he got skunked over 100 times. Because this bastard, you would hear rustling in the bushes. And he would just go in. It's like the marine thing. They just go in. They don't ask questions like what's there. So he was an English bulldog? He was an English bulldog master. He was an interest. Oh, that's interesting. It's crazy. I don't want to cry because I just put him down. So I don't want to talk about him too long. Because I had him 11 years. His name was Costello yet. I had like this. 22-inch neck. And actually, I'll come clean now, because maybe the veterinary world will come after me. About eight years into owning him, he had all these health problems. He was putting on weight, is shedding like crazy. He was joints were aching. And a friend of mine said, well, why don't you put him on a little bit of testosterone? I had him clipped to when he was younger, neutered him. So I started giving him 10 to 20 milligrams of testosterone a week. Everything changed. His appetite came back. He stopped shedding. He leaned out. And I asked my vet. I said, what's the story here? And she said, there are a lot of things that we could do to make animals lives better that we don't. For instance, hormone therapy. Give them cough medication. Wait a minute. Why not just take, not have them clipped? Well, I didn't think of that. I was too late. And you can't put them. So many doctors are so eager. Did you clip Marshall? No. Okay. So you're ahead of the curve, because. Well, I had a great doctor in Los Angeles that told me. He said, there's no reason to do this. He goes, look, people don't want unwanted puppies. He goes, but you're not letting your dog just run around and breed with things. He's like, there's a risk of prostate cancer. That's the thing. But you know, dogs kind of get prostate cancer anyway. He goes, there is maybe an association between not being clipped. But that's also with humans. There was a thing that just was published very recently that said, there's a direct correlation between castration and life extension. Sure. And remember that, I mean, along these lines, your doctor is a good one because whoever that is, because there was an article recently, I think it was Wall Street Journal, maybe it was Washington Post, that said that they'd been pulling vets. And vets are starting to say, yeah, if you really ask me, it's not the right thing to do for their health. Just about the joint pain. I mean, Costello was a 90 pound bulldog, Mastiff. He has to carry that. And he's, you know, and he can't repair his joints. The moment he started getting regular TRT, I mean, I'm coming clean, my dog was on TRT. We saw it come after me. He was happier. He slept better. His breathing got better. Everything was better. At the end, like a nerve degeneration thing, God. You know, what we do to these animals is terrible. You can't castrate a male animal unless you have an exceptionally good reason to do it. I think it's actually cruelty to animals to do it. And I confess I did it not knowing that it's a, you know, there's a reason why they give testosterone to help depression in male species. But there's a, there's a lot of people that are trying to influence people to do it. Like when you go to your vet, like I had a bulldog who, or who's a Mastiff, or who died a few years back, a few years back and I brought him to the vet a different vet might the other vet unfortunately died and When I brought him to the vet the lady was pointing at his balls and she goes what are those there for I Go those are his balls and she goes why does he still have him? I go because I want him to like what this is not what are you doing? Like it does not what he's here for he's he's here for something else I think they scare people or something But the well she was just making it seem like it's a mandatory thing that you have to do to a dog And I go I'm like why tell me because I know I did it to one of my dogs in the past and he immediately Got lack of days ago. He lost a lot of his enthusiasm. I did it to him. It was as an adult. Yeah, that's rough. Yeah, and He he lost all his energy. It was crazy to watch it drain out of him and I was like this is Fascinating you know like he just stopped stop having energy stop having enthusiasm It was just like all of his gas just went out of the system I gave Costell it to Stostron end stake to the end and I'm proud of it and in female dogs You know estrogen prolongs brain health I mean you ask any postmont sort of perimenopausal woman how they're feeling it's generally not they're feeling better than they were before Right and estrogen replacement therapy makes people feel better their brain functions better I think the same is true for female dogs. Yeah, I mean this I don't know how this whole thing got started Somebody who knows the veterinary world better than I will probably It's unwanted puppies. I'm sure I'm sure I said they're not running the neighborhood anymore I agree. I mean look with cats is a different story I've had male cats before and the problem is they piss all of your house. They spray. Yeah, I'm not a big I mean I'm not anti cat, but you know I like cats. They're they're cool, but they they kill billions of animals every year be I Billions of birds and mice and when people let their cats out you're basically letting a genocidal Homicidal maniac out of your fucking house. They are really good. They're ruthless and I used to have this cat She was a rag doll and she her name was spaz and she was this little fluff ball You wouldn't imagine that she would want to kill anything and she would go outside and immediately turn into a fucking assassin and just Start stalking things and even I had a courtyard in my house was a contained courtyard in California So wasn't even she was out there in the wild just in the courtyard or something fucked up and landed in that courtyard She would just slowly creep up on it was just 100% instincts did what she do that teeth chatter. Oh, yeah I had a bit about it in my act. Oh, did you yeah? There's a no American sense Yeah, no so the forebrain so basically that the forebrain is Controlling all the other stuff all the impulses so when you want to eat something like I shouldn't that's your forebrain It's it's what we call no go. It's a it's a we have go functions and we have no go don't do it don't do it Don't pick up the phone don't don't say this don't do it. Okay. When the forebrain is damaged You know like that Aaron Hernandez documentary was a really good example people blame steroids upbringing It was probably multiple things, but if you combine Impulses young male probably on androgens. You look at his size change there or not Maybe naturally high-endrogens and then you take away the forebrain You're essentially taking the break off behavior. You want to do something. You're just gonna do it right so there's good evidence with fighters with CTE Yeah, I mean sociopathic when it's actually technically it's not sociopathi It's called antisocial personality disorder if you look in the psychiatric handbook Forebrain damage is part of that. I mean inability to regulate behavior sociopaths are a little bit different because they're very Calculating it's not impulsivity. It's more they're playing long game kind of terrible stuff in any event when your cat is Shifts into seeing something wants to eat complete transformation and then it's the stalking is a lot of top-down control As we call it the forebrain going no go no go no go and that teeth chatter is a little bit of behavior sneaking through By it's striking that tonic tonic as we call it tonic paralysis and then bam It just does the attack and so it's a beautiful example predation is a beautiful example of the brain regulating It's own behavior because it gets one shot to bolt out after that mouse or bird or whatever it is And so that two teeth chatter is just a little bit of reflex that is creeping through that that and then it noises That's why I had a bit that I did in my act about I put a post up on Instagram I go this is some meat from a deer who like to kick babies and was about to join ISIS and then I wrote hashtag vegan and Because I wrote hashtag vegan it got in the hashtag vegan world So like people look for other vegan posts like people who are really in devaganism They they look up other vegans and they're all excited about vegan posts And so by me having this hunk of deer meat and a joke, you know that it was a deer that like to kick babies And was about to join ISIS when I did that all these fucking people came after me and like the most mean vicious way like what do they do they said so compassionate these vegans but one of the things they did was This one lady came out mean this really Ruth one when people get really mean one of things I always like to do It's like to try to see this is before I stop reading people's comments by the way This is quite a few years back Lex and I have been talking about that. I want to get very important So I get to the This lady's page and she's a fucking complete lunatic and one thing I see in one of her hashtags is hashtag vegan cat and This is a total true cat is a carnivore exactly it's classified Into in the biology books as a carnivore an obligate carnivore carnivora. Yeah, the order of carnivore. Yes So I literally in my bit I go Fox, I click this because I was really think it was late at night And I was like god damn it is gonna keep me up all night long because I know I'm gonna go down a rabbit hole And I did so I went down this rabbit hole and what I said is it's a Series of photographs of cats that look like they're in the house with a gas leak Like every cat is just like and it's like vegan cat my cat loves spinach this cat's like where the fuck is the real food Well, this is a good example. Yeah, taken an animal like I have I think a lot about animals and I confess in my research career I've worked on animals I have worked on a lot of animals the nowadays I work on humans which feels much better because they consent but An animal research is important I mean you have to be thoughtful about what you do and why but it is important because you're not gonna Put experimental stuff into humans, you know You could but you legally you can't so When we take these animals and we domesticate them sometimes It's kind and we enter this reciprocal symbiotic relationship with them But sometimes you're depriving the animal of some basic instincts that so innate that you're actually torturing the animal You are torturing a cat if you make that cat eats soybeans. This is why I I'm not not a hunter. I know you're a hunter But I've been talking to hunters Andy Galpin. I learned as a hunter and I think Andy's terrific and he's awesome You know so much brilliant been absolutely a critical resource for great follow on Instagram And and I'm and our Twitter as well he really parses the literature on sports performance physiology I mean he does it right down to the muscle microscopy, but he also works with athletes and typical people He's a real practitioner. I mean I I really have respect for my love these people I guess it sounds like Donna hers his name people have just really poured themselves into something But he's a hunter as well hunters and ranchers Really understand the relationship between animal and human and they understand that before this thing is your pet Before it's got its name or it's your dog or it's your cat. It's in animal Well, and if you look at the brain of an animal you can understand that this brain needs certain things Yeah, and if you deprive it of those things it is a form of animal cruelty People need to understand about hunting that it's highly regulated too The idea is that you're gonna kill all these animals. Well, listen You are not going to kill all these animals. You're you this they had a problem in the early 19th century when There was essentially a mass extinction of Wild game animals on this planet because of market hunting because it was unrestricted unregulated Market hunting so people this is before refrigeration People would run around and they would shoot as many things as they can and they would sell them at markets And it led to a massive decrease in deer elk bear everything Now they're highly regulated and there's more deer in America today than when Columbus came here They're very well-regulate. Don't even have them in Hawaii or something. Yes That's access deer and that's a real problem because those were brought by the king of India brought them To King Kamehameha who was the king of Hawaii at the time and they brought in this Incredibly prolific animal with no predators. So in the island of Lenahi you got to say it right I usually say Lenahi, but it's Lenahi they have 3000 people and Somewhere in the neighborhood of 30,000 deer Wow, it's nuts when you're there at night and you drive like Like we were there in this lady turn the headlights on for us and like turn towards the field and you see Like a fucking thousand eyeballs. You can't believe when the eyeballs you see looking back at you It's madness just seas of access deer and they are delicious. Are they how's it gonna happen? They're so good But they evolved around tigers So they're from India So they're insanely hard to hunt unless you're using a rifle So this is how hard they are to hunt When I went there I went there with Kamhain's who's probably the best bow hunter on earth and John Dudley who's probably neck and neck with them and there's like us and A couple other hunters who are like top of the food chain like Adam green tree and Remy Warren We were all successful in in bow hunting these animals. They're very difficult to kill what makes them hard So I'm very interested in predator prey relationship like so these access here Just they hear you from a mile they hear you from a mile away. They're gone. They smell you. They're gone And they jump the string what that means is when you shoot the sound of your bow going off Makes them duck down and leap forward because the way they move the way they get away is they drop all their body weight down So they load their limbs they load their they're you know their muscles and then they spring out of there Can they jump? Oh my god like gazelles So they take off right and they're they're insanely fast So I have a video of this access deer that I shot at at it was like 80 yards So I'm like lined up on this thing the The boghoes off the arrows going towards him. He hears the arrow going towards them and Maybe 30 yards away. He's gone. He takes off So we we actually figured out that the best time to hunt them is in the afternoon because it's windy And when it's windy they can't hear you and but you have to be in a right position. You have to sneak in you got to get close enough We were successful There was a hundred and fifty hunters after us over the next year One was successful. Wow Every single one of them gave up on the bow and started to pick up a rifle because it was this crazy and the guys are like I'm telling you this is how long so because I know nothing about this Maybe you get explain because I'm curious So you'll set off on one of these hunts. How long are you gonna be out for well? when one of the beautiful things about Lenat he is that you're there And there's a four seasons there So you stay in the four seasons and so you or you could you know you can rent a house one of the guys rented a house and a few of the other Hunter stayed there and there's but there's only a few it's paradise essentially so you're you're staying at the beach in paradise and then you hang out all day Lift weights fuck around swimming the pool and then in the late afternoon you go hunting So you go hunting you leave like three o'clock in the afternoon That's when the wind starts to pick up and that wind will disguise your sound and your movement And we found that to be the most effective way to hunt we were we figured out somewhere along the line There were way more effective in the afternoon than we were in the morning and because I was there with my family as well I said, okay This is what I'll do. I'll just dedicate my entire day to hanging out with my wife and kids and then the afternoon We'll get the hunting in very primal but it's same with the family. Yeah, it'll kill it's also It's one of the best places to hunt it's a odd place to hunt because it's kind of unnatural right? You're in paradise and it's also an invasive species but It's one of the best places to hunt ethically because they must kill these things because they're very overpopulated They don't have a disease problem, but it's it's always a possibility that some something could be introduced into the population Whether it's Bruce O'Loses or CWD or something that does well this whole thing whether or not it was from a lab or it was from an animal This whole thing with you know the virus out of China. It was definitely out of China We know that much Tells you that the relationship you do in animals and humans is a very thin veil. It's a very thin veil and there are little bugs and parasites and intermediate animals that act as what we call vectors and they will cross the line for us So you wear a CWD? No CWD is a pre-on disease. Oh, I'm know what pre-ons are. Yeah No interest in getting that it's terrifying. It's essentially the same thing as yuck up's cunts felled disease It's mad cow disease and it's it's extensive in deer populations now and they if you cook the meat it's no it doesn't jump It doesn't jump yet. It's but nobody who's Saying wants to eat a deer that's been infected with CWD if you're seeing what it looks like let me see Jamie pull up CWD infected deer and so it's a really heavy Subjective contention amongst deer hunters because some people are in denial about it and one of the reasons why they're in denial about it It's like many things that are look how fucked up that deer is One of the reasons why they're in denial about it is because like many things there's a financial incentive to to ignore right this this disease and because a lot of in certain parts of the country and even right here in Texas they breed deer and They have these deer farms and what they're doing is they're trying to get deer with these giant antlers and then they'll bring them to an area that has You know like a private land area and they'll let them loose It's really kind of shifty and it's it's really gross and it's it's in the the deer hunting world It's um, it's not respected these animals because they look like freaks like pull up How should I phrase this farmed deer giant antlers they give these deer this preposterous concoction of protein rich pellets So they feed these deer and look at those look at the antlers. Oh, that looks ridiculous Yeah, what the fuck is that yeah, this looks a lot like the Botox people but the crazy antler version It's really like a tree. Yeah. It looks like coral. Yeah. It's it's it's madness horrible It's madness. No, so to me that is manipulating biology for sake of whatever financial gain Well, it's terrible. It is for the sake of financial gain, but it's a for the sake of Dumb men. It's mostly men. I believe. Well, I'm maybe dumb women too, but let's not be sexist dumb humans That want massive antlers from a deer because here's the thing like that deer might be a year old that has those antlers too By the way, that's why it's so fucked up the whole idea of a large rack in the big animal means That's an animal that is evaded predators. That's an animal that survived like 90 It's like rings on a tree. Yes. That is a survivor like there's a place that I hunt in Utah And it's a really rare place is a beautiful place in the mountains of Utah and the people that run this enormous ranch is like 250,000 acres the people that run this it's all Like free range wild animals, but they won't allow anyone to hunt an animal that's less than nine years old So every animal that you're hunting is an animal that's evolved to or or evaded rather bears and mountain lions and even they've been Wolves there they've started to see some wolves in this this at one area So these are wise animals and that's the idea is that this animal has bred they have passed on their genetics and they have successfully you know bred for multiple years now here they are in you know When you're nine years old an elk if they're lucky lives to be like a lavender I mean maybe if you have them and you have no predators and you feed them Maybe they can live longer But the odds are I mean if you find a 15 year old elk in the wild that's crazy and usually they're going downhill Usually their antlers are shrinking their body shrinking like an old man and they're deteriorating so when someone Gets an animal with large antlers. It's a good for conservation Because you're not taking an animal out before it spreads its genetics in fact It's spread its genetics from multiple seasons and then be It's fair chase Sure because you're you're getting an animal that's wise that's seen it all that's seen mountain lions It's seen bears and they've avoided all this so you're getting a champion That's the idea like this is the one who's fought off all the other males and been able to breed because they kill each other all the time Then this ranch they'll find every year they'll find at least one elk that's been stabbed death by another elk Yeah, no, they this right to breed. Yeah, it's fundamental. That's what the antlers are for right the antlers are for violence They just they enjoy each other like they just fuck each other up and this this idea of taking that and Basterdizing it and feeding these animals this insane diet out of feeders So these these animals literally will wander up to the feeder in the afternoon because they know it's about to go off They're on a timer and there's They'll spread these pellets so they'll hear the noise of the machine go off and they'll Wade towards the pellets like it's dinner time like a fucking dog. It's no different than dogs and large animals in a zoo It's very similar like I understand zoos play a particular role in you know breeding programs conservation Not all zoos are bad, but I have a particular problem with Large carnivores and zoos years ago. I used to go to San Francisco Zoo and I was a postdoc one night. I was at the movies in San Francisco and Someone said you know tigers escape from the San Francisco zoo and are eating people and I was like that's crazy And this was kind of pre-internet. I remember that so these kids actually went to the San Francisco Zoo the moats were too low and these kids it was Real croissments. Yeah, they're throwing stuff a bit about that too. So this tiger Tatiana was her name I knew about her because she had taken the arm of a zoo keeper at the time I was trying to date as this woman who worked at the zoo So I was like hanging around the zoo not to you know inappropriate on a creepy way not a creepy way anyway Eventually Tatiana the tiger After taking the arm of one of the keepers climbed out of the moat because they didn't have the glass guards there got out The crowds were spreading this was near closing time Tatiana whoa This is what's amazing whoa through the crowd and went and killed one of the kids that had been throwing things at her So it was targeted yeah revenge it was not random killing off of humans right and then basically slashed up the other kid and Then just sat there kind of you know sampling the the blood or whatever The police showed up the shot Tatiana the tiger this is all documented and For a couple years. I didn't know whether or not to rejoin. I joined the zoo I wasn't like a donor to the zoo. I had no money. I was a postdoc at the time But I was very conflicted because it was like seemed like they gave the animals a good life and yet Clearly large carnivores in the zoo's you're depriving them of something fundamental Which is their need and desire to roam? I'm the reason I put my dog down is because he needed to roam and smell things and he's not just rolenics They have a deep desire to kill That's part of what they do. There's a reason why they exist they exist because there's a balance in nature You have prey population like antelope and these access deer which are the ones that evolved with tigers And it's why they're so fast and then you have predators like you know It's horrific to say but there was a video of a zoo in I believe it was Iraq and right after the war Right after But there was a video of a zoo in, I believe it was Iraq. And right after the war, right after the war, the soldiers filmed the way they would feed the lions. And the way they would feed the lions is they would let a goat out. And the goat would wander. The goat was like, oh, I guess I'm just hanging out out here now. And then the lions knew that once they opened up the cage, the goat would be out there. They were accustomed to it. And so they opened up the cage and these, this door opens and these lions just come pouring out. And they grab this goat and fuck it up. And they start tearing it apart and fighting each other over the pieces. And it's wild shit. But that's what they want. They don't want a cold plate of dead meat. No, they have what they want. They, you know, as you're saying, this, my, my neurobiologist mind goes, this is the video, this is the video. So these goats are hanging out, oh, how's everybody doing? And then boom, all these cats come rolling out. And this is how they fed them. But this is what they want, man. I mean, people would say that's cruel. But listen, you got to kill the fucking goat to feed these things anyway. Like why is it cruel if they do it? But it's not cruel if you do it because it's going to be more humane. Because you're going to kill them with a bullet. Like I just don't think the goat is going to really care one way or another. It's, this is the last day of its fucking life. And this is what a cat is supposed to do. Sure. And they're pretty effective killers. It's not only they're going to torture it like a house cat will. No, this is a circuit. There's a really interesting study. There's a guy at Caltech, great university, obviously, a guy named David Anderson, who studies things like aggression and whatnot. And he's looked at these that the hypothalamus is really interesting. It's like this group of neurons, they're all densely packed together. But with modern methods now, you can really turn on and off the different populations of neurons. So they did this study a few years ago, looking at an area of the hypothalamus, called the ventromedial hypothalamus. And for years, people were confused about this area because you'd lesion it in an animal and the animals wouldn't fight, but they also wouldn't mate. And what they eventually discovered is they have two populations of neurons in this structure, some that are responsible for mating and some for fighting. So then using modern methods, what the Anderson lab showed is that if you trigger activation of one set of neurons in these, in this ventromedial hypothalamus, the animals will just, the males will go and mount the female and mate. This is a mice. If you at that moment turn off those neurons and turn on the neurons that are right near them that are responsible for aggression, the male mouse will try and kill the female mouse. Whoa. But it's so extreme that if you just give a male mouse a glove filled with error or water and you turn on these neurons, the mouse will just go into a rage and try and kill the glove. Wow. Yeah. It's incredible. And just to kind of explain just how strong these switches in the brain are. Last year, that same lab published a really interesting paper. You know, animals mount to mate, they, they, you know, they do it from behind basically almost all animals, not some primates, don't humans obviously, switch it up. But, you know, but basically what they discovered is there are two sets of neurons in the hypothalamus for mounting. One is for males mounting females to mate. And another set of neurons is for males mounting other males for dominance. So you know when you go to, you just do J or the dog park phenomenon where you, people always say if your dog is mounting another dog, they always say, oh, yeah, they're dominating them. And female animals have this circuit too. You'll see a female pit bull at my, um, my ex partner. I we had a pit bull as well. It's an amazing dog. But, you know, she's pretty dominant pit bull. And we take her to the dog park and she would sometimes mount another dog. Yeah. And that isn't sexual mounting. That is dominance mounting. And there's actually a separate circuit in the brain for dominance mounting. And we, you know, people have been puzzled by this for a long time. You know, is it sex is the sex, the dominant dominance? And of course, this is in humans. This is a very thin line. Yeah. And who knows, right? But let's face it, all of that would not fetishism, mounting and subs and domes and all that. So would not be as much interest. It was if that circuitry didn't exist. Right. So in, in mammals, there are circuits for mounting for dominance. That is independent of any desire to reproduce. Super interesting. At least to my mind, because what this tells us is that deep within our biology, these drives exist. So when you show the lines attacking a goat, there has to be a circuit in the hypothalamus that says pursue, kill and then eat. And it just give animal meat. You're essentially depriving it of some basic function. Now in humans, it's different because you have to have societies that get along and camp. People just running their hypothalamus like, like, unregulated. That's why you got the part up front. But I do have to say that there is a part of whatever we're made out of that deeply connects with hunting if you're a meat eater. And when you kill an animal and then eat it that day over a fire, it is like a door opens up to the past. And you get this rush of whatever the endorphin is that I'd never experienced before I did that. And it convinced me on the spot that I was going to be a hunter for the day for the rest of my life. I was like that day. I can remember that day. My friend, Steve Renelle that I talked about earlier took me hunting. We shot a mule deer and then we're eating its liver. We cooked it over the fire. Is it good? Because I know one's gotten me on the organ meat thing. Yeah. It's very good for you. Okay. I don't know for whatever reason I was like liver. I was like liver and onions. I eat like when you shoot an elk, you get a liver that's about that big. I eat that liver all year. And you just still have some left. I need to try this from last season. I love it. Put my fucking kids hate it. Man, I tried to get them to eat it. What if they didn't know what it was with it? They would still think it's disgusting. They don't like the taste. But I know how good it is for you too. That's part of the thing. And I also knew that the Comanche would eat it raw with bile on it. They would squeeze bile from the gallbladder, salty bile on the actual raw liver and they they prized it. That's what they really enjoyed. Hardy people. On the gall, you know, we I'm fascinated by organ meats because you know, hear about gall, like someone has a lot of gall. But that's because the gallbladder actually contains a number of androgen like compounds that literally make your mind in your body. The gall of him exactly or the liver. I actually take liver, but in capsule form because I want what I do as well. Because he might are an HEME is the most bile available source of iron. And so, you know, women because they menstruate, they lose a lot of iron. And man, if you exercise a lot, you can get away with it and just you're iron. You don't want to go too high. That's not good. But this liver is absolutely the best source of bile available. I take Paul Saladino stuff. Oh, he has a series of supplements. It's called heart and soil supplements. Really good. It's all desiccated liver and heart. They just basically dehydrate it and put in a pill form. Yeah, that all take. I've never tried that one. I forget which brand I take, but I'm a big believer in this. I it's high in B12. Yeah. And you know, what's nice to learn, I don't learn a lot for me today about hunting. And I think that it just sounds like such a humane and fundamentally grounded relationship between human and animal. There's nothing humane about going and getting some factory farm meat at the grocery store. Right. I mean, if you can have a good relationship with ethical ranchers, that there are really great ethical ranchers where they have these cows that live an amazing life and they have one bad day. Yeah. And that one bad day, what they do is they lead them down this corridor. They lock them into this thing. They don't even know what's going on. And then boom, they get a bolt through the brain. Yeah, it's instantaneous death. Yeah, I have a friend from childhood. Her name is Anya for knowledge. She has bell camp, bell camp, both farms. Oh, yeah, that's a great place. They're great. And you know, they've got the cows up there. I've seen the ranch. They, um, you know, an excellent example of an ethical farm and the quality of their meat is incredible too. Yeah, I've known her since high school. Both her parents actually Stanford professors. And I'm early on. She was obsessed with animal welfare and like the relationship between animals and humans and look, it's very hard to do and talking with her. You know, it's, it's hard to do that at scale. That's the problem. How do you grow that? And that's the issue. But I think what's what's great is as people start to understand more about how what they, I would say the five pillars essentially of health are like light, temperature, movement, nutrients. And then there's the other stuff like breathing and all the, you know, all the other stuff you do. But I'm so glad. But, but in that nutrients category, it's like the quality of what you eat is without question as important as the amount and all that. And I think that a focus on food quality and sourcing is it's such an important conversation. I think that hunters and ranchers, they understand this relationship. But that's what I was going to say because the quality of meat from wild game is far superior. It's far richer in protein. When I show you, have you ever seen an elk steak or no raw elk steak? I keep hearing about these elk steaks on your podcast. I salivate the Pavlovia. First of all, how many days are you ever going to hang it out with like a little bit? Yeah. Man, I'm like, oh my fucking schedule so crazy. I like to cook some for you. Let me see if I could figure out how to do this. But it's a dark ruby red, like dark. Amazing. It's so dark. It's like, it's like a super athlete. That's what an elk is. It's an, they run up a mountain like it's nothing. And they live this wild life. And what I'm doing is I'm dipping my toe into their world. I'm entering into their world. I got to earn it. I got to go hike these mountains and find them. Sounds like they have the advantage. So they dip. Yeah. Sort of. I get one over here. Yeah, but the other 150. Yeah, there are 150 schmoes didn't get ones. Well, there's a lot of, that was, that's different. That's a line that's, that's a, that's a axis deer. I've been really fortunate, but I also have a really good guide that takes me. And I also work out like a fucking animal. Like that's a big part of it. Like you have to have the ability to get up to that mountain, you get up to the top of the mountain and you have to chase these things down. What about carrying it out? You've always been curious. So do you do clear the guts and all that out there and then carry it out? Well, I eat the guts. I eat the liver and I eat the heart. So you have, I save those, but you bring game bags. That, you know, it depends on, yeah. Well, I guess this is why Cameron, you know, I follow his account. I think I'd, I'd, I'd grant you, I don't understand the whole thing and what it really means because one thing to see if you do. You have to do him on your podcast. I hit you great because he's also a human, human performance freak because, you know, he's, he does ultra marathon. He runs the Moab 240, runs 240 miles. He runs three days of fucking 24 hours of running. He's a psychopath. It's impressive. Yeah. Oh, he's beyond impressive. But he did that. He got into it to be the best bow hunter he could be because it's very difficult. Bow hunting success, general bow hunting success. And a lot of this, you have to factor in public land, which is a, I generally hunt private land A, because I have the financial resources and B, because I don't want to be around that many people. It's just like public land is, it's kind of, you're hunting two things. You're doing two things that are difficult. You're hunting a wild animal and you're in competition with a bunch of other people that are hunting the wild animal. To me, I understand that there's an access issue that's tied to finances. And I understand that for a lot of these people, there's a badge of courage to be able to be successful hunting on public land. But these animals are heavily, heavily pressured. Right? And it's, it may times what, what, like these like real hardcore guys do is they'll hike into the backcountry 20 miles. So they get away from people that aren't willing to do that. Well, now because of people like Cam Hanes, because of a lot of these like Aaron Snyder and a lot of these crazy backpack and people, other people are doing that now too. Well, there's, you know, you go 20 miles in and you'll see a fucking wall tent filled with five guys, you know, like shit. Okay. I got another 10 miles and you're trying to get the fuck away from everybody. I, I want to be around animals that behave like wild animals. Animals that if you're lucky, they've never seen a person or, you know, maybe they saw someone from a distance riding a horse and look what the fuck is that and they got out of there. The more undisturbed they can be the better. And I find that's more likely the case on private land. The issue is an issue of economics. And, you know, whether or not these high flute and fuck heads like me, who can afford to go to these private places, whether it's just as much of an accomplishment. It's certainly of more opportunity because there's more animals and they're more undisturbed. So they're not, they're not going to be as jumpy. Like there's a real problem with that. If you go to a place that's a public land place on opening, like I was in Wisconsin for opening day. of deer season. And it sounds like World War II. Okay, so most people aren't using bow hunting. They're using guns. So, at first light, this was my first day. I was with my friend Doug Duren and he lives in Wisconsin. He takes me out. First light, the sun starting to rise here. Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Then further back, boom, boom. Where's that one coming from? Like you hear fucking gunshots for like all day long. Wow. You hear gunshots. It's crazy. Well, and I guess when you're out there, people will go, eventually sometimes get shot. Did they change the shot? Did they change the shot? Did they change the shot? Did they change the shot? Did they change the shot? Did they change the shot? Did they change the shot? And he apologized. The other guy apologized. I'm sorry, I look like a bird. Cause it's amazing. It's amazing. It's a funny with a murder like a big changing. Well, it's, that's a different kind of hunting. He was doing a real canned hunting. What that means is they literally open up a fucking gate and let these birds out. That's why I'm shooting. That's why I'm shooting. That's wild shit. That's different. That's a creepy kind of hunting. Well, that's a very common hunting. Oh, they like let, let fessence out and these guys just stand there and blow them out of the sky. It's kind of fucked up. Have you gotten into the spear fishing thing? No, I have not, but I do have a friend who, well, Rinala is really into that. But Valentine Thomas, she's, oh yeah. She's got, go to her page. She's amazing. And she's, she's want to like the premier, fisher people that's spreading the word of like how fun it is and wild it is. And she's, she was a lawyer in Montreal and decided to be a spear fisher. Very beautiful is that right there. Yeah, she's beautiful. But look at that. She killed like a Marlin. Beauty and Marlin confirmed. I mean, who the hell does that? Who the hell kills a Marlin with spear? But she's just really into the idea of promoting, oh, that's her and I. What is that? Oh, is that one in pink trip ones? He's a guy named Pink Trip and he takes things from the podcast and takes them and edits them. So it makes it look like like they'll take one of this and it'll make it look like you and I are having a conversation. Oh man. Well, like what the fuck dude and like, and then you'll be like, hey man, and then it's like, he does it. It makes it look a little play out of it. It's very fun. Have you seen there's this kid Michael? He goes by Guangzhou sound on Instagram. And he's been doing these song mashups of Lex and Donahur and you and dare to say me, they're hilarious. So he does like remixes like songs of them. And they're pretty funny. You're doing some funny stuff. You're not aware of it. I'm sure. Well, I wanted to get back to the, I didn't finish my thought about these animals, these crazy animals. Yeah. The problem with these animals, the crazy antlers is not just that it's gross and that they feed these animals and then they release them on these properties and it's got to shoot them and make it look like they do the big thing when they're really basically shooting a tamed animal. The problem is they spread CWD and one of the main ways that CWD gets spread is the captive servet industry. So there's a whole thing about this where some people that have a vested interest in a captive servet industry are in denial about CWD and how dangerous it is. And it's spreading. If you like, see if you can, I had a scientist, God, I can't remember his name, Brian, who came on with my friend Doug Dern, my friend Doug who owns a large farm in Wisconsin, a beautiful place in the driftless area. Do you know what that means? I don't know. Where the, it was passed up, Brian Richards. It was passed by the glaciers. The glaciers didn't hit that area. So it's beautiful. Hilly gorgeous country. Yeah, I think it was Wisconsin. Yes, that's the area where the glaciers flattened it out. This is an area where the glaciers missed. So it's the driftless area of Wisconsin. It's gorgeous. It's called Casanova, Wisconsin, it's where he's at. And they are finding like, you know, a large percentage of their deer that have the CWD. And the problem with CWD is when an animal's infected, it starts oozing out of its mouth. Like this, receiving a fine pictures of it, it's really gross. They probably lose them. Because pre-ond disease, stem-pruscular one, the Nobel for pre-ons, they have no one believed him, by the way, that this pre-on thing existed. Well, this was gosh, 2000s. You know, usually get the people who usually get the prize a little bit later. It takes a while. But they knew about Matt Cow before that, right? Yeah, but you know, the, the Swedes take their time making a decision. The Nobel prize is never controversial who wins it. It's often controversial who doesn't. But who wins it? It's always, at least in the sciences. It's always an absolute slam dunk. Interesting. The people who get ruled out cry about it for years, you know, but, you know, in a event, a prisoner was talking about pre-ons and basically the neurons degenerate. They kill themselves. So nasty stuff, hunters find, and on and in their deer, oozing green gunk, huge wards, paraceted again, so much. The green gunk is which, that's discussing those parasites. But the green gunk is which you have to look out for. Those are just ticks and stuff. See if you can find CWD oozing deer. Yeah, that's what it looks like. See that deer? Yeah, they, they, they start dripping CWD, that's blue tongue. I guess that's a different disease. They start dripping the CWD out of their mouth and nose. And it gets into the trees. See if it finds some other versions of it. It gets into the plants. And when it gets into the plants, it actually, I don't want to fuck this up, but I think it actually gets into the DNA of the plants. And somehow or another, it stays in those plants. Like it has a really long fucking half life. And these new animals come along and they can eat the plant and then get CWD from it. So the odds are, and these things, they, deer travel, right? They can travel for miles. And so they're traveling and they're spraying this oozing shit out of their mouth. And it's getting onto these other plants. And then other deer coming along and getting it and doing the same thing and spreading it. And it's now all through most of the country. And it's jumped from, it's now that they found it in mule deer. And I believe they may have found it in elk. I'm pretty sure there's some instances of elk that have CWD as well. elk are far, they roam far longer distances. Elk is a much larger animal. Much, much larger. Yeah, it's one of the largest of the deer species. Also the largest. That's the deer. That's the deer good eating elk is my favorite. Okay. Elk is my all time favorite. But moose is amazing too. And moose are there the biggest of the big. And that's also that things directly related to cold weather, right? The cold weather mounds much larger mammals because they have to maintain body temperature. So deer like a white, white tail deer from Saskatchewan where it's really fucking cold is a huge animal. That could be like 300 pounds. Whereas a white tail deer in Texas, they're little tiny guys. If you see them around, like I see them in my neighborhood all the time, they're very small. Like 150 pounds. Can coyote get a deer? Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. A little pachy coyote. Yeah, they get them. They bite their legs. They take their legs out from under them. That same thing wolves do. They snatch their legs out. Brutal. Yeah, and there's a particularly nasty type of coyote that lives in BC that they took out a woman in, oh, that sounds like 2007 or something like that, a young singer. She was a very promising singer. And she was apparently really talented. And she went for a walk on a pack of coyotes, a year. Goodness. I mean, I think the mountain lion thing is coming up in Northern California. Yeah, I spent a lot of time recently into Pangakanian. They've been trying to write there and you see them cruise through every week. Oh, yeah. They're fucking, they're gross. They are, yeah. They are big animals. They're beautiful. They are beautiful. They are beautiful. They just get the shit out of me because they kill hikers every now and then. I went to a while a video come up with a kid where one's tracking him for a long period of time. Yeah, you see the one with a momma mountain lion running at the guy like this. You see that one? Oh, you need to see this one because it'll freak out because apparently the mama was walking with her cubs. And this guy was on this trail and she crossed and he's like talking because he's, he filmed. He's like, whoa, what is it? And then the cat sees him and starts walking towards him. He's like, fuck off. Get out of here. Get out of here. And she's like, just running out of this is it. Watch this. Give me some volume because it's crazy volume. Go away. No. Yeah. No. Wow. Yeah, I mean, he's backing up too. Holy. And this is wild. I don't want that experience. It keeps going too. He's not getting away. Gosh. Fuck. Where's my gun? Perfect thing to say. I mean, I'm a big fan of mountain lions. I love them. I'm glad they're real. But fuck me in around them because they will kill people. They killed, I mean, in one year, they killed one guy in Seattle and one guy in Oregon. And it was really, it's really rare. They come down into the suburbs. I think one person was a hiker and one person maybe was a biker. I think they were mountain biking. I think it's also they're like regular cats where something goes by them fast. They're like, come here. Give me that. It's that reflex. Yeah, these ancient, you know, circuits. It's not a lot of there's not a lot of thought process. No, not a lot. Which is get flipped in a certain order. Yeah. It's weird that we tried to manage that world. You know, the manage the world of animals. And we have this like really these rigid ideas about what shouldn't, shouldn't exist and how we shouldn't, shouldn't do it. And, you know, we should be able to keep these things alive and put them in a zoo. And we're doing it for their own good. And like, man, I was driving limos once. I think that was when I was doing something. I was driving home. And I, there was a zoo. It was in mass juices. Actually, my problem was in driving limos. I was probably just driving. But this was around the same time. Because I remember I thought about this for fucking weeks. Still to this day, I think about it. And I pulled into this shitty little zoo somewhere in Massachusetts. And there was a polar bear. And the polar bear was in a room about as big as this room. And he just wanted maybe twice as big as his room and a lot. But it wasn't big. That's just wandering around in circles. Just like a crazy person. Like someone was just completely lost their mind, just pacing, going around in circles. And I'll never forget it. I just stood there. And the only thing I saw in the whole zoo, I watched that polar bear. And I'm like, I'm getting the fuck out of here. I'm not doing this. And then watching that polar bear may be think. Like, what are, what the fuck is a zoo? Like, what are we doing? Like, put that goddamn thing back. Like, find where that thing belong. It's probably captive. It's whole life, unfortunately, right? But if it's fine, where the fuck that thing supposed to be and let it go. Let's leave it alone. Yes. Large carnivores and zoos. And even the elephants. And to me, it just breaks my heart. It's awful. It's awful. It's awful. All of it's awful. The only thing that I had a joke about this too, the only thing that does bother me is giraffes. Because they don't see anybody. They don't see any other... They don't see... They don't see... They're herbivores. They just want tall trees to grow. Well, they let little babies feed them. I have all these videos on my kids feeding giraffes of the zoo. The joke was there like another day with no lions. And they just kind of strutting around. They don't see me give a shit about the zoo. They have a good time there. But that's it. The zoo should be giraffes. Giraffe has a tiny brain, by the way. Oh, I'm sure. It's so small. It's unbelievable. Given its body size, it's just an absolutely miniscule. They fight the weirdest way, right? I don't know how they fight. Oh, you don't know? No. I can't imagine they do fight with these things. Oh, my God. They fight to the death. They fight to the death using their necks. They whip their neck like a whip. Those little things that they have in their eat. Those little stupid horns that they have. Those little stupid horns are their weapons. Watch this. They whip each other. Wow. Look at that. See? They try to stab each other with those stupid horns on the top of their head. That's what those things are for. They don't look very effective. Oh, it's terrible hunting. But look how they do it. They're like drunk swinging at a bar. The one guy caught that guy right there. They're trying to discourage each other. How's they trying to do it? And here's another thing. Like the darker patterns. Like when the patterns are deeper in dark, and that's generally the older dominant male. Yeah, this looks more like an attempt than a success. It's too good. This is terrible way of fighting. One of these giraffes you learned you did too. Or leg kicks. This should learn some leg kicks. Just take them out of the legs, man. Just while this guy is trying to hit you with that stupid neck, just karate chop his legs. It's just such a, it is literally one of the dumbest things in all of nature. They're beautiful animals. Oh, yeah, they're markings. They're absolutely right. How did they die? They exit one winds and breaks the neck, and they just leave it. They definitely do that sometimes. Oh, someone went down. You fucked up. What happened? I think he just missed. They're slow mo. Yeah, he missed. What? What? That's basically, he broke his leg. It's time of Greg and Dustin Porya. Yeah, they eat them too. People hunt giraffes. And it's one of those weird things where people don't want to be photographed with giraffes because people come after you. Because if you're standing there with a rifle, with a giraffe down, oh my god, they're hitting. Yeah, we think of them as very plazas. Yes, and they are. Well, this is like the obsession with pandas. You know, I find this amazing, I look, I have nothing against pandas per se, but it gets me a little irritated like how we elevate the Panda. They are rapists. You know, we elevate the Panda. It's like they're as the only animal that we care about. It's conservation, you know, publicly. That seems to be the case. People, everyone loves pandas. But they're all these other incredible animals as you've pointed out. Well, the Panda gets a disproportionate amount of love and praise. Well, especially if you see their mating habits, they're ruthless little fuckers. Have you ever seen pandas go after each other? Oh my god. Put me, I don't know if you could Google Panda rape without getting investigated by the FBI, but give it a shot. We're in Texas. They're very aggressive and they're nasty to each other. Like this idea that there's cute little fluff balls, but that's always drove me crazy about bears in general. Like people get mad, people shoot bears, like don't kill bears like listen to me. First of all, if you don't shoot bears, you're going to have bears everywhere because bears don't have any natural predators other than other bears. And if you think you like bears, you're not going to like bears to eat your family because that's what they'll do because bears have been eaten people since the beginning of time. Well, and if there are sufficient numbers, I mean, actually, you might find this interesting. I was researching taste recently, the sense of taste, and there are these five senses, right? Salty, sweet, but you have the umami, the savory receptor. That's what gives like that really nice taste of meat. It's actually queuing the brain and the gut of the presence of amino acids, which is one of the most important things to ingest amino acids. Lions and bears and carnivores have 5,000 times the density of umami receptors in their mouth, but they have except for the panda bear, which has 5,000 times more sweet receptors. So your dog actually doesn't have sweet receptors in its mouth. It only has umami receptors. So it can taste salty, it can taste sour, but it has the taste of meat for bear. The mouth, this is where this is definitely the other customers. That's just mating. This seems pretty normal. I could honestly bring it, googling what you did. There's a Simpson scene apparently in all I'm getting is Homer Simpson and Panda stuff. Well, this is just regular old panda sex. Mouth breather. Once a year with females, only able to conceive, that's another interesting thing about animals is that they have seasons where they breed, right? That's regular, you know what's... Okay, they're duking it out. Yeah, they're fucking vicious. Here you go. They're ruthless to each other to wild panda fighting for mating rights. Either they're fighting to mate or they're fighting for mating rights, but they're not like what we want to think about. They're bears. They're kind of bear. The seasonal breathing, breeding things, excuse me, is interesting. So light turns on this testosterone and dopamine system. Dopamine, more than a molecule reward is a molecule of motivation and drive. It makes you want to do more of whatever it is that led to more. Interesting. So light, viewing sunlight actually triggers the release of dopamine. So that's why it feels good on a sunny day. It's right. So seasonally breeding, right? So seeing the breeding animals, there's more light, more dopamine, more testosterone they mate. Days get shorter, less dopamine, less testosterone and estrogen, and they don't mate. But the other thing that's really fascinating is that in animals that during the winter, their coat is white, and in the summer and spring months, their coat is dark. Dopamine has a precursor. It's a molecule called tyrosinease. Anytime you see ASE, that's an enzyme, the tyrosinease molecule is actually what causes pigmentation. So sunlight causes the pelage, the color of the fur to go dark because of dopamine. Wow. Yeah. And so people who are albinos or animals that are albinos, it's because they have a mutation in this tyrosinease. So with the white, you know, white, because of dopamine. Yeah. And so people who are albinos or animals that are albinos, it's because they have a mutation in this tyrosinease. So with the white, you know, white, red eyes typically, not always red eyes, but often red eyes white fur, they can't actually take sunlight and convert it into this, into melanin. Basically it goes sunlight and then there's a bunch of other biochemical steps in melanin. So there's this beautiful relationship between light dopamine testosterone, mating, hair color, right, and temperature because in long days, generally it's warmer than in short days where it's cooler. So light and temperature are kind of pushing on a bunch of physiological mechanisms to make some animals want to breed at particular times of year. And the break on breeding is what we talked about earlier is melatonin. When there's very little light, you get lot more melatonin and it shuts down dopamine, it shuts down breeding, it shuts, so melatonin, you want it a little bit, but you don't want too much of it. And when you're saying that light makes the brain produce dopamine, I wonder if there's long periods of rain and a lack of light if then once you hit sunlight, you have more dopamine. Oh yeah. Is that what it is? This is, I mean, if you go to a skin and I have a relative, my stepmom is a Danish, you go to Scandinavia, you go to Denmark in the winter. And everyone is, some people are resilient too, but most people are a little bit, I'm not going to say clinically depressed, but everything is depressed. It's darker, it's darker, people go, they're head down, it's cold days are extremely short, the spring hits. And literally people start going, or at least they did when I was in college, you know, like women and men start going topless in the sun in the parks. People are definitely mating a lot more than they are in the winter months, even though they're drinking a more alcohol in the winter months for sure, they're mating a lot more, people get spring fever. The spring fever has a biological basis and near the equator, like the Brazilians, they're like that all year long. I have a lot of Brazilian friends, so I realize there. Yeah, I do as well. I was thinking about this because I went to Prince of Wales, Ireland, which is I think the rainy spot in North America. And it's, we're there for a week, it was crazy how much it rains, it rains every single day, except for a few hours, we were able to start a campfire one day. When I came back, came back to LA and of course it was sunny because it's always sunny in LA. And I call my friend, I go, dude, I don't know what's going on, I've never been happier in my life. Exactly. I am so open-man-search. Yeah, it was a surge, like I was on a crazy drug. I'm like, if you could keep this high all the time, like what a wonderful world it would be. Well, there's another hormone that's super cool that actually that people are now abusing unfortunately, which is called a melanocyte stimulating hormone. A melanocyte is a, is a, is a kind of cell basically that creates pigmentation in the body. Makes you go tan. And melanocyte stimulating hormone is in the pituitary. And when you get sunlight, you release this melanocyte stimulating hormone. It makes your skin tan from the, it actually causes pigmentation, not by tanning because it burned your skin a little bit, browning you. You're actually the melanocytes are darkening your skin. Does it from the inside? It does. It does. So you can take this melanocyte, achieve a tan? Well, so melanocyte stimulating hormone does two things. It causes pigmentation and it reduces appetite. So who are the two people? What's the one group on this planet of people that want to be tan and reduce their appetite? Hose bodybuilding. That's what I was thinking about. It's the hoe. Come on, man. Bodybuilders take something to them called, you know, there's a whole world of peptides that we should, you know, maybe that the peptide world is, is blowing up love to talk to you about. Oh, yeah. That's getting to that next. So melanocyte stimulating hormone has a name. There's a peptide that's so called melanotan. Melanotan has three major effects, which is why people are now taking it slash abusing it, etc. Which is it makes you tan. You don't have to stand the sun. It just because it mimics this pathway makes you tan. It reduces your appetite. And it gives people almost hair trigger erections that last hours have come to me three weeks. So now. So it's so in this, so you're talking about this effect. Our I talked about this effect in Scandinavia of sunlight comes out. People have dopamine. They have also melanocytes stimulating hormone. They're not as hungry. They, they want to have sex a lot. It's that's MSH alpha MSH is the molecule. So you can buy this stuff people buy it. I'm not well, okay, now we're getting into these people now we're getting into taking it. What's going on with her face though? That's fake tan bro. She's got chocolate. I am definitely not suggesting people play around with these things. Why? Because I want to hear your stories. So that's what these guys are taking summer sunless tanning nasal spray. Wow. So he's probably doing this spray. But yeah, people it can bypass the blood brain barrier through the nose because you know, the neurons of your of your olfactory bulb or part of your brain, they say, get it crazy boners too. That's why he's got that piece of paper. So it's wood. So it's a common picture. So he's got the paper forward and right above the crudge. Yeah, I don't want to push people towards any particular sites because I, but that's fine, but I will. You tell me what to say. So I've never. Oh man, the, um, so peptides are very interesting. So oh, oh, you got off the melanocytes real quick. I see. No, so melanocytes are a pet. What's the negative side effects of this stuff? I don't know. Nobody really knows negative side effects. Well, how about that? Well, the smart people I know says go for it. No side effects. It quotes Andrew, who knows next Instagram ad is going to be a picture of you with a status scope on you. You would have one. They're photoshopped your head and doctor some scrawny as doctor. I'm putting it online, but this might not be real as a potential side effect. That's from Reddit. So yeah, there is a claim to inject themselves melanin to to get a dark tan. Yes. What he went too far. Oh my God. Is that real? That's part of like it could just be that guy putting people on on Reddit to get well, that would be a real problem with some of these crackpots to think they're transracial, but they take. Right. Well, they're taking he's going on someone is lips. So no one really knows how much of this stuff to take. That's the issue. It's all worked out by these, you know, bodybuilding communities. Right. So right. Exactly. So so what's incredible is so melanitant there are sites online where people can just look for peptides and you will you can buy these things and it will say not for use in animals or humans, but people are buying them and they're injecting them. Let's be honest. But what is it used for that? It's not for use in animals. Exactly. And so I've definitely I've never taken. Oh, is that real? I like German model claims she's well on a way to becoming a black girl. Now, she's undergone a series of tanning injections to darken her skin. And somehow, it's convinced an African hairdresser to give her a black textured hair. That is crazy. Is that real? Yeah. And it also could be a tablet, but I feel like I saw this a couple years ago. But his thing is, is darkening the skin from the inside. I have, I have vitiligo. So I have these spots. You can see it in my nose. Yeah. Luckily I'm a white guy for this because if you're a black person, it's very like about really dark skin. You can see it when that clearly. Really, it didn't see until I was in my twenties. And I arrested it. I had it for quite a while. And then it stopped advancing because of vitamins. Initially, that was the big thing. And then I started doing UVB treatments and a bunch of different things. And now it just doesn't get worse, but doesn't get any better either. And the one thing that actually did help it, which is odd, because I only did it for a month was the carnivore diet. The carnivore diet, I started noticing, like some of my, some of my white spots were filling in. That could be downstream of dopamine and not everything leads back to dopamine. But many things do because things like dopamine are basically a, a kind of a trigger for a menu of a bunch of other things of testosterone or estrogen and primarily in females, but also for motivation for sexual behavior, for drive, for tan, you know, for pigmentation and these kinds of things. It sets off a whole program. You were asking about peptides. But while masking. Oh, yeah. Do you think that shit would work with my vidil? I've never never heard of that. Well, the issue is is that would make every melanocyte in your body turn on more melanin. So you get dark everywhere. Have melanin. I might not have melanocytes there. I don't know much about vidiligo. It's an autoimmune issue. I can ask a colleague. I mean, we have great people in dermatology at Stanford. They would know. Okay. I will. We'll talk soon. Yeah. So anyway, more about peptides. Yeah. So peptides are getting a lot of interest now. Yeah. Um, so you see one five sevens all the rage. It is. So, um, peptides are just small strings of amino acids. They can act as hormones. So a hormone is a molecule that would release in one point in the body and goes in acts on a bunch of other areas of the body. There's like testosterone doesn't do one thing. It had does many, many things. So it acts kind of as we say systemically. Peptides can act as hormones. So, um, melanitan obviously changes the skin, changes libido, all sorts of things. There are peptides like GP 157 gastric peptide 157. This is a peptide that is naturally made by the body, but people have synthesized and turned into a compound that they take and inject that does seem to have the ability to repair damage to shoes of various kinds. It mimics some of the downstream effects of growth hormone. So this is actually, I, um, I actually trained with him once, although, uh, he with far more weight than I had this guy, Ryan Crowley, who tore his pack recently. This very dramatic Instagram video where you see him doing it in client press like five, 15 and it rips off the bone. And then now I'm not going to say whether or not Ryan's using GP 157 or not. But, um, I don't think there's anyone needs to do a nadir not video on him, or maybe they do. Doesn't matter. The point is that things like GP 157 definitely do accelerate the healing of an injury. And there's no question about that. That's an issue. Because I talked to a doctor and he was trying to tell me that it didn't work. And he was saying if you even inject a saline into an area, we'll alleviate some pain. And I was like, I don't think you're right. Yeah, but this is like the TRT discussion or the steroids conversation 20 years ago, where people said, do they really work? I mean, people, this guy was very incredulous. I mean, when it was listening to this guy talk about it, I was like, listen, I've used them myself. And I had a tendonitis in my elbow that I just could not fix. Yeah. I started using BPC 157. It was gone in two weeks. Yeah. A lot of people are using GP 157. What is the difference in BPC and GP one? Uh, BPC is a different, I think it's either a different stream of a, a string of amino acid, excuse me, or something related. You know, the gut has a bunch of stuff that it secretes that tells the rest of the body about health status. This is why the gut microbiome is so critical. As a not unrelated aside, I have a colleague upstairs from my lab at Stanford, Justin Sonnenberg, who's shown that the ingestion of two or three servings of fermented food per day dramatically decreases the levels of interleukin six, these inflammatory cytokines, increases levels of interleukin 10. So like kombucha, kombucha, kimchi. There's actually, it sounds disgusting. I've never tried about fermented cottage cheeses out there. I mean, I slanted the fermented shards. Those people are animals. Those people are different. They are different. I've been eating just fermented cabbage recently. Perfect. I got it from a grocery store. I was like, this stuff is good. It's weird. The Sonnenberg lab publisher paper in cell, another one of these premier journals, super, super stringent journal today showing that if you ingest two or three servings of these fermented foods, you, you basically what you do is you create an acidity in the gut that's perfect for the anti-inflammatory environment, or I shouldn't say it's perfect. It's ideal. It pushes you in the right direction. And GP157 and these other peptides are things that when the gut is happy, the body starts secreting these things that allow you to heal faster. This is why when people are like, when they're sick in a hospital or they can't move, they get sores that turn into massive infections, right? And it's not just because hospitals have a lot of infection. It's because when you were sedentary, the gut suffers, when we're eating the kind of garbage they feed you in most hospitals, the gut suffers, and then the whole system crashes. We had so crazy that they're doing this in hospitals, right? Hospital cafeterias are among the worst food in the world, which makes no sense. It's so crazy. It really is so crazy because, and also the amount of doctors that dismiss nutrition as a viable way to stay healthy. Well, look at them. Yeah. I mean, this is why, this is why 2020 to me has changed everything because I look, I work alongside many doctors, I train and teach medical students and I have great reverence and respect for the field of medicine. However, it's clear that most places are not updating the training to stay modern. This is a great thing about Stanford. You have people, the scientists and the physicians talk. And so, and there are other places too, but I think that this kind of communication, when that happens, then the physicians learn about all the modern studies. I mean, that's why if God forbid you have to go to a hospital, try and go to a hospital that's related to a research institution because they hear all the latest. Now with BPC 157 or GP 157, whichever one is most effect, is there one more effect of the other? Not that I'm aware of GP 157 is the one that I hear more athletes and various other communities who need to repair injuries taking. Now, are they taking it locally or are they taking it subcutaneously? So you take it systemically, but people have this thing, just like with testosterone people, it would act systemically, but people will like if they want to repair it to issue, they'll inject locally. And there are local effects of these hormones and these peptides. So there's some benefit to injecting it low-haves? Perhaps. Perhaps. Enough so that it's not going to hurt you because it's also going to be systemic, right? Higher concentrations delivered to a particular area that's going to, maybe, you know, if it has to be distributed systemically, you have receptors everywhere putting it locally can definitely enhance the effect. So like similar to the way they treat stem cells, like stem cells, they shoot it locally or you can get an IV. Yeah. And I should say the stem cell therapies are very controversial because the academic community and the clinics that are doing these in various places, they haven't joined forces. I'm all for communication. I'm not like four or against, I'm all for more research and let people talk. Have you ever talked to Dr. Neil Reardon? I don't know. Dr. Neil Reardon is a guy who, he's written many books on stem cells, got peer reviewed papers on it and he runs a clinic at a Panama. And, you know, we're doing the Biosolar Reguys. And then Danny in those guys. He has a similar setup down in Panama and I actually sent my mom down there because my mom had a really badly injured knee and they were trying to get a have a knee replacement. I centered down there and nothing for six months like she was like, one else still hurts, still hurts. Six months later, also in the pain went away. Amazing. And then eight months later, she's like, I can walk with no pain. This is crazy. And, you know, Mel Gibson sent his dad down there when his dad was 92 when he was 100. He was getting boners, which Mel wanted to tell us about for whatever reason. Melanne. Maybe. Maybe. But Mel also had him. I had some stem cells in Santa Monica shot into my shoulder or maybe no, this was Vegas. And this was, Dr. Roddy McGee did some stuff in Vegas. And then we did an MRI eight months later, I believe it was. And I had a full length tear. My rotator cuff, it was gone. Amazing. The tear just healed up. I mean, the, which is wild. That kind of experience will shift somebody's view of these things for sure. For mine, because they were telling me that I had to get surgery. I went to a doctor and the doctor was doing all these tests on it. And he was like, lift here, press against this, press. And he goes, well, he goes, like, you got a lot of stability there because it's pretty strong. You got a lot of muscle around it. He goes, but you're going to have to have surgery. Like, you're just putting off the inevitable. I'm like, huh, okay. And so I went to a different doctor's guy. Well, Dr. Davidson out of the UFC sent me to this guy, Dr. Roddy McGee, and he shot me full of stems and Roddy's been on the podcast before as well. He's very careful. He's a funny podcast guest. Very careful because, you know, I like to get silly and say a lot of wild shit. He's very careful. He's a damn track. He's legit. And we did this MRI, like, whatever it was, I believe it was eight months later. And he was like, this is absolutely insane. Like, I've never seen this before. I've never seen a rotator cuff tear full-length rotator cuff tear go away. Well, surgeons like to cut. No problem now. Like I do awesome. Everything. I mean, I'm doing kettlebell swings and presses with 70 pounds in each hand. And I have no problem. Like, and I'm not in pain. It's full function. It's a sleep on it. It doesn't bother me. It's crazy. And I also got a series of injections while I was in Texas from this company, weighs to well. And just it's remarkable. Stem cells are remarkable. And I just think there was such a scare in this country because people thought they were coming from fetuses and they were encouraged. He was always, yeah, there was the embryonic thing. During the Bush administration, there was all this fear of it. But they're using umbilical cords from when it was someone, a young woman gives birth. She can sell her umbilical cord. And they take that umbilical cord and they convert it into stem cells. And has radical healing properties when it's utilized correctly. But in Panama, they can get away with a lot of shit. They can't, and the same thing, Columbia, there's a reason why Danny and Rampage are going down at Columbia's because they can do a lot of things there. They can give you fucking trillions of cells again. Well, there have been, I agree with everything you're saying. There in fairness, there was a case in Florida of an eye clinic treating macular degeneration with stem cells injected these people to try and save their vision. They were, they were early stage and they all went blind. Yeah, that was the FDA shut them down. So I do think when you when you talk about the brain and the eyes, which as we talked about last time, I was on here, two pieces of brain hanging out outside the crying, you know, vault. There you have to be very, very careful. A brain and where an eye is not a knee. And when I understand, that was a very unethical application. Oh, this clinic was making claims about curing blindness, Alzheimer's, all this, that they're shut down now. But so also when that happens, it sets back the field of stem cell therapies in this country 10 years or more. So it's a slippery slope. And I think this is why I think people need to approach this with caution. It's one of the reasons why people are looking to peptides because like for instance, you have what are called secreta gogs. Sounds like synagogue, but secreta gog, which is basically a hormone stimulating hormone. So growth hormone, as we know, various people use AIDS and growth hormone really causes metabolism and repair. That's really what it controls. Next organs grow, but it also increases metabolism burns fat, etc. You heal faster. But there is growth hormone releasing hormone and those go under the names like Epimoral and Tessa Moreland, things of that sort. And now there are a lot of people who are taking those peptides in order to stimulate their more growth hormone as opposed to taking growth hormone directly. So now there's this whole class of peptides that are not hormones per se, but that they stimulate more hormones. Are those effective? Well, they absolutely work. Well, the way you said that's scary. Yeah, wasn't it scary? They absolutely work. Things like Tessa Moreland, Epimoral, and yeah, absolutely. They'll cause you to release more growth hormone. You burn fat, you recover quicker, you all with all the stuff. This year's Olympics, you're going to see some amazing record breaking in people that are not taking the band substances because they can take that time because they can take certain peptides because every time something's on a band substance list, all you have to do is get right outside the list and take something that is chemically similar enough. They don't ban pathways. They ban particular molecules. You can't take climbular, you can't test, you can't take deck, you can't do other, but people will take hormone stimulating hormones. You could take this Epimoral and stuff and compete in your life. I don't know if it's on the Osoto list, but I mean, let's just say there are, there is lots and lots of peptide use in order to get into these pathways. There's some stuff that is effective that is not on the list because they haven't discovered it yet. I didn't think band it yet. Right. Things like Sermoreland, which is another growth hormone secreting peptide, these, you know, they're 10 or 20 of these things that can promote the release of these different hormones. And so the peptides are an area that is considered gray market. They're not illegal, they're not legal, they're not prescribed by doctors. This is that Sermoreland is actually prescribed by MDs for growth hormone deficiency. And it actually was a popular diet a few years ago where people were given Sermoreland and told to go on very low calorie diets and because of the way growth hormone preserve muscle and kill appetite. People were losing weight. And so in Hollywood, peptides are really big because they, unlike steroids, unlike hormones, peptides don't scare the category of people in Hollywood who don't want to put on muscle. Let's just say it's big with the ladies. They're big because it keeps your appetite down, you burn fat. But some of those people have spoken to and they've said they're getting joint pain. Well, if you take growth hormones secreting peptides, you're going to start making more collagen. Your skin will look more youthful, but you'll also start building more cartilage in your wrists. And you know, the skeleton has to contend with that. And so everything grows. Partilage problems with your knees. Would that help heal them? It likely would really absolutely. Oh, what about, um, what about meniscus? Because meniscus is a real issue. Like meniscus tears, one of the problems with it is not a lot of blood supply. Right. So Danny, those guys, I don't know how to find the videos. I don't know if they're still up there. Maybe they were in the stories. But when they would go in for meniscus tears, they're going to burrow away a lot of the bone and other heart scar tissue that's in there. And they're putting stem cells in there from what I could see in these videos. And then they're also going to locally treat it with some of these peptides like GP157 and other things like that. So you're creating an environment of well-being and health and mobility for a joint that's battered. What they do at ways to well is they combine stem cells with BPC157 as well. So that's a common thing. Yeah. And so when you say, you know, do these things work, they absolutely work. What are the risks? Well, you're tickling cells in the pituitary just to create more hormone. So you're going to get some balancing out of other hormones. You know, if guys want to run out and just increase growth hormone, you're going to increase, you'll increase testosterone and you'll also increase estrogen and parallel. So people have different sensitivities. And so this is why it's an experimental science. And this is why most MDs are not going to prescribe any of this stuff because an individual has to really be able to think intelligently and know, they have to understand their system. It's clear, you know your system. You know when you're feeling good and you know when you're not feeling good. But we see all these crazy videos on the web of guys getting ridiculous, guy know and like tanning to the point where they look like a different human being. Yeah. It's because people just have this more as better mentality. Well, also people, you know, they're, they're doing it for Instagram likes. Right. There's part of what they're doing is like, like there's a giant group of people online that just experiment for YouTube views. I mean, they're, they're willing to try all kinds of crazy shit for YouTube views. It's crazy. Yeah. It's a while. We're living in a living in stretch. But there's a lot of interesting stuff that can learn from these things. Yeah. And health information. I mean, one of the reasons, you know, 2020, thanks to you coming on your podcast, thanks to Lex and his, and his encouragement. The whole reason for teaching about science and health and practices about sleep and light and stress and hypnosis and all this stuff is because 2020 sparked a health communication crisis. I mean, it was, I'm not going to name names, but it was very clear that the big ups in the, in government, in the national institutes of whatever and etc. Well intentioned very educate people were not coming out with public statements that were clear about how people should manage their stress, how they should manage their children's stress, how they should stay on a sleep schedule. And so that's why I essentially just stepped up. I mean, well, I got a mouth and I know the literature and where I don't know the literature, I can communicate with these amazing colleagues that I have. I can ask four of the best MDs on gut health. I can talk to Matt Walker, the Stanford sleep clinic and find out what are the three things everyone should do to optimize their sleep. And so from pulling from these various sources and communities, you can put it out there. So I feel like social media has this very dark and kind of strange side. And then it also is the opportunity to just put information out there for free. And I think, you know, all the stuff about peptides and hormones, etc. That's kind of the more niche. But for most people, they're just struggling to figure out like get oriented. Like what is happening in the world with viruses and should I take vitamin D3? It's so hard to get good information. Yeah, it really is. And that's one of the more rewarding things about this podcast is that I can have people like you on and Matthew Walker and Davidson Claire and all these people that are experts in health and wellness and they understand all these things. And you can I mean, it's just an amazing resource and it's free and people can get educated about this stuff and understand that you can take some control over your own destiny in a small way by actually a pretty large way. Oh, absolutely. Like benefiting your health. I mean, the peptides and all these various things, they have a cost, but the basic things of viewing light in the morning, controlling your breathing as a way to modulate yourself. You don't need, it's great if you have a sauna, but you can also take a hot shower. Most people have access to that, not everybody of course, but most people fasting for some portion of the day, trying to make better food choices. These things don't just have a small effect on health and well being they have a huge, outsized effect. And no one is going to provide it in pill form. It's never going to be delivered by the government. It's never going to be delivered in schools, although I would hope it would be someday. But basically what we're trying to do is those of us that are interested in public science and health education is provide a kind of a user manual for all this stuff, this technology that's been built into us. And we always think about a device technology, but the eyes, this dopamine, the gut, I mean, everyone's equipped with this stuff, but we never actually learn how to use it. And so that's what like you said, David and Matt and Rhonda Patrick who I don't know, but it's done great. You know, I think it's doing great where it's beautiful. He's amazing. You guys would get along great. Yeah, I think it's, I think we're entering a new era now where people are feeling comfortable to do it. And you know, and I'm grateful to you because I think this podcast, it's actually, I'm absolutely clear that this podcast has promoted more health information than any other media venue, clear directives or opportunities to explore. You know, I know a few months back, things got a little crazy around stuff and even fauci was commenting back, but that just told me that this podcast is actually a primary source of public health information. And for people to go ferret out the people, the resources, the papers, enter the discussion. And I think that is, that is fundamentally important. Without that, we are never going to make it and be, because we have that, I think I speak for many people, I'm extremely grateful. Not just for this opportunity to come on here and speak, but for the opportunity for people to learn about choices, basically. Well, I'm extremely grateful for people like you that come on here and are willing to share all your information and help educate people about this stuff because it's super important. So tell me we hit three hours, believe it or not, just flew by. It's four o'clock. Tell people when this podcast, you're doing a podcast right now and it is called Huberman Lab, Huberman Lab and how long you be doing it now since January, since January. Once a week, every Monday we have an episode. It's not just about my lab's work. In fact, it's mostly about other people's work. And basically there it is. Oh, thank you. Yeah. So every episode is about 90 minutes or two hours. And we do the deep dive on some topics. But we cluster them. So like the month one was all about sleep and how to get better at sleeping. What dreams mean if you're jet lag or shift worker, I care a lot about the firemen and firefighters and police officers and military. They have shift work. They can't do the perfect schedule. So you know an episode about that. Then we'll spend a month on hormones, growth hormone, peptides. And we spend a month on sleep and eye health and just basically everything. So it's kind of a class that you can go and watch or listen to. And then I also teach on Instagram, just Huberman Lab. Yeah, I was about to bring that up. Your Instagram poster fantastic. Oh, thank you. Really good. Everything you do is awesome. But all this is available in all platforms, all travel and everything. Yeah. Spotify, Apple, YouTube and all the other various places you can find podcasts. And the Instagram obviously on Instagram, I'm on Twitter. But it's your Instagram, Huberman Lab, Huberman Lab and Twitter as well or Huberman Lab. You use that? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Thank you. It's awesome. Thank you. I appreciate you very much. I appreciate you. Thank you. Thank you. All right. That's it. Bye, everybody.