Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night. All day. Oh, Joe, greatness, Mitch Brothers. It's so good to be here. I have enjoyed your content tremendously online. And I really got into a video this morning that I was watching where you found this megalithic site that was undocumented in Peru. It's incredible that they still have these ancient sites that for whatever reason, it seems like the money that they get gets stolen. Like the money that it's supposed to be allocated towards documenting these things and registering these things. People just say, fuck it. I'm going to pocket it. And it happens a lot more than you think. I just hard to believe, man. Some of the stuff that you document is very heartbreaking. Like one of them was when you flew a drone over these ancient ruins and you showed the amount of places that have been looted. Oh, yeah. And it's just all of it. It's just pop. You see these holes. And when I first saw them, I'm like, what does it show me? And then you're like, these are all spots where someone has dug in and looted. And most of it has been done in this area of Peru over the last 20 years. So from 2006 to 2026, more. I would have the biggest amount of looting happened. It's actually died down some. But the end of the 20. So 1980s to 2010s, I would say that's what it really like when it really took off. And you can tell from the trash that's left there like cigarettes that were only produced in the 80s. So the bottles that were only produced in the 90s. How nice of them to steal the artifacts and leave trash? It, it, they've become landfills of human remains. It's this place you're talking about is, I mean, it's eight full kilometers of just it looks like the moon. Every single location has been looted. And like I got to go up there and see what this looks like. And and so pull up to the microphone a little bit more. So looting, what are they at that point in time? I mean, these are hundreds, thousands of years old these sides. So what are they finding? Well, a lot of the mummies that I've because I found mummies that have been torn torn apart literally like they're the cotton that they're wrapped in the textiles that they're wrapped in. I mean, it's just they've been scavenged. Well, they're looking for jewels or for some sort of metallurgy like on the person themselves. The unfortunate thing is, I mean, all you'll see is you'll just see these, these bones littered across the landscape with broken pieces of pottery and that was also disturbing how much bones you see everywhere. So this is a, it looks like you see a bone right there. These are all human bones that you just find scattered. That's all cotton. And what we're about to see here is an actual mummy that's been torn apart. This is so sad that there's no protection. Nobody's going out there, man. Nobody except for the looters. But I have no very little about Peru other than, you know, obviously the Nascalines, the mummies, all these different things. The mystery of the place. People showing that, please? Oh, it's over. But there's a, there's a couple burial, burial drone side too. But it's just you go to the top. How big is Peru? I don't even know geographically how large it is. I mean, Peru Peru is huge. I mean, it takes up. This is another, this is a different looted site. So this is all, this all of this is in the Paracas, Nasca, Eka region. And these are the scalles you're sitting there. So the looters will oftentimes leave, I don't know, set them up in this fashion. There is an aside I've gone to where I haven't seen something like set up like this in the end. But so I pull out to show the scale of it. I mean, every little piece of white you see is, is some part of a human. Wow. It's tragic, man. There's just so much history lost. And so does this stuff wind up in private collections? Is the museums ever get it? Like what happens to that stuff? I don't think museums get it at all. It's like private, private buyers. I actually met a, well, the term is walk out role. It's a grave robber. I actually met one in Mirafloris in Lima, proper at one of the Artesanales where they're selling, you know, ancient goods. Well, some of them have real things that they go out and they loot. And I mean, that this is one of the things I've been thinking about like for the future. Like what, what can be done about this? Because the government, nobody from the government's going out there. And so these things end up in private collections, textiles, humans, pottery, things that you would see in museums. It's just nobody from that official administration is taking the trip to go out there and preserve these things. It seems like just the ancient civilization of Peru is a massive mystery. It seems like there are a lot of uncovered stories in that area. And it was a hotspot. And it doesn't seem like there's an incredible amount of research being done other than by independent people. They, I mean, so, Joe, there's so much in Peru. I mean, you throw a stone in your finding an ancient archaeological site. I mean, they're doing, whenever they do construction, they end up coming across structures or bones. I mean, this last expedition, I went all over the country and there is no lack of archaeological sites. So the money and, I just, the money it would take to fund research on all these places is just extreme. It's extreme. I think there's a lot of history that that goes missed because of what's currently happening. But a lot of times a lot of the research is focused on what's going to bring tourism. Right. Like Mach Pichu, things along those lines, which is also insane. You're just incredible. Like that place is like, what, why, how? Why'd you build it up here? Fucking nuts. Of good friend of mine just actually went. Just recently took his family up to Mach Pichu. And he's like, it doesn't even make any sense, man. Mach Pichu is what started. My family's from Peru and so I would grow up going there and I have this old back when you were filming with cameras with like a videotape. There's footage of me finding seashells at Machu Pichu. When I was like 10 years old, back then you could go wherever you wanted. You didn't have to stay on a path. And so, and for people that don't know, Mach Pichu is like, what, 12,000 people have seen a lot? Yeah. And so I'm a kid. I mean, I saw the footage, the grainy footage, and I'm showing my dad on the camera. Like, Dad, Dad, look, I found seashells. I saw them inside of, they were glinting in the mud in the wall. And so I took them out. And that's what started this whole process for me. I was just like that. It blew my mind that there were seashells way up there. And so I studied about Earth cataclysm and ancient history and when sea levels were different. And that just, that is a moment that started kind of this whole path for me. How old were you at the time? 10 or 12. Wow. Wow. So how many times have been there since? Well, growing up, we used to go every year and a half or so. And that's continued into my adulthood. It's only been recently the past two years that I've been doing. what I've been doing, which is like hardcore solo expeditions. And so when you look at a site like Machapitu or any of these ancient sites, what is the timeline that conventional archeologists attribute? I mean, they attributed to the income, which, you know, 14, late 1400s, early 1500s, I think they encore conquered by the Spanish in 1530, I think. And so most of that megolithic architecture, they attributed to the Inca. However, there's evidence that there's a site, Jamie, if you could pull up, it's called Vignake. This place is, there's megolithic architecture with precision that goes down 50 feet under this mountain. It's it. Take this out. Wow. Wow. This is crazy. So I believe they filled in the top to in modern times, but they're more of a red top. And very soon there's going to be a guy who shows us a map. And so you see very different construction, very different construction from the bottom to the top. But that's how it always is, right? The most complex stuff. So that's that's showing that this architecture here, it goes down 50 feet into this mountain. And what do they think this was? So this complex is all attributed to the worry. It's attributed to the culture that came right before the Inca, which doesn't make much sense to me because what you see on the surface, that's worry construction, which is small stones, right? What have they held together with? Mud mortar, mud as mortar. And but then so this site has only been 4% excavated, 4%. It's underneath all of it is that type of architecture, which is crazy. So you have mud and mortar with very small stones, and then underneath it you have precision cut, megalithic stones. And how big are these stones and where are they supposedly coming from? That. So here's a funny story. So this place, if you look, you can find it on Google Maps. They call it the El Complejo, the worry, so the worry complex. But if you go back to the Spanish chronicles, Pedro Céez de Leon, when he was in Tijuanaco. So Tijuanaco, where Puma Puma Puma is in Bolivia, when they ask the natives, you know, who built this, they say, we don't know it was built before us from the people from the lake. The same people who built Vignacé, that's what the natives said. That place of Vignacé is 800,000 kilometers from Tijuanaco. So and it's the same construction. So it would, it makes sense kind of what they're saying. The people who built Tijuanaco also built this place. But before they know, before they knew that, they didn't witness it. They was just there when they got there. Because the locals said, well, that's a lot of stuff, right? That's part of the weirdness of South America. Yeah. And you know, even Mexico, right? Yeah. It's that's the weirdness of the Aztec structures. I didn't know that until pretty recently that the Aztecs labeled like to note Chitlan, the place where the gods were born. I didn't know that. Yeah. Like they, they don't attribute that to themselves. They themselves. They found it when we cleared the area. I mean, you think about it. I still to this day, you know, I was up in Lake Titicaca. I mean, there's structures all over the place. But you're like, where were these people living? And because there's no remnants of cities or towns. And the reason is because in modern times, people have recommissioned the blocks and started and used them for their farms and their homes and things like that. You have a good location, a place of reverence, a place you're going to build the next, the next culture is going to build on it. You know, and I think that's happened a lot in a lot of places. Yeah. Well, everywhere, right? I mean, that's Lebanon too. That's Paul Beck. It seems to be the case that those, those immense stones where the Romans built on top of them. The Roman documentation is pretty precise. They documented everything that never talked about these enormous thousand toned stones that are seven meters up in the air. Now we're just going to put them into base of our structure. Yeah, they did even talk about them. They talked about these beautiful structures that are on top that are clearly Roman, but the stuff underneath it just defines logic. And some of the stones that were never moved and put into place that were cut and quarried, but just never moved. 1600 tons. Like how? And things you can't replicate, you know, nowadays. That's what's crazy. With modern machinery, we can't do it. I mean, it's, when I started this path, you know, I was, you know, fingerprints of the gods was one of the first books I picked up. He too. My dad had it in his library and, and, and that set me off on a course. And the, the inability to be able to, to, I don't know, I don't, I don't buy the mainstream. It's, it feels a little bit lazy. The, the responses that, that the mainstream kind of gives to some of this stuff. Um, as opposed to just saying, I don't know. It's purposely ignorant. It's more than lazy. Because if it was just lazy, I mean, they've been confronted by all this other alternative archaeology evidence and all these other people that have like explored these things and shown. And that there was always the conventional wisdom that there was no society back then that was capable of doing this. So they had to attribute it to more recent societies until go back. Like, yeah. And then you're like, okay, you guys need to shut the fuck up. It's, I mean, there's a power in emitting like, if we're looking for the truth here, then it's like, we got this evidence that disrupts this that we thought before. All right, just say that. Right. You know what I mean? They just say it. It's fascinating that they can't. You know, because they are like every other form of academia. They're, they are just like, I mean, it might as well be talking to a gender studies teacher. Just like they don't want to look at reality. They just want their narrative and they want to be the gatekeepers of information. And then they just want to push that narrative forward. And they're so mean. Dude, it, I only started recently being on X within the past year. And I'm just like the caddiness of it all, man. It's, well, just that could boast. It exposes their personality. And they're just not the type of people that I want to talk to about anything. Especially not, you're not the gate, if you're a 41 year old person, you're not the gatekeeper of ancient history. You can't be. There's too much. There's too much all over the world. It doesn't make sense. None of it makes sense. And that's, I think, why they're so terrified of people like Felipe Biondi. And the scams and the interference. Because if he's right and it appears he is over 200 different independent scans. And they also have the exact same thing. If he's right, you guys are fucked. Because you have to, you're going to eventually have to say we're wrong. And you have a moment here where you can choose, which direction to go. Pretty soon that moment's going to be lost. But it's like, this is what the evidence is presented. And like you said, verified over 200 different studies. It's like, all right, we might be wrong. Let's see. We don't want to do that. They don't want to do that. They're still digging their heels in. And they're just discrediting themselves, which is fascinating. It's really interesting. It's really interesting to watch these assholes just like flounder. Well, and it makes me think, you know, what's the reason behind it? Is it pride? Is it ego? It's because it's because you wrote some books on it that you need to keep selling. Is it because it's in textbooks that universities use? I mean, it's all about. There's a lot of layers to it. It's all the above. But you can tell just by the way, the communicate online a lot of it is ego. Yeah. A lot of it is ego and just really bad personalities. You know, these people that are accustomed to never being questioned, accustomed to being in the hierarchy of academia, where you know, you have these tenured professors and then they have the people that are coming up under them and they all follow the same sort of rigid structure. And so any heterodox thinkers, anybody who comes in from outside the box just gets shit all over. You know, there's no open mindedness. I don't know if this is like a parable or something, but you know, I don't know some story where there's a truck going into a tunnel and it gets stuck. And it's back enough traffic and nobody can get through. Everybody's trying to figure out what the hell how to get this truck through. And just, you know, some farmer walks up and he's just like, take their out the tires and problem solved. And so the inability to let other people come in with thoughts and opinions. It's just, it's a real detriment to the study of these things. Because in my approach to some of the places I've gone, I think it is that, yes, we have research. Yes, there is a level of understanding at a lot of these places what happened. But it's also that going into it with a fresh set of eyes. You know, sometimes, I mean, I get so locked in my work sometimes. I can't see outside of it. You know, sometimes it takes another party to come in and all of a sudden your mind is blown in a completely different direction. I don't see that level of openness to things on the side of a lot of a lot of the mainstream academia when it comes to this stuff. Super Bowl 60 deserves a sports book built for the moment. Draft King Sportsbook, an official sports betting partner of Super Bowl 60 puts you right in the center of the biggest game of the year. Anything can happen during the Super Bowl and Draft Kings has your back with early exit. If your player goes down in the first half, you still get paid in cash when your bet settles. No bonus bets, no waiting. While other sports books don't offer injury protection, draft kings covers the entire first half, even the second quarter. An early exit works on live bets too. Pregame or in-game, Draft Kings has got you covered. New to draft kings, new customers can bet just $5 to get 300 in bonus bets if your bet wins. Download the Draft Kings Sportsbook app now and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets if your bet wins. In partnership with Draft Kings, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-Gambler in New York called 8-7-7-8-Hopenwire text-Hopenwire-467-36-9. In Connecticut called 8-8-8-8-7-8-9-7-7-7-7-4 visit ccpg.org. On behalf of Budhoke Asina when resorting Kansas passed through a per-wage or tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over, age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void and Ontario. Restrictions apply. That must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. In a month, odds required. For additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co's-audio. Limited time offer. Well, people have to really understand that the whole concept of being's GMAC is only a few hundred years old. And that's what's weird. It's like so these very recent structures, these very recent establishments want to be the gatekeepers of information of vast swath of the world. I mean, it's not possible that you know everything. It's not. I was thinking about that. You know a lot. They know a lot about things they have discovered. They do. They know a lot about Mesopotamia. They know a lot about Iraq, all the amazing stuff that they find. Some stuff, they very accurately date it. But it doesn't explain things that you can't explain. And they want to try to just fit it. Yeah. Yeah. That's what's goofy. I mean, look, if the puzzle beats doesn't fit, it's not trying to force it. Well, it's also like more gigantic spectacular pieces. And you know those aren't important. I mean, Ben Van Kirkwick with this most recent discoveries where they're using the ground penetrating radar to find the labbrance and this 40 meter long metallic object that's inside of an atrium down there. Like what is that thing? I hope it's something. If they go looking and I hope they do. And this is the other thing. It's like let's start putting money towards this like now. You know what I mean? Like figure this out. I don't know why I thought this. I think it might be a meteorite. If it's some sort of like metallic thing. 40 meter long. I know. I know. That's a fucking civilization under. But and imagine the next civilization coming across that. hearing the stories. It's like, right. Shit, let's worship this. They're like, let's revere it now and put it in an atrium. Well, like that's my thought. Yeah, exactly. Right. Exactly. There's a 40 meters. Yeah, there's a meteorite at mecco that they all go to touch. Yeah. Which is kind of crazy, right? Yeah. But completely makes sense. Right. Something comes from the sky and lands because chaos and then you worship it. I mean, that also wasn't one of like King Tut's knives was made instead of a meteorite or something. Yeah. I mean, so they were finding these things. Yeah. 40 meter one is pretty big though. I know. But also tick-tock shaped. That's the other thing. I'm like, so when it comes, let's go. Let's go. Well, you know, that's part of the Bob Lazar lore. I remember Bob Lazar said that when he was told that at least one of these things came from an archaeological dig. Like, what? What? What does he mean? He's like, that's what they were telling me. I don't know. But they told me that one of them was from an archaeological dig. So these things are really old. Dude, and his accuracy was with the element 115-15-15-something like that. From 1989, when element 115 wasn't even discovered until the 2000s. I mean, that's why when he's, I forget who I was talking to outside, but we were talking about, I think it's talking to Jamie about that, about Bob Lazar talking about some of these things coming from an archaeological site. Yeah. Let's go find it. Right. You know what I mean? Well, that's where it gets really weird, where it gets really weird is these mummies. We're going to go to the mummies. Are you going to hear Jamie? Eric Burleson, our representative, talking about how he was. How he's asked the White House to give DoD the power to let them go see this stuff, including that buried UFO. Portedly an object that is not in this country that is so large, it cannot be moved. That they've built an entire building around it. And I think that I think either Greer or another individual has actually mentioned this site, but I'm not going to mention it because it is a classified location. But there is a really apparent, there's reported a really large object. And that's one of the locations that I'm requesting to get to. It's going to evolve a lot to get to make that happen, but that may be the final destination. She'll like that makes me want to run for president. Because that's all I care about. The economy would be in shambles. I'd be like, show me the UFOs. Do you think they do it? Because I've heard that like they'll be. I mean, on that need to know basis where they're keeping stuff from presidents. You know, can't you got too close? I don't think that's where they killed Kennedy for it, but I think there's a bunch of things. I know. There's a whole lot of layers. But the UFO people love to think that it's UFOs, that's why they killed Kennedy. But they think everything's UFOs. But it definitely seems like, I don't know about the evidence, because it's just stories. And that's the problem, is that a lot of this stuff, and this is how I feel when a lot of people come on the podcast and talk to me, you know, supposed whistleblowers. Some of them I think are legitimate, and some of them I think are disinformation specialists. I think they're designed to muddy up the water. And this is what they're saying is designed to muddy up the water. And that's what they're trying to do. They're trying to make a lot of this stuff look silly and push certain narratives and just create confusion. And I think a lot of it is probably some black budget, weird science stuff that we have. But then it begs the question, where'd you get that? Is that really like the Diana Pissulcah work, where she's talking about their, essentially these things are donations. And that we're supposed to like take these things and try to figure it out. And then you look at some of the creation of some different inventions that happen very quickly after Roswell. And then our civilization just, I mean, just been on a boom ever since. Weird stuff. Like the fiber optic stuff and transistors, just the history of the creation of the transistor and the people that were involved in it. He's awful fucking fishy. I mean, I try to stick with what I, evidence that I can make out tangibly and it just gets so murky. Like you said, it just, all of this gets so murky that I don't, I don't know how the truth would even land. Well, the truth would have to land if there was an overall comprehensive effort by all of the world governments. And there would have to be some sort of unity in this and some sort of like a recognition that this is really important for the entire human population to understand our past. And if this is nonsense, let's find out that it's nonsense. And if this is real, this changes everything. And when you look at just just look at the vastness of the cosmos, it's not outside of the realm of possibility that stuff either came from somewhere else or was here. Because they were here that there was an advanced civilization here, whether it's our civilization or whatever the hell those mummies are. Yeah. Because the tradactyl mummies are we here. We can talk about that because I went, I did a deep dive with my friend Will and there is, there is too much a muck going on with these things for me to, for me, to objectively say, that they are what people are claiming them to be. There's too much wrong with this picture. Right. Well, first of all, a lot of them are fake. Yeah, for sure. A lot of them people have seemingly created with a bunch of different animal bones and human bones and pieces of the bones. And pieces of the bones and pieces of the bones. But then there's the weird ones. That are mummified and they're in the fetal position. And you see a structure that doesn't exist in the human body, but it's complete with tendons and ligaments and some of them have eggs inside of them. That, John, telling you, man, I look, I want to believe. I think it is much closer to bullshit than it is. All of them. I think what we're dealing with here are real human beings from the past. They are ancient that have been put together. Will from incredible history has done some amazing work with some amazing specialists. I mean, people at the top of their field on this stuff, looking at the X-rays and the Dicom files and calling out, calling out cuts, calling out incisions that were made, calling out why things don't make sense. And for me, the reason I put out my last video on the NASCOM Mummies is because there's a whole other narrative too of where the top of the world is. And I think that there's a lot of narrative too of where the money is, who's making money off of these things. And I think that, is there money being made off those little mummies? Oh, please. Yeah, let me get some. Yeah. So I remember, I forget who you're talking to. It might have been Jesse Michaels, but I remember you saying, you know, these are one of the greatest art projects if they were fake. Right. Right. But I remember you saying, you know, these are one of the greatest art projects if they were fake, right? Well, if you just scroll to the right here, this is what the, that's the goofy one. Yeah, but that's what the walk-out-o-a-selling. He sent that to me personally. The guy selling these things. These goofy ass. Yeah. For people. You can't see it. There's a folder on there that has the pictures in the photo. This is the photo ones. But what is the one that is the female that's in the... Maria. Is that what they're calling? Yeah. Maria is one of them. I mean, so Will had on Dr. William Morrison and Dr. Proctor, Dr. Wilson. I mean, like people in the top of their, in the top of their field analyzing these things. And this is the biggest fuck. Yeah, yeah, everybody. You can get this for $15,000. This is come, this comes directly from the walk-out-o-finding these things, by the way. Yeah. I did like a little undercover thing, trying to see what I could lower out of him. This is not particularly compelling to me. But it's in the same, it's in the same class coming from the same place, supposedly the same group of people are providing these things to the... Yeah, this is in, this is in the eco-museum. This is where they're, monster-aught. Is that what the monster-aught, monster-aught? So these are, again, these are not that compelling to me. The small ones know, the big ones, so the big ones though are... Gosh, they keep coming out with new specimen. There's a new one, Antonio, who's a teenage boy, except for his feet. His feet have arthritis in them. And which indicates that they put the foot bones of another specimen on this thing. Now, what these doctors have done, look, and here's the thing, I mean, I want to be clear, I would love nothing more than a Peru to be the hot spot of some new species. I don't think we're alone, I don't think we've identified every species, but also I'm not putting my money on these things coming out as authentic. I think they have been used with authentic bones, which is why they're getting the dates. I think that... Dude, I did a deep dive on this. Please, good, no feel free. Tell me, tell me what you found out. I initially wasn't going to make the video I did, but after spending days staying up doing this research, I couldn't not do it. And I found like, like I've been watched the whole Gaia series on this stuff, and I found myself getting entranced by the... Maybe. And then... Right. And then also watching... The whole reason of putting this stuff out there is like, look, make your own decision, but don't just take in the fantasy, taking the other possibilities too. Right. And just have all the information before you make your decision. But clearly we know some of them are fake. Clearly, clearly. You know, even people like me who want so desperately to believe. And it's also the corresponding artwork from the past. The three-toed, three-fingered artwork, which is weird. That is weird. And I saw some of those geoglyphs down there in the middle of nowhere. You know, and so... And then the whole thing with, you know, the James Fox and the Brazil and Sí, Yeah, part of that thing. Yeah. And the three-fingered thing is a weird thing in history. With these bones, I mean, I'm going to have to point you to some of the videos that these specialists have come out analyzing the files. So where the money is is exactly what's happening now. We have this possibility. We're going to make a show about it. We're going to put out this new thing. It goes deep, Joe. The same doctors, the same specialists that are verifying currently the Nazca Mummies, have been on the same team for the past 20 years, verifying other species and specimens that they've alien hybrids and say the same, literally, my whole video. I'm just like, this is what he said in 2007. This is what he said about this fake thing in 2012. This is what he said about the fake thing in 2017. And I put it back to back. So it's the same narrative. Same people. It's the same people, the same narrative. And so you think that the construction has just gotten more sophisticated? 100%. 100%. What is that? The major one, Maria and Montserrat. Well, look at, let's find Montserrat and see the Jesse Michael stuff, because he went down there and looked at them and they did scans on the bodies. And then I have a link to, I think it's Dr. Morris in talking about Montserrat's feet, the X-rays of his feet and pointing out. That's on the spreadsheet. Let's see that. I'd like to see that. So do you think that these are recent creations of old bones? Is that what it is? That's what I think. Okay. And how do you think they did it? Is there any speculation? I think that, so here's the, what's that, Jimmy? Just ask them a question. I caught them off. Oh, how do you think they did it? How do you think they did it? Well, I think that they, I think they've gotten very good with taxidermy. Mm. Right. Because we've seen that before where you take like an owl, and you had to hatch it to the iguana. In fact, in the research I did, there was this demon fairy thing in 2017. If you want to pull up my, my vids. Let's start with this. Let's start with this. We'll get to the demon fairy. Exactly. So, the meta tart. Okay. This is from a surface scan that was available. And I went in and just kind of removed some of the fuzziness so that I could highlight the bones. And one of the things, again, that you notice is that the joints have a lot of spacing between them. These are not joints that are in contact. So they're dislocated. Now, the main part here, the central area where the cana forms are in the cuboid. Those articulate with five meta-tarsals normally. The way these are led to A would go with the big toe and E would go with the little toe. And again, just like in Maria, those are missing. But the joints are not lined up properly. The shapes of the joints don't go with the matching bone on the cana forms of the cuboid. That's exactly what I was seeing in CT. So none of the articulations of the meta-tarsal junction really made any sense. And some of the bones didn't even meet an articular surface at all. So that jumped out to me immediately because then my first question goes to how would that even be a functional foot? So, Monsorace, that's what I said. So that's, why does Monsorace have tendons click on that? Keep it going a little bit. Where I thought I saw the razor resection. Because people were talking about they're still being tendons and stuff intact. And I would agree that some of those meta-tarsals are, as Dr. Proctor pointed out in the correct position, but then some are just missing. So if you wanted to elevate the illusion, one of the ways you could do that would be by performing a razor resection. And essentially that's a function conserving surgery where if you've had damage to your metacarpals or your metatarsals, they'll remove that metacarpal or metatarsal and kind of rearrange your fingers or your toes and remaining metacarpals to keep your limb functioning. So her feet, Monsorace feet were just a little bit different where I think they might have used more complex procedure like that. Versus Maria where her feet just looked more like arts and crafts to my eye. So Maria came up, if these things are hoaxes, there is also, if we're just going with that angle, there's a clear evolution of the work that goes into them behind the scenes. Like that one came out after the first one. The first one got called out on a whole bunch of things. All of a sudden the next iteration doesn't have the same issues. All right, they're correcting. Yeah. And that's actually, I forget there was an archaeologist on X. He said that's very common in the world of fake antiquities. Like they learn once they get called out on something, they'll figure out how to make the pottery better or something like that. Is there a lot of money in this stuff? Yeah. I mean, apparently, where's the money coming from? How does it? For me, it's not even in the sale. The most money coming from this is not in the sale of these things. It's in the shows that come from it. It's in the series. It's in the subscriptions to get to the next season where they're going to finally reveal the truth about it. There's a lot of money being made in the background. And that's part of the deep dive I went on following the money. So who do you think is making them? Do you have a theory? I believe that there's actually, it was in my video and one of Will's videos. There was a grave robber, a whistleblower, a grave robber who was part of this team. And he shares how he was getting stuff for Mario, like the main guy. There's got to be a team of specialists working on this stuff. Money went into making these things because money's going to come from it. That seems like a lot of money though. Yeah. But you would think that that would kind of fall apart. I would. I would think that it is falling apart. But it is under scans. But I would say someone would rat somebody out. These are in scruptial. So that's part of the reason I also decided to make this video. And a lot of the pushback on this stuff is like, oh, you don't trust Latin American doctors or anything. No, it's not that it's Latin American doctors from Peru and journalists from there are afraid to talk about this stuff. Because things can get violent down there surrounding this topic. Article from 2012 about a mummy being stolen. And it goes on to talk about, there's a, I said, right to bottom. The e-camoff. Yeah, there's a mafia. The e-camoff. Yeah. And in fact, the guy Mario who, there you go. This was one of the reasons for mafia dedicated to the trade with links throughout Southern America and Europe. And at the time, it was $18 million a year in stolen archaeological artifacts. Pro estimated it was being taken out of the country. So this is all going into like wealthy people in other countries that want to have these artifacts in their homes. Yeah. And so they came in some messages with some of the American buyers. Really? Yeah. So these guys are just like, come on into my den. I'll show you a mummy. This, what I'm talking about specifically was tapestries. And it was actually the guy I met in the artist and now us in Mirafloris. And he showed me videos very open with me. He showed me videos of, because the buyers want to see provenance. The buyers want to see them pulling the artifacts out of the ground. Right. And mystery them. And then they just, well, no, I mean, that's all this stuff. Mummy crowd funder leaves archaeologists fuming. So there's a guy in London that's selling this stuff. Oh, Victor, Wind Museum in London. Haven't it dedicated to dead people? And they were trying to get a mummy from Peru. Wow. So what do you think is going on with the skulls, the elongated skulls? Jamie, I have a, I think that it's one I've seen here. So here's one. You found that one? Oh, yeah. That's one of three I've come across. Now, the, supposedly there's a difference in the way the skull, you know, when you're a child, what does it call the salon? The sagittal sutures. Yeah. I've found some without the, every elongated skull that I've, the three I've come across, all had the sagittal, all had that suture. Like a normal human, like a normal human. So these would be from pressing boards on the child's head when they're in development. Yeah. Finding. Yeah. But then the question is why would you do that? And I mean, I err on the side of you don't just come up with that. You're trying to imitate something. Right. And so that's, and then you see it in Egypt and the Hyramas and stuff. So I do think like there is, you know, there's, we've, we've labeled things other species with just a bone fragment. You know, I'm like, there's, there's deserts of these things. And, and I think that if the right study went to them, you might have a separate species. If, if you put the money towards studying this stuff, because it's all out there, man. Right. Like a separate branch of the human species? Possibly. Right. Which makes sense. I mean, they're finding separate branches all the time. All the time. Then the sovans, you know, all these different ones that they found within the last 20 years. And there could be something with a larger head and they elongated head. Yep. And that's the, I don't know enough about osteo, whatever to go in depth about it. But I mean, I think you had a whole culture is just doing this or there's too many of them for it to have just been kind of some elitist practice. I think. And a bizarre practice at that level. Like why would you want to do that to your kids head? Man. When clearly it's probably not been done to your head, at least the first people. Like what were you trying to imitate? There, I forget who told me this. There is some, I think Will told me this. There's, there's some woman who did this practice on herself like actually trepinated her own head. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we've talked about trepination when we had that woman on the, to herself. Okay. Well, yeah. Wait, you had her on? Yeah. Well, woman did what was her name again? The psychedelic lady. She's, I believe she passed. Didn't she? Recently? Really fascinating woman. I mean, the old man to feel me. She died recently, right? Yeah. So, but she did self trepination. She did self trepinate. Oh, but that's not elongation of the skull. No, but if there's an idea that what that trepination might have done in the ancient days, they did it like to release the evil spirits. If somebody was afflicted with some sort of psychosis or something like that. But, and I forget if it was Amanda, something happens in with your brain waves when like the brain is exposed or something like there's some sort of, I don't know. Oh, fuck, do you find that out without doing it? But if their skull is elongated, I don't know if it gives extra space to, I forget who told me this was. It changes the chemical structure of the brain that like kind of like a DMT experience you're open to more things. Aha. And so an idea is that if you elongated it and had that extra space in the skull for the brain had more oxygen, I guess, maybe it affects your brain chemistry. I don't know. Just pure speculation. But what are one of the things about some of these skulls they found is that the volume is larger than a human instrument. So how would you do that just by stretching it out with boards? I mean, it would seem like you have the same volume, you're just changing the shape of it, right? Yeah, but there are some like you said that have more volume that would give that more volume. And have there been no studies on these weird ones, the ones that don't have those sagittal lines that correspond with human beings? Because some of them don't find studies. That's the problem. That is the problem. What are we looking at? Are we looking at an animal head that they've kind of like shoved onto like human features and glued things together? With the mummies? I mean, some of these skulls. I mean, some of the like the one you just saw, I mean, they're there. They're just out in the desert. I don't know why funding hasn't been there. And you found them just sitting there. Yeah. And you just leave them there? Yeah. I put a pin up. I mean, eventually one day I would like to, I don't know, have formed some sort of relationship with the ministry of culture. Because the thing is nobody's going out there. And I specifically went to places this last expedition that I went the first year. Just to see what happened a year later. And those places were looted even more. The things I had found and come across and documented and like any elongated skull wasn't there anymore. So these things are being taken and sold. Make sure I wonder how much of it was there in the past. I mean, I don't like that eight kilometers of looting. It was all bones and textile and pottery. I mean, just eight full kilometers and like people. So it's a big kilometer graveyard. Yeah. Yeah. When I'm looking up trepination, that's a weird one. This elongated skull is coming up. Apparently this one is in Oklahoma Museum of some kind. That's the one that looks like it's had surgery on it. Yeah. And there's some sort of a metal implant. It didn't come up in that context. Like this one's coming up too. But what they're saying is that the metal implant is used after trepination has been done to sort of. patch the bone. Sometimes that has been documented as happening. What kind of metal they use on your fucking head? Well, that's the weird thing too. Because that metal has come up in this skull. Scans on like monster out. I don't know which one particular head up, but they're saying it's got like metal that wasn't available. You know, what's that one on the lower left hand corner? That one looks crazy. Oh, that's the jungle skull. What's the, okay. So that one's the jungle. Yeah. That's, yeah. This is it's in paracas. I mean, that's a pro. I mean, that's click on that. It's very close to where I found the one I showed you from my footage. Okay. That skull looks nuts. So that doesn't look like a human skull at all. That one is like the lines on that one. That's fucking crazy. Yeah. That doesn't seem like it has any of the normal lines that a human skull has. The museum unfortunately is closed now. So you can't go see it. I tried to. Well, where is it? It was in paracas. The Ministry of Culture shut down that museum. Oh, the collection often except exceptionally elongated skulls found in paracas, particularly around the village of Chongo's near Pisco, dating to around 700 BCE, 200 CE. His skull's exhibit severe artificial cranial deformation practiced used by elite paracas, and culture members to signify status. Huh. That is the one we just saw in that museum is the largest one. But it's weirdly large. Can you find some more images of that one? I'm not going to find some other stuff that's not three years old or older. Oh, it's okay. It will just see the images of it. It might be hard for that one since the museum closed. Right, but there's images. Yeah. So that looks like it's a lot more volume than a human head. The one on the far left. Yeah, either one, the one below it. Like that, just the image alone of that. How do you get a normal human head to be that large? Without some sort of... That looks like you stuffed a balloon into someone's eyeball and kept pumping it up. You know, while they're a baby. Like, what the hell is that? That's so much bigger than a normal human skull. And then you think if you know with the skull binding practice, I mean, are you, is there going to be some form of mental difficulties with that human being now? Or human being or expanded capacity? Or expand? Yeah. Because I think... So the cranial capacity is 25% more than a normal skull. It weighs 50% or 60% more than a normal skull. Also the eye sockets are larger and the jaw is larger and more compact. God, that looks like a different kind of human. So there are... And when you go to these museums, there's all sorts of... What's that one up there? The one to the right of your cursor. What the fuck is that? Is that real? That's why I didn't want to go to your screen. Whoa! Bring up a bunch of fakes shit too. That's why I was trying to... Is that fake? I don't know. I don't know. It's like, it's taken me to Facebook or I was already a big red flag. Yeah, I know. Facebook is a hub of fiction. And... I can't escape it. It's the same picture. So a lot of them are probably AI generated. But that one, that's 25% larger than a normal human skull. And larger... I said, look, the eye sockets are fucking huge. That's also weird. It's just like... That's the problem with all this looting that's been going on for so many years. It's like, there might have been some evidence of a different kind of human that lived with these people. And I mean, imagine if we find out that that different kind of human was what populated that area. And they were the people that built succesate from on. Because Paracas isn't... Paracas is the highest concentration of the ones that have been found. But you find them up in the Kuzco region too. There's... There's a video I have... I think... I think it's... Chisniri, CHIS-I-S-I-N. Can I ask you, what is the conventional explanation for the larger capacity of the skull and then the larger eyeballs? The eye sockets. I don't know that there is a conventional explanation other than... Well, it seems like you would have to explain that. Like, if that's not something different... ...at the same... ...at the same... ...homosapion human being like you or me, what is that? That seems... ...that's a different thing, right? You would think... Right. Like, if you look at it in the end or tall skull and you look mine's pretty close to one. But if you look at it in the end or tall skull and a normal human skull, you can clearly see the Denisovans, you clearly see the difference. Homo-julans, you see the difference. That's different, man. It's different. And some of this... Some of this stuff in their jaws and with like the set of teeth, there's differences. I mean, I haven't done a deep dive into it personally. But there are a multitude of differences that have been highlighted. And for people that are skeptical, one thing you have to recognize is that it's really hard to make a fossil. Fossils... I mean, most things that die and have died forever do not become fossils. They get consumed by the earth like a normal thing would. You know, that's why you don't find... I mean, yeah, yeah. And I mean, if you're talking about going back 10,000 years, that's why you're not seeing much evidence of stuff on me. Right. It's been so long. These things are preserved because they're between, at most, typically at most, 2,000-ish years. And in that region, old. They're preserved so well because of the climate there, which is, I mean, when you're going in these barrels, you still see the hair of people. It hasn't disintegrated. It's there. God, it's so creepy. Dude, that guy has some creepy photos for you, man. I don't know. He might want to put a disclaimer out before. So, show people know on this show, you don't need a disclaimer. A quick question. I found a video a guy with a long-gated skull he's talking about these and showing it. I'm just... The size of reference to his hand does the skull seem small. It does. Unless he's got some giant-ass basketball. That's kind of the size of the one I showed you earlier. It was smaller than you would think. So, but a lot of the people there back then were very small, right? They didn't have access to a lot of protein. I went to Chichinita and one of the weirder things is how small the people are there. How small the mine, people. I'm short already. And I was a giant compared to these people. It was really weird. And it's typically the same... This episode is brought to you by Armra. Every week there's some new wellness hack that people swear by. And after a while, you start thinking, why do we think we can just outsmart our bodies? That's why Armra Colostrum caught my attention. It's something the body already recognizes and has hundreds of these specialized nutrients for gut stuff, immunity, metabolism, etc. I first noticed it working around training, especially workout recovery. Most stuff falls off, but I am still taking this. If you want to try, Armra is offering my listeners 30% off plus two free gifts. Go to armra.com slash Rogan. Same in Peru until this... When the Spanish came... Mmm. And then the interbreeding. And then interbreeding you. Yeah. But if you go... Jamie, if you just open up the photos remains folder, this is... This is the stuff you see. I mean, there's still skin on some of these things. Like... Which is what... Whoa... That's creepy. And how old is that hand? Probably... I mean, at this burial site based on the artifacts I was seeing, it's Perocus or Nazca. Go back one, Jamie, please. Look at the cloth next to it too. So what is that piece of cloth, do you think? Ah, it's like it's braided at the bottom. And then... I didn't see a hole in the middle. So I don't think it was... And it's too fancy for a sling. I think. So I'm not 100% sure. Also so fancy sling. It could be fancy. Bozenaro's fancy gun. True. True. Look at the hand, man. That's so crazy. And what you see to the right of it is... Like what kind of looks like burlap is... I mean, that's what the mummies were wrapped in. They were stuffed with cotton. They were put in the fetal position. Wrapped with textile, then cotton, and more textile, and ropes. And that's some of the cotton and wrapping that... The grave robbers had torn apart, torn to find gold and jewels and things like that. Yeah. And what's unfortunate is some of the... Oh, some of the most beautiful pottery there too. It's just completely destroyed. Wow. Whoa. Look at all those bones. This is... You found this? Yeah. God, that's got to be creepy just seeing all those dead people's bones. And rope. It affects you, man. It definitely does. And what's the time period of this? This is... 2000 years? That picture actually isn't from Nascar. That was another... I have a video of this to show you. This place. There's just so much weirdness about Peru. Just the Nascar lines alone. Like, what were they doing? Why were you making artwork? You can see from the face. It's crazy. Oh, look at the hair. That's nuts. Oh. Normal size skull, though. Actually, that one... I don't have the pictures in that folder, but I measured it. It's incredibly bulbous. It's much more bulbous than a normal skull of it. So you're just getting a side view of it. Yeah. And I put the tape measure there next to it. And that's crazy. You see the skin. Yeah. The skin and the hair on the skull. Oh, God. That's creepy. That's why. Yeah. I mean, I thought that I had gotten... This is another thing that's been set up. You seem to graver hours do this. You know, there were some places where I found things set up like this with little candy, little modern, little, little, modern candies. And what that is, is it's a tradition called Pagollettiara. I'm paying the land. And so whoever left the candy, I don't think it was a grave robber. It was probably a little... And it was... It's a way... Pagolette Yeta, I'm paying the land. And so whoever left the candy, I don't think, was a grave robber. It was probably a little, and it was a way of giving back to the land, giving back to the ancestors. I started doing that with, you know, if I had a soda bottle or something, you pour out some Coca-Cola, and pay the land for walking to it and documenting this stuff. It was a nice little practice. But, so the, I would say that like 2000-ish years old, just to circle back. So some of these things, this is on the surface. I don't go digging, that's not, right, and some of me. But the walk arrows do. And that's where they're finding these things intact. They're finding these things intact where you can put them into a CT scanner. And it's going to show the whole inside. Has any, have any paleontologist or archeologists brought these skulls and brought them for examination to try to find out if there's intact DNA that can be studied? There's supposed to be, there's supposed to be doing DNA tests on six of the specimens. But if you watch my video, you'll see each time they've done DNA tests on all the hoaxes that they've been a part of before, I imagine the results are going to be the same. Yeah, but I don't mean the hoaxes. I mean the elongated skulls with large eye sockets, things along those lines. You know, there is a lot of the bureaucracy of how to go about doing anything with the Ministry of Culture in Peru is, it's so disjointed, you can't get things done. You just can't get, I know, Brian Forster for decades was trying to get some sort of of official path to do DNA studies on these things. And so I mean, I'm hoping with the work that I'm doing with pillars of the past that some of those boundaries can be broken where we can actually get permission to study these things because it's, it's Peru's patrimony. You can't just go in there and, you know, that makes sense. And so, and it costs money to do those things too. And you have to do it in the above board way. And so it's kind of waiting for the okay from them. What seems like at the very least, the most bizarre elongated skulls should be studied more closely. It should just be like, oh, it's in a museum. Look at the head. Big, huh? Weird eyes. Let's move on. Look at this bowl. It's broken, but you know, pretty interesting. Let's move on. Like, no, what the fuck is going on with that? I'm going to put some money, figure it out. And because if it turns out that there was a totally different branch of the human species. It's huge. It's huge. Yeah. That's a, I don't know the accuracy. That's why I'm hesitant to even bring it up. But as you're asking about that, the video I pulled up is the sky said that they tested 12 or 18 skulls. That's forster. And some of them came back as Native American. I'm trying to, I'm reading the closed captioning, but some of them did not. Some of them came back from the Black Sea area. The Caspian Sea Black Sea area from two to three thousand years ago. There have been skulls found out in those areas too. Wow. I don't know what the black and Caspian seas as in the Caucasus mountains. So that's very intriguing. What I can also share with you is what I believe was the migration pattern because these people, like the some indigenous people of the Caspian area and Black Sea area, were and are dark red haired and also very light skin and green eyes. And this seems to correspond as well with the elongated skulls. So I believe one of them. They do have red haired three thousand years ago. The ancestors of the Paracas decided to leave the area because they were being invaded by someone. And so they traveled south through Iraq and Iran to the Persian Gulf. And there they wound up sailing eastwards. And eventually found their way to the coast of Peru. They're different. That's me. That's speculation. That'd be too close. So that's the thing. With theories like this, I'm like, let's put some effort to peer review this stuff. You know, like let's do the studies that are needed, have multiple universities test these things, come up with the standard set of results. And then I mean. So what is missing? Funding, interest. It seems like this is in terms of like really doing a comprehensive study of archaeological sites, Peru seems like the least studied. Is that accurate? Half way, I would say only because, look, there's a part of me that also feels for the ministry of culture in a way where there's so many sites in Peru that to have eyes everywhere to protect it to have teams excavating things every, I mean, isn't that alone kind of crazy how many sites there are in Peru? And the fact that also you have Sockside, Womon, you have the Nazca lines, you have all this weirdness in this one part of the world. Like why? You have the oldest stone pyramids in the Americas, pyramids that predate the pyramids of Giza by thousand years. What do they look like? If you look up a corral, they are, dude, I've done a whole thesis on this. Like I plan to write a, I don't think I'll ever get a peer reviewed, but I plan to write a paper about my theories on some of the stuff I found. So corral was this area on the coast. It's a CARAL. And these pyramids had, Graham Hancock's been looking into this stuff too. This sunken circular plaza. This is a, these, this predates Giza. Oh, well, what we think. The great convention, the conventional dating. Right. So all right, let's see if I can condense this. This site has, I don't know, eight of these pyramids. They're actually all throughout the valley and four valleys around it. The earliest one in a separate valley close to this dates back to 4000 BCE. has the remnants of a sunken circular, the main thing to keep note of is that sunken circular plaza because it's a feature that you not only see there and that those four valleys, but you also see it 200 kilometers north of Peru. And what's the conventional explanation for these sunken circular plots? Ritual, ritual spaces could, some people say collecting water. Some people say the acoustics are different. Here's the interesting thing about it. This site was discovered in the 1940s. Wow. And nobody did anything about it. The archaea, this is what happens in Peru. And the, from the 1900s to 1940s, archaeologists and historians were going up and down the coast finding stuff. I mean, just finding stuff and they would write it down. They'd put it on the map. That's why the Ministry of Culture has it on their archaeological database. They'd pick through it, what they could put stuff in museums and just move on. That site, Corral, predated any ceramics. I mean, this was a pre ceramic culture. So there were no artifacts to find. So they just, they just moved on. It wasn't until Dr. Ruth Shady in like the 80s and 90s actually put research in and figured out, hey, this is older than everything else we found because they just overlooked it. There were no artifacts. They were just like, we're going to move on. When you say no artifacts, like that seems weird to me because like why would you make these immense structures and not have a bolt put rice in, right? They, a lot of animal skins and the weaving. So these cultures, what they found is, so that's a little further inland. They had a sister site on the coast. And so what they would do, the only agriculture they would grow was cotton. That cotton, they would trade with the people on the coast so they could make nets and fish with it. The fish they would bring back, they would give back to those of people who made the cotton for them. So is this weird, you know, interplay and the other unique thing about this time period is there was no evidence of warfare for a thousand years. Nobody was fighting each other. It was very just everybody, no weapons, no anything like that. No weapons for a thousand years. That seems insane. Is that just no evidence of weapons? It's currently no evidence of weapons, right? But maybe someone stole the weapons. That's possible. I mean, you're talking about a place that's been looted ad nauseum, right? That's true. I mean, they put in a lot of work though, especially that site corral. So you feel like somewhere they would find they would some sort of a axe head or they found the only artifacts of major note are some of those carvings that we saw and then bone flutes with carvings on them and the nets, the fishing nets. And my whole theory is this was a pocket. It's called the Norte Chico culture. It's a little pocket in these four valleys. And I went all over them documenting these pyramids. They don't look like pyramids anymore. They look like mounds. They're sold. But there's another place 200 kilometers north in the Chasm of Valley. And what they have found is underneath the structures that are currently exposed, they found deeper layers of temples with that sunken plaza in this whole other location. And those are dating to the same time. So I firmly believe that what archaeologist currently say is the oldest culture, I believe it went the whole coast of Peru. Wow. I mean, like this was a cradle of civilization. I mean, hands down. Cradle of civilization 6,000 years ago. 6,000 years ago. So which is right around the time we think the cradle of civilization happened in Samer. Wow. Wow. And so the hard thing about it is like you'll have car, you'll have some carvings in Adobe that's been preserved in some of these places. So there's some sort of iconography. But there's no writing like the Sumeria. The whole thing about Peru is like there was no writing system that we know of. There is a theory and I believe this. I believe the Kipus, the rope strings with knots. Yeah. And so there's a lot of language, but the Spanish burnt as soon as the Spanish came over, they burned as many of those things that as they could find and they killed the people who could read them. So we don't we won't ever know. Oh God, Spaniards. How dare you. But there's like there's evidence that they would they took some some of the anchors to the Spanish court. And so there's an anchor in the Spanish court in front of the Queen or King reading off of these Kipus reading stories telling the court. From knots on strings. From knots on strings. Yeah. And that understanding of that stuff is lost. There it's it's lost. Currently I think for that's few years, there's been some studies being done in Harvard trying to use AI to figure out what these mean. I mean, and how many of these are left over? Ah, can we see some images of them? I think 500 to 1000. I mean, that's it. I mean, the Spanish went on a mission to burn all these things because they were trying to convert them to Spanish and get them to speak the language and come Catholic pretty much. Yeah. And so much history is lost because of it. Yeah. So it's, but what's interesting is that that oldest place at Corral, they found a Kipus. They found one of these non-it strings. And it wasn't a fishing net. It was what looked to be a Kipus. So if you have that tradition going back 6,000 years, I mean, that's there's a lot of this picture from 1994. This is what it looked like then. Just doesn't look like anything. So you see that on the right? Those pits? Yeah. That's looting bits. And wow. That's what it looks like from above here. I was looking at a map. Oh, so they'd got to dig it up. This is the map from above. Why is ancient history so damn fascinating? If you go on my spreadsheet, there's a place called Aradev. What is it? What can I my notes here? Sunken Plaza, Aradev, Andl. It's linked to my YouTube. So this what we're about to see is right across the valley from Corral. So all throughout that valley are these sites from that Norte Chico culture. And I'm like right there on top of this pyramid and just the drone footage is epic. Wow. So I want to I want to I want to on a mission looking for these places. Um, that's it. The thing about this that is so compelling but also so unsatisfying is that a lot of these stories you're never going to get the full answer. You know, you're never going to get the full history. It's just the mystery will never be satisfied. You're always going to be hungry. You know, which is is that for a person like yourself that studies these places and is dedicated so much time to it? Is that in any way frustrating or does it add to the appeal? Both. Um, well, I got a 6000 year old question. There's no one there with you at all. It looks like not. Not so that no one can stop you from taking. No, I take it. Yeah. Oh, look at that. I mean, if you got caught down. Yeah, this is just me. I actually spoke to, um, like there was an archaeologist who told me to go to that place. And so I went and I just I was the only one there. So this is my whole thing was I identified most of these places through Google Earth. First, like they're they're not labeled. These places aren't labeled at all. That's crazy. So these aren't documented. No, this this is just one place right here. It's not on Google Earth though. It's not on Google Maps. You won't see any marker of it. But I was able to do some digging because of the guy who took me through the site. I meet this random guy, Luis, Luis is amazing. He's a farmer right here. I freaked him out. Um, he thought I was coming to rob him because he gets robbed off and apparently. Oh boy. But he walked me through the site and he this one. Okay. If you pause it, that right there on the bottom right is another one of those temples with the sunken plaza, except that one has monoliths. Oh, looks like Stonehenge. Exactly. And nobody's done a study on Astro. I don't I don't know why. But I can almost guarantee that that there is some sort of astronomical alignment. So what happened was archaeologists did come back. Did come here in the 90s, I think. And it didn't look like corral. They weren't going to be able to restore it. So they just kept it as a, you know, to find dating on these things. And it's from the same culture. It's just a couple of values over. Do you have any footage of the monoliths? Uh, yeah. Yeah. I'll come up if you fast forward through it. It's going to be back closer to where yeah, we walk up to it. There you go. Oh, interesting. So some sort of a stone circle of monoliths. I put it through a I have a small modelist though. Right. I mean, some of them are have been buried and removed. Oh, so someone's got them in their fucking house somewhere. Some of them. Yeah. How much of that is a problem with archaeology. I know that that was a giant issue with Egyptian artifacts. A lot of like wealthy people in other countries would just get it imported to their, their den and have a big fancy party. It still happens. Um, I will have to say that the, and I mean, I've seen it with my own eyes looting. It's I've never come across like somebody in the field doing doing it though. Terrible right would be freaky. Yeah. Because they'll kill you. Yeah. In the middle of nowhere. And if they get caught, they're in deep shit. So they would want to get rid of you. And I mean, what I I know for a fact, the way some of these get out of the country is some of these volcanoes have people on the inside who write them certificates and things like that that say it's an authentic piece that has been owned by the family for this long. So they can get it out of the country to whoever they're selling it to. That's how it works. Um, what's a bigger problem though recently after talking to several archaeologists and witnessing it myself is agriculture. Agriculture. They actually went to I went to a couple of sites that I found this by mistake looking on Google Earth. So I would find a site and I would like roll the satellite date back because it sometimes different seasons give you better imagery. I'm like, holy hell, what exists now is a quarter of what existed 10 years ago. And now all you see is like plantations planted. I mean, they have literally paved over the archaeological site to plant. Oh, dude, and that is it's become one of the bigger missions of the channel and eventuality because dude, you don't know this site could have aligned with that site could have aligned with you have no idea and there's no documentation of it. There's no document because nobody's going out there. These places are far away, you know, um, but here's here's another peculiar thing. This last expedition. So I found one of these sites and among camera and I'm ready to go in like guns ablaze and like how dare you do this, how dare you erase this. And I get there and I mean, it's crumbled stones, crumbled walls. And it's just this woman on her farm. And so I start talking to her. This wasn't corporate. This woman has in fact, did in fact write to the Ministry of Culture to say, hey, I'm expanding my farm. Then and get back to her. So she did it. You know, paved over or created plots on half the archaeological site. So it becomes a, I don't know what I don't know what the right solution is because I feel for this woman. She's actually, she's not, this isn't corporate. She's just surviving. She's just surviving. The corporate stuff like pisses me off and I'll go hard on them and I do in some of my videos. But she, and she tried to do the right thing by reaching out to the Ministry of Culture. Which she's supposed to do wait 10 years to get a response. You know, and so. And then I don't know how you empower these people. Because from where I sit is at least if you could document it, then you'd have a record of it. You know, that's that's what I'm trying to do when I go out there create 3D models and put it, put pins on a map or something like that. You know, so it's a tricky situation to try to figure out. What's the most compelling site and proof for you? I wanted to show you this. If you, if you look in, in my video footage, Puru Lynn pyramids, P.U.R.U.L.E.N. This site, I think it is much more deserving of future study. It's a site that has 16 platform pyramids. Wow. And what is this site date to? So when I do this, half my, half my role here is like, I'll go out and find these places and then on the back end, when I make these videos, I go hard on the research. Like I, I spend two hours with videos. Pyramids, Puru Lynn, that's just, so you can have a sense of scale. Thank God for drawing, so 100%. Okay. So that's a platform. So that is the remains that's in it. So right back, if you look back on the horizon, that's the coast. So this is right on the ocean, which means this has been in it. inundated for millennia by tsunamis and that looks like it. It really does, right? It looks like it's completely washed over. Look, how the sand, yep, is formed. And it's, so I kept that in there. That's the wind, the wind is so, like, I messed up my first drone flying it here. But take this, I keep this in so you can just, there's another one. Wow. It gets better, man. That seems like a river bed. Another, it completely seems like waters washed right over this whole area. I bet if you look at it from far above, it's even more evident. It was. Yeah. Look at that. Wow. And they're all the same, they all have the same shape. And what's the conventional explanation for this place? There was one study done on this and it was a brief survey in 1970. And this guy. Yeah. Yeah, that's it. However, the archeologists who did that survey, there's another one there. The archeologists who did this survey has been quoted in the past 30 years saying he always wanted to come back here and do more research. He just never did. It's not an easy place to get to. But what they dated it at is even in that report that 1970 survey, he's saying 1800 BCE, but likely, look at that. Here's something unique. If you pause it real quick. All right. So I looked on Google Earth and those toward the top center, you see those two blog looking things. All right. So I was like, I thought they were a megolithic. They're not all of these. All of these pyramids are carved out of the bedrock are carved out of the bedrock. And the only place that they were looting pits are behind those two stones at the top. In that little alcove of the mountains, that was the only place. So I went there and there's bones there. So that's where people were buried. And I'm like, why are they burying people here? And I stand right in the middle. And it's facing 89 degree, almost perfect east west, that little gap. So that's where they were burying in their elite people. So where the sun would rise in the summer solstice? Yeah. Now, how old is this site supposed to be? So they said in that report, he says, 1800, they found one piece of pottery that's documented. They found one. And so this is from the 1970 study. And so they're saying 1800 BCE, that's right around when pottery started. But in that report, he says it's likely older as well. He thinks it's older and needs more study. But that was it. That was the only thing that was put out there. I mean, this is 16 pyramids here. And if you look in my drone footage, you'll see it looks like there's another thing here, another thing in there. So it's in the neighborhood of 4,000 years old, but possibly older. Correct. And I think it is, I would stake everything on it being found to be much older. Pre-ceramic, pre-pottery. The pre-ceramic thing is nuts. All right. So like here's me. What are they using for utensils? What are they using for plates? Like what are they using to put their food on? And then if it is pre-ceramic, what kind of tools do they have? And how are they carving? How are they building these? This out of the bedrock. I mean, imagine the amount of effort it would take for a human being, banging a rock against another rock to try to do that and then to make it flat. Are these things level? Have they? They're, I mean, this is the only modern, most of my footage is the only modern media. What in existence of some of these sites? That's crazy. Of that's you. Of that site. Imagine if you didn't exist. Imagine if you weren't exposed to that as a 10-year-old. Yeah. I mean, that's... This is just gonna sit there for like another thousand years for somebody else figures it out. Yep. Or it gets paved over. God. That's why I'm doing it, man. God, it's so weird. But how weird is that? How weird is it just you? I'm on route over. What kind of fucking... What kind of weight on your shoulders is there that this one fascinating site? You're the only guy that's got video of this modern video that's crazy. Thanks for having me on. You guys have kind of choked up about it. Yeah, man. I mean, it's a lot of work. You know? And it's just... It's something in me that... Well, it's obviously very compelling to everyone that really pays attention to. Is this the... That's when you look on the satellite. And again, this is the thing. This is not like they put some rocks in place. They carve these things out of the bedrock and they're fucking huge. That's what's so crazy about it. I just... I mean, getting there was like, what are we looking at, man? Like, that's the thing. Like, what are we looking at? And why in Peru? And what happened to this area where they had so much, so much sophisticated, complex construction that was absolutely abandoned and there's almost nothing left. So they... Over the course of history, what they found is that... Because people like to build on the coast and they're just up and down the coast of Peru. They're so much. Sure. But then a major, massive El Nino would happen. And that just floods everything. And so people are like, well, we got to go up into the mountains. So they start going further into the valleys. Because Peru's so unique. You have the coast and then the Andes just start. You know, they just start going up until you get to the... Before you start getting into the Amazon, you got to cross the whole Andes. And so for several hundred years, they would live further up the valley. And then they would come back and repopulate on the coast and build on top of the sites that used to be there. And then it would happen again and it would go back. And so there's this whole cycle of... And there's some places where you will find that direct... It's very hard to find megalithic stuff, though. Like this stuff you're finding in Cusco, for example, on the coast. You don't really find that... You don't really find that type of architecture on the coast. You know, how that building material. You don't have stones like that. And so it's my belief that some of these places existed further back than we think. Like this place here on the coast, the erosion and the wind and the water that must have affected it. And finally, I have footage from... What we just saw was drawing footage from this year. I didn't get much strong footage of the year before. I could already see how much has been covered in one year, in one year, from having gone there again. And it's just imagined over millions of years. Thousands of years. How crazy. If you had to just take a wild guess with no one holding you to this at all. Hold, you think we're talking about here. I think there's... I go back pre-cataclysm, the young a dryest. There's evidence on like, walk a pre-eta that there was this mound that was carved out of the bedrock that Tom Dileh and his team excavated. was the young dryest. There's evidence on like walk-up reetta that there was this mound that was carved out of the bedrock that Tom delay and his team excavated and that academically accepted dates back to 12,500 BCE. And so there were there were people living on the coast at that time. So this mound, what does that look like? There's a it looks just like a this is an interesting site. That's it. What am I looking at here? That mound. That's not a natural mound. It started off as natural. And so what they found was they would use their refuse. And so they would put trash on top of the mound and then cap it with like Adobe mud. So it would become strong. It would become a platform. And then they would build on top of it. So it's a trash mound. Part of it. How weird. That wasn't an uncommon thing. And that's more than 11,000,000 years old. And what is that they're writing from there? No, that's that cloth. That's hard to cloth. Like fishing nets. Oh, I say it's one of the oldest pieces of cotton. So you ask how they were carrying things and all that with the cotton. But the cotton was coming from further inland. It wasn't coming from them. So even back then they were on. So here's the kick. And this is part of like the paper. Thank you I'm writing. There's evidence at that place. What could we at done? Of a sunken circular plaza. And that predates all the ones we saw by an even by 2000 more years. I think this is where that tradition started. Wow. I think that's where it started far earlier than anybody accepts or knows. Now here's the weird one. How do those people get there? You know, I've thought about this. I mean, look, if you're if you're if you're building these structures 6,000 years ago, 11,000 years ago, 15,000 years ago, when did you get there? When did you get there? And there's yeah, there's the the plaza. So I mean, I don't think it takes it takes much. I think if you're living on the coast or I don't know, you buy any sort of water and you see a piece of wood floating on it. I like, huh? All right. Well, then the 1000 years go by and you have at that point put some pieces of wood together to make a flotation device, you're able to navigate. Like I just I don't see it not happening in the country. Right. Especially with crazy people. It's right. I mean, someone's like the courage to just sail out there and hope you have enough water on you or your or your fishing and and you get stuck. You get stuck and there's a storm and it's like, whoop, right? And you could never make it back. You know, but I think that's happened in multiple places. I don't think it's civilization is born and created without a that sense of exploration, but also that natural ingenuity. I mean, storms happen. You see a log floating in the ocean. Well, I can use that to go get catch more fish. Yeah. All of a sudden, you're seeing very poorly. So it just when you see stuff like this, this that old, that's 15,000 years old, you go, okay, well, this is all that's left from 15,000 years ago. What's left from 30,000 years ago? Because it's like double that, right? Right now you look at 15 is almost nothing. It's like, God, it's so little and you get it. But if you went another 15 before that, are we talking, what is that? And that's why I'm like, with with the stuff beyond a beyond ease doing with the SAR tech, I'm just hoping that that can be affordable and applied in multiple areas to find things that are buried underground. One one thing that I've always been curious about whether hasn't been more research until I looked into it. All these places were on the coast of Peru. Well, sea levels were lower at one point. And so what's right off the coast of Peru? Right. And there haven't been many, if any, studies on that. I'm like, why apparently the humble current makes it very difficult to this is this is what I read because I was like, why hasn't anybody studied this? Apparently the humble current makes it very difficult to do research out there where it becomes very expensive for the equipment you need and things like that. But I guarantee that you'll be you'll find some stuff off the coast. Yeah, it just makes sense. Yeah, yeah, especially you find that. I mean, especially we know that sea levels were far lower, especially if that really is 15,000 years ago, we definitely know that sea levels were lower than. Yeah, it wasn't like this. It's crazy to me because like Tom Dileh, he got I mean, he got so much shit from the academic community course for his research down in Monteverdi in this site, which is interesting how consistent it is. It's still going on today. The same way. And they're always wrong. Right? It's like you would think you might want to have an open just leave some room and the young archaeologist are. I think there's a lot of young archaeologists that have grown up with the internet and they're really paying attention to this stuff and they're realizing. And also when you're young and you grow up with the internet, you realize like gatekeepers of information are a real problem and they always happen and they're wrong about so many things. I mean, they're wrong about virtually everything. The official narrative of almost everything has holes in it. I'm like, hey, something you said earlier too, like this age of study and exploration and radio carbon. It's not that old. It's so we only been doing this type of research for 100 years with some of the new advancements. Like you don't think something else is going to come along that might knock that out. Right. You don't want to leave room for that. Right. It's kind of dickish. It's very dickish. But you know, no need to focus on the dick. But that's why things like Philip will be on day's work is so devastating to the narrative because this new technology and if it shows that it's accurate and it is accurate on things that we know exist. That's what work. It's really crazy. Especially when they looked 1.2 kilometers through a mountain to find the political collider underneath and got the exact dimensions and a map of this particle collider. Wow. Right. So they know that it's accurate. And then so what are those pillars? What are these 20 meter in diameter? What are these things? And why would you not want to divest all the money you can possibly do to figure that out? I think it'll happen. And I think one of the reasons what's going to happen is because of the internet is because the just the pressure and the amount of interest. And also think about Egypt. Right. Egypt, a large portion of their economy is wrapped around the tourism. Yeah. Because the tourism in Egypt is phenomenal because it's one of the most incredible sites in the world. Wouldn't you want it to be even more incredible? Like what's more incredible than some unknown mystery of spectacular proportion? Something that goes a kilometer deep under the pyramids. And they don't know what it is. Like this is nuts. Also, these those shafts that go down that are filled with debris now that they can clear out and it leads to what at least this data shows, tunnels and caverns and all this shit that's underneath there. Like what is that? That's I mean, and I think Ben has done phenomenal work putting on this incredible. I love that guy. The history and the store and the accounts of being in these labyrinths and he's another guy that got into this because of the internet. You know, I mean, he had a real career in town. He's like, okay, I'm going to throw this out to be a YouTuber. I was I forget who I was speaking to, but I mean, I my goal is to document as much as possible before it's not there to document. And and I I mean, it's crazy to be on here in to my channel. I still feel like it's an end in its infancy. Well, I'm not out about it a while. I mean, I was a four months ago, five months ago, something like that. You know, I started seeing some of your stuff online. I think on X and I started looking at it on YouTube and I was like, yo, this guy's going deep. How did you fund all this stuff? I mean, how do you have the money to go and do these things? I went broke the first expedition. This was a total field of dreams. If you build it, I'll see what happens. And fortunately, I mean, people saw the work I had been doing up into that point. There were some GoFundMe donations, which was a May the fact that I mean, just thank anybody out there. Just thank you. Like the the people who believe in what I'm doing, like that's what fills me up the most too. Like the encouragement and the support from from people I don't know. You know, and the content you provide though is so fascinating. And so it's so interesting to people like myself and other people that are really interested in it. It's just a matter of getting you exposure. So the content is so amazing. It's just a matter of people have to find out about it. And then YouTube is a great way that the algorithm on YouTube is so good because it'll recommend I'll watch one of your videos and it'll recommend something else interesting. You know, and then it's going on and on and on. Well, and so I came back from that first expedition. I was there, the first expedition was 23 days. I had two terabytes of footage. And it's funny, that footage lasted me a year and a half until this expedition now. And I was out on this last expedition for 42 days all over the country. And I mean, the video you were talking about when we first started talking, that that is too. The only there's no drone footage of that site ever. There is one Facebook post with pictures. And that's it. And I was like, I have to document this. You know, and so much from the last expedition is like that. It's the only media that you'll see of it. And I think these pyramids carved into the bedrock that you're the the only one that has media that is just absolute and saying, what are we looking at here? I'm just digging around the area. Oh, yeah. This is a mummy lady cow. They found in 2006. They color that she might have been the first female ruler of the area, the Cleopatra of South America. These are pictures of her tattoos. Oh, what? So actually, what's interesting is, it is helping. There's a lot of evidence to say that some of these early early cultures were matriarchal because they're finding a lot of the tombs of these queens right there on right there on the coast. The sorcerer. Yes. That this one pyramid in this area called El Bruko, where the Hawka Prieta is. They found this tote totem. And so what's in and so I believe this was the Mocham. El Bruko, there are these paintings around the wall. Wow. I have a video on these cool too because you see paint. So you realize that these things were very colorful. Yeah. Making prisoners and that this is a recreation of what it would have looked like then. Those are prisoners. Yeah. So the I have thought that was clear too. Why are they painting their prisoners? That's weird. I mean, everything was painted though. This was where people came from. I mean, why are they making depictions of their prisoners? You know, I mean, not that they painted it different colors, which is kind of cool, but it's interesting like how old is this supposed to be? Anywhere from three thought this was a very interesting part. 3000 BC is what they say goes back to, but they say it wasn't developed until modern day like 200 to 600 AD, which is 300 or 600 years of nothing. So it was I believe it was the Mocha 1990. This one was found in a Peruvian banker as the guy. It says it's Phil of the Emperor. Phil and three film properly minded. I can say it. Right. And the the the watch arrows are the ones who told him about it. And so that's a lot of these places have been found because of walk out of us being reported. All of a sudden there's an influx in a little village of silver or something like that. And somebody tells the authorities they figure out where they're going to dig. I mean, there's a there's a good book on it. The Lord of Sipan, where archaeologists literally had to like stand guard. The townspeople weren't happy that when the archaeologists got involved and the townspeople were coming to get the gold and coming to get the silver. And so there's a whole book about it. I don't know why nobody's made a movie on it. There's an extensive though, right? Because it's life changing if they can find hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of gold and silver in the ground. Book these archaeologists. Well, and some of the earliest a lot of this stuff you'll see in the museums like the Largo Herrera Museum and a lot of this stuff. A lot of the pottery is preserved because you had these big plantation owners, these big, you know, technocrats and their workers in the field would constantly be finding this, this artwork in these, these, these, these walkas. And, and so they were like, you know what, I'll give you two dollars every time you bring, bring, bring me one. And now we have the Largo Herrera Museum, you know, full of this stuff. So, and there's, I was talking to Dr. Ed Barnhart about this. There's also, there's also so much in Peru that the, the people finding these things, they aren't. Maybe nowadays they're making a lot on stuff, but for the past couple decades, there was just, there was just so much, you're getting three dollars for, if you're a Peruvian worker in the field, moving this thing up the ladder, you're getting three dollars for a little piece of pottery. And so, how long have you been doing this for? I mean, what I've been with the channel two years, that's a two years, yeah. And what were you doing before that? A video editor. And so you just said, you know what, I'm going to just take a leap of faith. My contract, my, I had a contract position and it ended, um, I was posting these things, I was finding on Google Earth and I was saying like, I think this is something, this is why I came up with this whole methodology and people were like, you're full of shit. And then as I, you know it, let's see. And I went and 100% accuracy every single place I saw on Google Earth that did not have a label was an archaeological site, every single one I went to. And that first expedition, yeah, I went to 90 and 23 days. Yeah, nine, that was the first expedition. I was there for 42 days this time. Wow. So like, I've got five terabytes worth of video footage of things, nobody's saying, that's cool. But just, I mean, imagine again, what if you didn't do this? That's what's nuts. That's what's nuts. Like we would be completely ignorant about this stuff. Yeah. Yeah. I just make you wonder like, what was like, like those stone pyramids carved at the bed drunk, the only you have footage of it? What was that culture? What were they doing? And all I had to go off of is what this, what made me happy is like, and I have it on the video if I'm talking to the camera, like I think this, I think that I think this is card. And that survey verified every little thing that I, which was like pretty cool because I'm not, you know, academically trained to, you know, analyze these things. But I have the, I have the experience. And so it was kind of neat that every bullet point was verified by that survey. The feeling I got going to that place, in that place in particular, I don't think they're going to find pottery there. I don't think they're going to, I think it was pre ceramic, but I also think there weren't houses. There weren't, there might be, you know, if you go digging or do some light or, I think it was a place of pilgrimage, that's just my person. I've nothing to back that up. That's what I felt though kind of, a kind of intuitive, like when I was walking there, I don't know, man, Peru is weird. The energy in Peru is different. And so I want to say spiritual because I don't have a different word for it. And it's just, you just in tune with something. I mean, maybe it's just the nature, maybe, but I mean, I feel, I feel different down there. And especially going on these far out places and when you get to some of these sites, like you feel a little different. And so just the kind of the intuitive impression I got was I wonder if people were coming here as some sort of pilgrimage because they, I mean, there aren't houses there. There's no evidence of people living there. So I think that's because of time. That's very, it's very possible. That's the problem. When you're seeing something that's the amount of work that would take to carve something out of bedrock, like there was pyramid. How many of those parents? You're far like 16 of them. 16, man. Okay. They're huge. Huge. They're carved out of the ground out of rock with what? There. Here's the interesting thing in that survey. I didn't know this. And I tried to pinpoint the location. That main pyramid I was on. There's a black and white photo from 1970 where they found a carved out room in that pyramid. In that main period, and it looks like a room. It's been human carved out. So there's chambers and some of these things. Why aren't we studying it? Why? Why haven't we gone back in? Also, how? What are you using to cut? Right. What kind of tools do you have? And 6,000 years? Like what tools were available? And so close to the ocean, you might not ever know because a tsunami is taking it right back. Right. Right. And if it's metal, it's gone anyway. It's gone. Same with it. Same with I think also like I think that little alcove where all the burials were, I think that got preserved because it was behind this mountain. I think if there was any civilization there prior that might have been living there, all the bones that were there on their gone. Right. Of course. And probably all the structures, any houses, if they had wooden houses or on top of the land, yeah, gone. Nothing left. And so all you're left is with this strong, who knows if those things were bigger or two? Right. Right. We might do what was on top of those things. Right? Exactly. That's nuts, man. The thing that gave it away on that site in particular is when you look airily, every single one of those pyramid structures is facing northeast every single one. And that's for the sunrise on the solstice. Right. And I was like, this is manmade. This is manmade. And there's still people on the comments who are like, that's, oh, that's just a mountain. And I'm like, dude, what more do you want? Like, what do you think that those things were just, oh, yeah, they don't think those things are manmade? Yeah. They're the same shape. Yeah. I know. The same shape, the same size. They're all pointing in the same direction. Shut the fuck up. I've learned not to fight. It just, you know, you're going to believe what you want anyway. You know what I mean? It's the history. I mean, Graham Hancock has the greatest phrase that we are species with amnesia. And I think it's true. And I think it all points back to not just the younger, dry, sin pack, but probably several other impacts. You know, my friend John Reeves, he lives in Alaska and he runs the bone yard. Yeah. Yeah. John just sent me some photos of a new site that they have that's under all these other sites like deep under all those where they're finding not just bone, but charred bone, like an entire area of like burnt tasks, burnt bones, covered it. And he thinks there was another impact. And you know, just, I mean, he's just making a rough estimation. Because the, what some of the sites that he found, it's somewhere around 10,000 years ago, due to like, you know, doing the examination of the cores. And he thinks it's 20,000 years ago. So he thinks this is probably a normal thing that has happened all throughout the history of the earth. As the earth gets pelted, you know, every 10,000, every 20,000, whatever. I mean, get hit. And that speaks to the myths and the legends and the dryest and the you guys I mean, every civilization has its version of, you know, this is the fifth epoch or the fourth epoch, you know, this is the first one was fire. The last one was, you know, water. There's always several cataclysm. The you the stuff is nuts too, because it just seems like it's so accurate. And we're in Kali, you go right now, which is the age of deception. And like what's more confusing, that's what it's called, right? Isn't it called the age of deception? Final. I know what caught. So what's more like, if you thought that it was all fallen apart before it gets rebuilt, it's like, that's now like this place is fucking crazy. Every day, the news is nuts. I've gone on a social media hiatus over the last few days and I feel so good. And I decided two days ago, I'm not going back. I'm like, I'm not going back. I'll go back to post things. I'm never reading it anymore. I'll find my news, you know, people send me enough stuff as it is. my friends send me things. I don't have to click on them, but I know what's going on. Like, what craziness is happening? You just feel better when you don't do it. And I've been sucked into the NASGOM MUMMY's things sucked me into the back and forth on X and I talked to it. It's so toxic. And it's like at the end of the day, people are going, people, look, you can have all the evidence saying this one thing and everybody agrees, you're going to have this group that is like, well, no, for this reason. And then it's the same thing on the other side too. And so it's just this social media is this, what I'm saying is this is weird loop of confirmation bias and bitterness and anger and arguments and infighting and attacks. And I just think that it's altering the collective psychological foundation of our society. I agree with you. And that's what's weird. And that's what makes sense when you see like crazy protests and crazy people online. It's like everyone's getting, there's something that's happening to them. Well, what's this one thing that exists with everybody? It's social media use. Yep. And I think I don't know. It's hard. I tried to stay away. And then I found myself like last week week after I made like these videos just just for the social media sphere as an example, like I was getting pulled into it. I felt my size, somebody who has not engaged that much. I was like, something has shifted, you know, and like I was ready to get defensive and take things personally. And I'm like, this is an attack back. And I was like, this is just continuing the cycle. And I don't want that. I don't want that in my way. If I don't need any of that. So I just stopped, you know, and, and, but the level of defense of this level of, level of attacks, the level of, and it's not even at some point, it's not even just taking things personally. The attacks are personal. So it's like, what are you supposed to do other than not engaged? Yeah, you can't engage. I say post and ghost. That's my strategy. I like it. I'm so encouraging. And then even then, I'm telling people to stay off of it. So they're not even going to read my stuff. Like, it's like, it's okay. It's like you find out enough. You find out about the important things and find out about shows that you enjoy. And then you subscribe. And then when new episodes come out, you're like, ooh, yeah, yeah. And so that's what I've been doing. And it's a much healthier way. Like, um, the one thing that doesn't, and jelly rolls tell me this, like, you know, he got off all sorts. He had no phone for like 18 months. No phone at all. It was crazy. Like I'd contact him through his guy that was running his social media. Tell me, tell me, tell me, tell me, tell me what's up. And then recently he got a phone like over the last few months and only uses YouTube. He's like, my YouTube, he goes, I learn things, I get interested in things. And that's how I feel to like, I really enjoy YouTube. I, there's so much interesting, interesting content on YouTube about everything. I mean, it's just like, we're living in, I mean, this is an incredible age where, I mean, I feel fortunate for what I'm doing that there's an audience for it. And there's a platform that can allow that to have some reach, because some stuff deserves to reach. What you're doing is very important. It's very important. Just the fact that you are the first guy to get media of those structures, that's crazy, man. I mean, it's really kind of crazy. You're a video editor. Two years ago, you decided to do this. You're the first guy who's documenting these things. And then we're showing millions of people right now. Kind of nuts. Like how few people know that there was some kind of a complex society that understood the equinoxes, pointing their structure toward it and not just building them with mud and bricks, but carving it out of the bedrock in a similar shape over and over and over again. And that's just what you found. Like imagine how much hasn't been found. Dude, you just look at the aerial stuff and I mean, Joe, I can't, this just, that's just the tip of the iceberg, man. Like of the content that, I mean, I'm going to places in the middle of the desert and seeing an Adobe wall peek out at this one little section and then I put the drone in the air and you can see the outline of this whole structure, just a little bump in the sand. And no one even knows it's there. No one even knows it's there. What happened all those people? That's what's good. Dude, that's, that's like when I say cradle of civilization, I mean, this was, I don't, whatever's bigger than a cradle. Yeah, yeah, that's what makes sense, right? Because if you think about the ice age and if all this stuff is pre ice age or during the ice age, that area is not covered in ice. And it's one of the few areas around the equator that's not fucked up. And this is one of the few areas where people can thrive. So it really makes sense that that would be the area where civilization would not just thrive, but reach very high levels of sophistication where they're able to carve into the bedrock of these massive pyramid structures. There is interesting evidence that I was watching it was on like discovery or an NGO or something, but there's evidence in like the Okukahi Desert. I mean, they're finding another dark trafficking illegal trafficking web is like the sale of fossils because they're finding whales in the Okukahi Desert and brings me to, I was waiting to find a good point for this. They found that they were using whale vertebrae as stools. So they found this giant. Dude, I want those for my bar. Dude, that's awesome. I didn't know that. In 2023, they found it could be the most heaviest or the heaviest animal ever. But it, whoa, I've been in touch with that guy's nephew colossal blue whale found outside of Peru. Each vertebrae weighs 220 pounds. Yeah, the whole thing with the ones that they found 200 tons. And so like as you were just saying, if they're not buried under tons of ice, then these people could in theory have found, you know, lots of these giant. Holy shit. And the desert, yeah, something else I'm stumbling across and getting into it. Blue whale poop has apparently got some something interesting to it. What's the deal? Blue whale poop. I didn't really get into it. How do you go on these deep bags? I'm a middle of a bug. Has Jamie your fucking wizard, dude? Just seeing stuff like that. Whoa. Having a poop. Look at that. Like neon green. I'm just imagining these giant 200 ton poops poops. And then what you could, I don't know, thread. Oh, God. What are these people doing with poop? They also think that they could have been eating in a different way. They just on poops poops and then what you could I don't know thread oh god what are these people doing with poop they also think that they could have been eating in a different way they just sweeping up shrimp and shit from the right ocean right I'm just like picturing what this looked like you know and the year zero where there's a bunch of giant whale bones all over the coast and who knows what other octopus or whatever the fuck else but happens that poop when it fossilizes you know but no they're finding that they're I mean there is a dark web of trafficking for looking for stuff in the Okuka desert where there were all these prehistoric animal bones are they found dinosaurs and stuff there too and again is it just wealthy people that want it for their homes is that what it is this stuff I've seen it I mean really that guy and a few other people just kind of going out there illegally looking for stuff but it has to be valuable for them to be well yeah who's buying it wealthy oligarchs I know I never met one of them that has some stuff like that I want to go over someone's house like anyone's using shit we got a whole museum right there like that's probably how you wind up on a list but I mean there's still there's still so much out there and I mean if I just like some the structures I was talking about like you literally see a whole Adobe wall you see a whole temple complex you see the remnants of a circular plaza I mean there's another if you go to the undocumented temple on this on the spreadsheet this is undocumented no Ministry of Culture sign it's not on the Ministry of Culture's database of archaeological scientists using Google Earth and so here's the thing all right so circling back we had that Norte Chico culture with the sunken plazas way down here we have this so that well that's that's what I saw on Google or no go ahead continue okay so you have the karael soupe culture down here and then you have they found that sunken plaza underneath archaeological sites and chasm away up here so you have these two different and they're saying they were separate cultures I think they were the same how far apart are they 200 kilometers or miles I forget so what I was like I was like well is there a connection between these two so I looked in the valleys in between and I found this with a sunken temple with a sunken circular plazas so you have them found it on Google Earth yeah and then and then I went and I needed help from one of the guys in the field to point and that's a lot of the people in these pueblos like bell note every now and then you'll get lucky in someone knows the history every now and then more often than not it's yeah there's some ruins right over there and that's it that's the extent that's the extent of their knowledge um and so that that was one of these occasions where the guy was like if you just go this way and that way and I was looking for it I had to pin on my map but I was getting lost so I go and I find this place and lo and behold it's a sunken circular plaza temple structure I go up on top there's pottery there you can see where the what where the walk arrows have dug things out there's walls and it's just unexcavated nobody surveyed it there's no documentation of it it's just there wow yeah can I see that so that's what I saw um this is what you saw on Google Earth yeah okay and so you're just looking in between these two areas oh and it's also facing north northeast too that also told me that it was probably something okay and then you see this this you want that that's right next to it and then you went and then I went would you rent it a car how the fuck are you doing yeah what happens to bring these cards back to like where did they help yeah I have some pictures of driving out in the desert bed like okay so this guy's helping you this is the guy at a local yeah he was just working in the field there okay so these are the fields and he tells you where the stuff is so all the locals know they know what the stuff is and then pretty soon I start walking up to it and this is completely undocumented and it's you can see the plaza there it's all rubble so it's something happened some some earthquake or so I'm walking up to the top of it and then so right now it just looks like rubble it doesn't even look like it was a building right from the ground at least exactly and half so many places I'm like standing right in the middle of the right in the middle of a site I don't even know until I put the drone in there I think it's coming up here you'll see a say should come up here shortly I find there you go okay so clearly underneath all of that is rooms right so you see the bricks piece of pottery and some of the walk arrows can't took out but that was that was evidence to me so underneath this whole thing are walls and chambers why rooms and you just found this on goo earth and it's the same style as that karael soupate culture the early one from you know three thousand to four thousand years ago it's just so hard to believe that this is unexplored and not just that undocumented and that you just find it on google thank god for shout out to google you know google earth deserves some props I mean seriously yeah amazing I would have ever thought people asked if I used like advanced satellite stuff and I've only used google or so far look at this clearly some sort of a civilization was there that just kind of obliterated so this was weird I don't know like there's just a cactus in the middle of it all it was very strange I don't know what to make of that they can grow anywhere that's what's weird about but it is weird there's only one yeah in the middle of it yeah but so there's pottery there and I was wondering if it was the sand there was one more cactus like directly aligned with it other sand page or cactus down there yeah so these people were probably doing something something with the old psychedelic cactus I've got a place to show you cuz sand page or cactus is where you get masculine right yes yeah makes sense that if they have these temples and they have if there's a pilgrimage there's probably some sort of a psychedelic ritual involved look at this man what does it feel like to just find something that no one even knew existed like this it's got to be a trip like thank god I was right it's been 14 hours getting to this place like they got there was something but there've been times two where I'll get there and it's the satellite google earth hasn't updated itself and there's a plantation planted over some of it you know it's like you'll be asking people like what used to be here if there's people around I mean sometimes I guess that it's you can tell you can kind of tell when it's corporate the infrastructure in the area is different but but that's the other thing there's there's nobody monitoring this I and I was like what's the solution do you pay somebody to call the ministry of culture when some of these coming in with bulldozers leveling things and what would they even do the probably the people the bulldozers just pay them off either pay them off or dude at that corral site Ruth Shady the she was shot by land traffickers the archaeologists responsible for discount land traffickers are trying to take over the site and she was shot she was killed she wasn't killed she was shot and I mean she's as recent as a few years ago is like we're still not getting protections from them they sent us one security guard to patrol the perimeter these land traffickers man like and it's for agriculture it's for agriculture it's not for loot it looting is a happy byproduct for them it's for the agriculture mmm squatter's issued death threats to archaeologists discovered oldest city in America the oldest city in the Americas and you're getting one rent a cop wow they call the sites lawyers and said that if he continued to protect me they would kill him along with me and burious five meters below the ground and she's 73 they killed our dog as a warning oh god they actually when yeah I think it was there was because when they excavate they do an in seasons and stuff and there was one season where like land traffickers had started building on part of the site and in the off season from digging so they had to deal with all of that I mean it's crazy it's like the wild west man wow any other sites to show us that are yeah they I mean dude there's I know if you look at shavin uh ch its on the just on the media hard drive so we're talking about underground structures and hallucinogens and stuff like that this place shavin so now this is a known archaeological site and how old is this place I think 2008 right around zero look how far yeah yeah deep as it go this is nuts right and this is just one part of it and this is 2000 years old at least at least so they wouldn't they won't let you film in the other section it kind of looks like this um but don't they let you film there because there's something called the Lanzon monolith if you look that up Jamie uh L.A.N. Z.O.N. monolith so that's it so they won't let you film in there because too many people go in there and take pictures and the flash supposedly so they just yeah yeah dude but when I went in there the security guard was right behind me the whole time he knew I was gonna try to take a picture yeah but you could get a picture with no flash now especially with like the new iPhones and Samsung phones you can take some really high resolution photos the guard said not enough people know how to turn it off on it oh boy so but when you walk flash is fucking it up that seems crazy it seems like voodoo doesn't it yeah it is I mean it could do it the paint and stuff but oh this is a pain on that fuck rock thing how's it and it's behind a piece of plexiglass too that sounds like they just control freaks like fuck off dude make a reason for sure just to tell people but so so okay so there's this thing about this place you saw how deep we went underground it's in a comparable place with these hallways and and Joe I completely stonehold sober as soon as I walked in underground something hits you so it's the air is different so yeah dude I don't know how to describe it it's and how do you feel lighter and a little messed up in the head man really yeah do you think it's a lack of oxygen it's possible because it seems like your deep deep deep underground probably limited oxygen because you got these caverns and could hold to the top I mean honestly I wonder if it's built on some sort of I don't like the like the secret secret energy or Delphi with the gases or something like that I don't know getting gas in there all I know is that when you when you go in show me that that totem again that monolith what they found is um they found evidence of rituals happening there like plates with with hallucinogenic plants or substances so people were going down there to do these rituals and do this space I mean if you're gonna go on a trip that's the place to do it right like that's it's it's just you're in the closed space the acoustics are so weird it's it's trippy man what is that image on that thing it's a jaguar there's a there's a whole bunch of imagery here that's like the fenged so for a while they thought they thought this culture the shavin culture was responsible for the the onset of religion in Peru the shavin they called it the mother culture for decades and you see this fenged deity Dr. Barnard talks about a lot this jaguar looking deity um they thought it came from there but there's actually places that I went to where you see it on the coast for the older so it actually kind of flips that whole it's not the mother culture um but their influence and their reach was extreme throughout the throughout that andean world so they were responsible for that that's when like religion took and i can argue if you got a major influx right after shavin culture they had it before but not like this um so that's what's that's what's on that statue wow man and it's just so ridiculous they won't let you take a picture because of the flash that's so good somebody said talk to them go maybe I'm shut the fuck up that flash doesn't do anything devotees would be led into the maze of pitch black tunnels eventually coming face to face with the sculpture the worshipers disorientation in addition to the hallucinogenic effects of the sand page or cactus they were given before entering only heightened a visual and psychological impact of the sculpture i mean that's god people are weird i must have had it lit up with fire some fucking sweet yeah they were able to just go in in there stone cold sober and feeling affected i can only imagine what it was like being on sand page or is that the weirdest place that you've been to improve um socks i've one month seems to me to be the the most bizarre because just the size of the stones oh yeah i mean like how how i mean how i mean how what are you guys doing how did you do this how did you figure out to make them interlocking in a way that if there's a seismic impact they stay put how and how did you get them there how do they look like marshmallow i mean yeah i like why they like looks like they're melted i've gone on some deep dives it's funny on that yeah look at that fuck man the big ones on the bottom like how i mean it's the style of them too which is so different where as you said it looks like marshmallows they're melted into place almost like look at that one big one in the center what the hell is that how big is that i ever get but they go up to 200 tons i think that's got to be bigger than 200 don't you think probably i know like how small those people are and those people in the foreground get those people right up next to that thing they'd be tiny well maybe it is 200 i don't know but either way but they could not stop it when up there you know how rounded these things are yeah you can't get a piece of paper the only way they've been dislodged is because of earthquakes i mean like it's bro look at the size of that and look at the way they interlock you can tell when you get up close there's there is this reddish residue oh we can there's so much fan you can see there's often reddish reddish residue like so they were painted at one point in time now i think it was clay in the span the indigenous people will tell you that and actually Percy faucet wrote about it in his journals too like this this bird that would take a leaf a red leaf and peck it into the rock and after a little bit of time it would create a hole in the rock like it would help kind of melt the stone actually the guy from the video that unregistered mega lithic site told me the same story okay i know what you're talking about right this specific type of plant that has like an acid to it an acid uh and i've started to i like dr barnarts theory and there's also a paper on it a peer-reviewed paper by helmet tributes where he talks about okay if you mix if you mix pyrite from the offshoot of one of these inking mines with this with this plantish material you can create like an acid that will slightly deform the stone so maybe you would set the stones in place that way secrets to of softened stone the lost techniques of the ink from facebook so you know it's true no no no but thought jorge leer was um i did a whole some of my early videos man are like research papers like i went i went on a deep dive with all this and the spanish chroniclers talk about seeing gold in between uh some of the stones but this guy also helmet tributes wrote the paper it wasn't gold what if it was pyrite fusing the stones helping to fuse the stones together with this paste hmm look at it says there it says the technique to carbon state shape the stones remains a mystery according to legends the gods would have gifted the ink as two magical plants coke so coke leaves which allowed them to withstand pain and physical exhaustion and another plant that allowed them to soften stones soften stones but you see that red residue that also makes sense that they did so much work they're all coke up hey fucking i gotta fake in these dope pyramids when i was a kid this woman picture i clicked on but that didn't pop up wow that can't be real no that's uh i've seen that that's uh an artistic creation if you pull up uh let's if you want to to stay on coosco or go to one other place it's up to you dog whatever you want to do let's let's go to uh tunnels coosco dude this whole this whole part of the andes yeah it's uh there's tunnels everywhere man like it's not just what they're doing so you're climbing down into this tunnel now is this a naturally formed some of it some of it okay on the way out you'll see when i going in their steps those were actual steps that were built but these things dude i you can't get to the the end you can't find people there are stories where kids get lost in these things and never found oh fuck so again these look like natural caves right some of them have been carved out them so it's a combination it's a combination so probably there was some natural caves and then they started carving things up well the whole thing the whole thing about it was this gets weird so this is the steps yeah coming up on on the right i mean it just it just keeps going on oh i'm not going in there there's the steps Jamie can you and me outside the door go uh oh you go up all you tell my catch with guide was man he was just filming that fuck you bro not going in there i was like i'll go in go demons and that's like that movie was that movie the descent the descent yeah i know he's like the great dude i love him he's great i watched it a while ago i was like 2005 that's why that's old movie yeah they did a descent too it's not good yeah this is okay it's not it's not the best but this is descent one was awesome yeah one of the best to horror flakes yeah and there's another one huh this is fuck that hole did you go in there please tell me oh of course i did you know of course i whoa with your pillars of the past shirt on oh my god dude i don't even think i would fit in that hole i got a little scared because coming out wasn't was an easy i was just reading about this guy who died in one of those holes a guy was a cave crawler and he got stuck trying to get out he got in head first and then could not get out and just was just stuck died there like that like that scream because his chest was compressed oh god yeah i mean there's some stuff i've done i'm not gonna do like this you know and just couldn't there's no way to get back out he has terrifying oh that's terrifying you know how that never happens you don't you don't go you don't go in there you never dive in a cave you never dive in a cave i take that into consideration all right before we wrap this up anything else one shows uh all right one more site uh chis neary the chis i s let's just do the drone footage and then inside tombs so this place it i had no idea places like this it's just me and my god he's dude the people i met on this it just by happenstance he's the president of the community there the little compass you know and took 12 hours out of his day to walk me through this place that's cool that's another build it and they will come thing right it really is oh you just go out there and you'll find the right people or they kill your dog yeah okay so this this like i i i move the paint still on it it's actually not paint it's it's it's mud it's different colored mud that's what he said so now we're gonna go now in that in that next video uh we're gonna walk up to them oh skull the sky people do you know now it uh the chacha poi the chacha poi is where much further north you see that skull you see that skull right yeah this is in the cusco region wow what the fuck dude yeah man why all these dead people in that hole whoa what's going on in there these were the where they they would bury their deceased they just chuck them in a hole no they know they were they weren't like that they were so this is all just this is looting this is all looting that roton skulls are everywhere this is crazy it's wild this is like a horror movie this is like the beginning of a horror movie before it gets dark out right the guys this archaeologists it's probably you you're out there in the movie you'd bring a girl with you have to leave this place before the sun goes down 100,000. bro you're gonna hear voices you're gonna hear dead languages yelling no camping in the no camping in the valley you have to be a gangster to fucking take a nap in there ghost hunters definitely go there oh yeah i get salmon cold be to go down there they know i bet they won't do it that's real ghosts this is all from looting wow so they just dug these people up stole whatever yeah that's a spine yeah fuck man god there's so many bones hey nuts it's crazy man that's nuts well ro I'm happy i'm so happy that you made that decision a couple years ago to just follow this passion and the content that you put out was really incredible and the fact you've been able to find these sites that are here to four undocumented it's it's really amazing man it's it's amazing i'm happy you're doing it and uh i really enjoyed having you on and uh for everybody wants to watch it's pillars of the past it's on youtube um do you put videos up on x as well i do i've i've started putting videos up on x and you know my website's gonna be up and running soon it's gonna be a place if you you know if you find places and want to put it on a map and you know if Jamie wants to comment on it then he can comment on the pin you put i'm trying to build something because people send me stuff all the time right have some sort of a thriving community of people that are interested in the same thing absolutely well there's a there's an interest for this stuff now i really credit gram gram Hancock i think because he was the real pioneer of this when people just thought he was a loon i remember people would make fun of me for reading his book in the late 90s they'd make fun like we didn't read this bullshit from once you've got a real history class what that's no fun no this is fun this is fun it's fun to think that we don't know what happened but that's something happened and gram puts in the work i mean i mean you just look at the citation section he's put it he puts in the work of course yeah he's an amazing human you know which is why they have to lie to discredit him but you know when when he put that material out and then i think the Netflix show really started started opening up the gates to people exploring the stuff more and just being fascinated by and then seeking out content like yours and you know there's that we're really fortunate now there's quite a few really good shows that are on youtube that document this kind of stuff and it's these are real mysteries it there's real mysteries when it comes to human history and in my to me it's one of the most fascinating things i agree with i love it so i thank you so much for doing what you do and get out there again and let's come back and do another one of these and i would be happy to and uh i just just a few plugs yeah i've been speaking at it because of all this which is just amazing i still feel like everything's in its infancy so i'm humbled by the opportunities that keep presenting themselves but like the quest for ancient civilizations conference in sidona and then it's actually going to be yours in sidona it's going to be here in Austin tourist and see me too in uh two kooky places ACL live i think is all nice yes okay it's an amazing venue that's going to be in october and then i'm doing a tour with mike colons from wandering wolf in the ukatan and with hu newman we're doing a let me ask about that what do you think about that sage wall because he's the guy that goes over the sage what you think it's a natural formation i think it's more likely more like the way i operate is i'm i tend to remain skeptical i i would like multiple pieces of evidence there's also similar things nearby that aren't as spectacular that are natural right i believe so yes in the yeah there's something about the geology of the area and and i found places like that in kuru as well i mean i'm waiting for they've done light our studies of that stuff for me just to have one one wall i need i'm personally need more than right more than just that oh yeah and i mean i found some of the stuff like that in perune i'm very hesitant to say this is megolithic architecture is all so much more study for people that are interested in that just to let you know there's a lot of a i images online and when you go to look for the sage wall sometimes you're confronted with ones like oh my god that for sure is man made but then it's not a real image no let's create it an image or doctor the image to make it look a little bit more man made i would say i mean my colony has done a ton of work on it so if you want to like see yeah original footage it's on his channel it's very very interesting foot i mean i go back and forth yeah i mean that's depending on how old it is so that's the thing like we should talk about something that's 30,000 years old maybe that's all it's left i forget he was saying they found that it goes a lot deeper than it right something like that so it's like which from me more interesting which makes it more interesting and i'm like i just i like like let's see keep figuring out how texas too that i haven't found a good answer for yeah i've heard of that yeah 200 to 400,000 year old wall i think i think i'm 19 25 claimed that and probably just got people to pay attention and come visit but i don't i don't have a good answer that i've just come across on what it is or how old it is go to that one below to the right of your cursor right here to the right of it right there yeah look at that huh i will say that could be natural formation they i mean the earth does a lot of weird things yeah that's not does not convincing to me no can i put it back up again i i but i'm aware of it i'm just like i'm looking at that extra terrestrial stuff up extra thresholds do a way better job they might have built a pair of it's it didn't build this fuck out of here was shitty fucking extra terrestrial stuff. Fuck up. Extra thresholds do a way better job. They might have built the pair of it. They didn't build this. Fuck out of here. It was shitty fucking. Couple of the four versions of this picture and ones in color. Oh, it is so hard nowadays to think that you've got to put in some work to find the truth. Yeah. That is weird. But that doesn't look real. That looks like it's just the strata. But it's not consistent all the way with the fuck. I know. I don't even know what it looks like. Who knows. That's here in Texas, right? Yes. Yeah. Maybe we'll go one day. Pillars of the past. YouTube. Awesome. Thank you. I'm not sure what you want today. I really want to try and appreciate the amount of potential. All right. Fire bait.