How long have you lived in Israel? I've never been there for about 10 years. 10 years. So we're just talking off camera and I'm a first of all, thank you for doing this. I do. Thanks for having me. It's impossible to really understand anything from United States because the filters that propaganda are just so restrictive. But it seems obvious that October 7th is the beginning of a global reshuffling certainly of the Middle East. We haven't spent enough time thinking through what that was. What was that? I think to properly understand October 7th, you have to put together kind of a timeline. I think what's been lacking here, I talked to a lot of Palestinians and they tell me a lot about how they portray the war as something that began after October 7th, which is another problem we can get to at some point. These rallies chalk it up to the act of a rabbit ant. I said, I've no doubt that he was quite possibly an ant. I said, mate. You're speaking of the Ehesin water. Yeah, the leader of the Uphu's now dead. Yeah. But it doesn't mean that there wasn't a logic. It doesn't mean that this happened when it happened and how it happens for us. So just speak about what you're saying. So from the Palestinian perspective, everything we're seeing now is a result of the events after October 7th and from the Israeli perspective, October 7th happened just because they're hated unreasonably. Well, I guess what I often find is when I speak to Palestinians and they're not wrong to say that the backdrop of all this is that there has been an occupation for a very long time. We've been occupied since 48, which I understand. But it still doesn't explain the specifics of October 7th. It explains why at some point something like that could or quite possibly should have happened. And so that's been something I focused on a lot. And I think if you want to put together a proper answer, you have to put together a time line. You have to go back. You have to trace basically the existence and the trajectory of Hamas from the rise to power. But the real breaking point I'll say is 2021. What happened in 2021? Three things happened in 2021. 2021, you have tensions that are like Hamas. You have famous the other tensions that went on in Sheikh Dharah, where they're settlers taking Palestinian homes in East Jerusalem. That caused a lot of tension. What happened at the Al-Aqsa complex? There are all kinds of clashes between Israeli border police and Muslim worshippers. And this went on for some time. It was also Usme, Usme. And what happened was that three things happened. Hamas fired rockets into Israel, killing about 14 Israelis. riots broke out in the middle of Israel across the country, actually, internal riots between Arab Israelis and Israeli Jews. As Sarang, the West Bank woke up from a very long slumber. Suddenly you had for the first time in a very long time militants who were firing at the troops. I remember seeing videos of, I think it must have been hundreds of Palestinian men marching towards the borders. And I think they were going to enter. No. But I remember calling my father. I remember calling him and saying, this video I'm seeing, this doesn't look good. This is an indication of something. And in the Israeli media, if you look back at the reports, the Israelis perceived this to be an indication that we have a big threat from within. This contributed also to the rise of the right and the years that followed. So the first order of business was we have Arab Israelis and there are problems. We have two million Palestinians within our borders. And the next thing that happened, and you saw the borders of Israel probably within the board, within the 48 borders. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You can see in the green line. Yeah. And then you had over the next year or two, you might remember increased operations by the IDF. Suddenly in Nablis, which is I used to be called the Terakapro of Palestine, certainly there was a new militia that formed called lion's den. Suddenly in Janine, the refugee camps in the north of the West Bank, there are arms men doing military marches with M-16s and masks on. And that was the second order of business. And the last thing that the Israelis believed was that Hamas firing some sort of like a water pipe rocket into Israel was an indication of something to come, something much bigger to come. So what was this? I mean, as you said, you could trace this all the way back to the British mandate or whatever you could trace it for our back as we wanted. But you think this really began with clashes between both Israeli citizens, Arabs and Jews within Israel and in 2021. So how did that lead to? Not exactly. I think that the internal riots were absolutely meaningless. I think what happened in the West Bank was somewhat meaningful. And I can explain later why I don't think it had any end to it. Why wasn't going to come to any significant end? But what happened in 2021, why Hamas fired rockets? No one bothered to ask why are they suddenly firing rockets? Hamas came to power in 2007. I think it was 2007. They come to power. This is a group that over through the PA, they tossed in a Palestinian authority. They tossed them off of rooftops to control of Gaza. And they came, why would people have wanted them or what do they think that the Palestinians deserve them rather than the PA? They were saying, we're a resistance group. We're Palestinians. We were exiled in the 48 and the whole purpose of our existence in one way or another is to get back. And so unlike the PA, we're not going to sit and make peace with the Jews. We're not going to coordinate with them. We're not going to arrest people at their behest. We're going to fight. And that's what they did from 2007 to 2014. I think you have three to four ground invasions if I'm not mistaken. And so they were fulfilling their promise. They didn't win. They didn't liberate Palestine. But what did happen is that Hamas didn't have a lot of political attention because they were either fighting being bombed or people were cleaning up the rebel. But in 2014, which is bear with me a moment, in 2014, suddenly silence falls upon Gaza. I think this was a silence that I don't know if Hamas even predicted this to silence whatever come upon Gaza. These rarely certainly wanted it. It's the last word, klutzuke Tan and Hebrews. The last war, these rallies bombed a bunch of tunnels. There was some ground operations, lots of strikes. And it was kind of this thing where they came and said, look, we sent them back. I think the quote from the general at the time was, we sent them back 50 years or 100 years to the stone age, whatever it was. But that's a bit of a problem for Hamas. Your group of gritty sort of nitty gritty resistance fighters, you came to power. You fought some wars. Didn't win. We didn't get totally beat. And now you're just bureaucrats. Now you have to go from grit to governance. And that's fine. Maybe for a year, maybe for two, because the next big battle is coming. What happens three, four or five years later? At some point people are sitting there. They have a much lower quality of life than people in the West Bank. Palestinians in the West Bank at the very least can come into Israel for years and years and years, half of them illegally in work, making Israeli salary go back home. In Gaza, it's, you know, they didn't have a whole lot going for them. And I think at some point in time, maybe around 2018, it became clear that I think people are kind of starting to ask the question is like, what, okay, if we picked you and you're supposed to fight and now we're just eating shit here, we might as well get the PA back. And you say that you don't sit down with the Jews and you don't recognize the Jews and you're not going to make peace with them. But like you talked to them on a weekly basis. You just have some Egyptian guy in the middle playing telephone tag. And I think that the leader of Hamas, I think you're Hagia Sinwara. I think he understood that I think around 2018, he began to understand that like, this is not a sustainable, this is not some sustainable. I can't keep going like this. When do you think the planning for October 7 to begin and what was the thinking? Okay. In terms of the planning, if you're talking about the concrete steps, look, I'm not an intelligence analyst, from what we know, I think from what was released, we understand that sometime in October 2022, it might have, the real planning could have been underway. The conceptual planning for something of this sort, I think, had been working within Sinwara since he was probably a teenager. I mean, there's a famous quote, I think he did the interview in Hebrew, which is like all the more, it's an eerie, it's crazy interview. He's sitting on a plastic chair outside and they asked him something about, do you want to kill us? Do you want war with us? And he goes, listen, right now you're strong. He's got nuclear bombs. I can't. I can't. I can't. I cannot you. But in 20, maybe 15 years, you're going to be weak inside. And that's what I'm going to strike you. And in 2018, the ASN water gave an interview, it's crazy because, you know, I think we were just talking about this before we started, Jeffrey Goldberg of the Atlantic, he put at a piece called Sinwara's Marsha Fali. I think it came out in the summer, August, September. And he ventured an argument as to why Sinwara could have done something so stupid. And I'm bracketing morals here, I'm not talking about whether he was, you know, good or bad. I'm just talking about, you know, conceptually, it's like a pure analysis of it. Yeah, exactly. And he had this line, I read this, I must have read this piece four to five times and onto this day I can understand what he meant. He said something to the effect of the ASN water fell prey to Muslim, brotherhood supremacy, conspiracism. And he lacked reasoning capabilities, something out of like a first year philosophy paper. He wrote a couple books in prison, didn't he? In the decades he spent in prison. He wrote one book, one book novel. Yeah, you're something of the road. I forget the name of the carnation and the ego or something. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He was reading quite a bit. He'd had people, he'd read a lot sort of like old. Right. So he's not in a literate savage, whatever you think I'm not endorsed. He could be a savage, but he wasn't in a literate savage. He was definitely literate. Yeah. He definitely had reasoning capabilities. Yeah. You can use reason and capabilities to do very, very bad things people do all the time. He did, he did. But again, it's not the point. It's probably pretty obvious by now that you definitely need the hollow app. you need peace and the hollow app can bring you there. And there's something pretty great starting on how it was starting April 13th. Mark Wahlberg begins a new series called Stay Prayed Up. His message is simple, go to church, take your faith seriously and pray. And how it can help you with the last one. Millions follow that routine on Sundays. That Monday comes, life gets busy, the connection to God fades. Now with howlope, howlope offers daily prayer challenges. Not just encouragement, but structure, a way to actually live out your prayers. Prayer is not complicated, but it's hard. It is a discipline. It's about opening yourself up to God's will relinquishing control and letting God lead your life. And that can absolutely change your life. In fact, it's the only thing they can change your life. Howlope's users embrace the rhythm of prayer and scripture into the regular routines. Listen, reflect, let it speak into your day. That's what it means to say, pray it up showing up daily even when you don't feel like it. God meets you directly. So stay prayed up, download howlope today for three months for free at howlope.com slash Tucker. There's nothing we recommend more strongly than this. So Goldberg's analysis, which is to say, gangdulberg is not even like a real person. He's like a symbol of the American ruling class as conversations with itself. But he's reporting back to his masters. There's no reason behind this. He's just, I don't know if he was reporting back to his masters. Like I don't know Jeffrey Goldberg. I don't know who he reports through. In the media ecosystem in the United States, that's considered like the highest level of think piece. So I don't know if he was reporting to anyone, but he certainly believes, I would assume he believes if he wrote a whole essay on it, that this was all just rabbit anti-Semitism and a failed. And the worst part about the piece is that he already determines the success. He claims it's his March of Folly. I mean, he failed. Not only was he stupid and he had, did he have no logic whatsoever, but he failed. And with him, all his buddies has Balah at all. They all failed. And it's over. It sucks. He had a good, you try to be failed. In 2018, and this is a very important quote, there is an Italian journalist who's since left journalism, which is crazy to me, but she went out with a bang Francesca battery or something. She did an interview with Yheha Sinoad in Gaza, 2018. The interview was later published by Winet in the Hebrew paper. And it's a fascinating bit. This was again, if we talk about the silence that came upon Gaza in 2014, this is at the height of the silence, 2018. Not all the people remember the wars that happened four years ago. If people are starting to feel a little antsy or a little jittery, Israel's super happy, because they're like, we just keep feeding them. This would be great. We can ride this way forever. And she asked him this question about the next war, and it's crazy that Jeffrey Goldberg did an quote, Sinoad once, in his entire piece. Seriously? As far I might be wrong, but I believe that he didn't quote Sinoad once in his whole piece. And there's a plethora of quotes. They're all very, very useful in trying to understand what that'll happen. And he says something to the effect of, and I quote, the next war, right in the next war, victory for Netanyahu for Netanyahu will be worse than defeat. This is the guy who apparently already knew that Netanyahu would still be in power. Why? You might ask, because the next war is the fourth war, which cannot be and cannot end like the third, which ended like the second, and which ended like the first. And as closing line is they should take over Gaza. That's a quote. Who? That's you, Jason Water. Who should take over Gaza? Israelis. The next war is the fourth, the fourth, the fourth, and like the third, which ended like the second, and the first. So for those who aren't steeped in this, why would the head of Hamas want the Israelis to take over Gaza? I don't know at that point if he wanted the Israelis to take over Gaza. But I think he was pointing something, I think he was pointing to something that's quite theoretically elaborate, like a very, very high level understanding of how history functions. Sounds that way. Which is, he didn't want them to take over Gaza. But I think he understood that if there were to be another war, that it would be a disastrous war, and that it would force Israel into a corner where they would have two options. Either we destroy this entire place and or we occupy Gaza. The problem is that the Israelis already occupied Gaza. They already tried it and they left and they left for very good reasons. It was economically taxing. It was unsustainable. Israeli soldiers could die. There were RPG attacks on settlements. And I think he understood that he would in the next war, if there were to be a next war, put the Israelis in a position where they would be forced to grow up around in the gray for a very, very long time. And if it would appear otherwise from inside, even if it could be sold to the population. Otherwise, and along these lines, there is another quote, if you don't mind. But a year before October the seventh, don't quote me on this, but I think a year before October the seventh, and it's in what it did a speech. And he convened the leaders of his faction to various demands in Gaza. And it's like, it's a pretty boring speech and he has no rhythm and he's screaming way too loud. But there's one point that tons of people have cropped and isolated on Instagram. And he has this line and he says, well, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, he goes by God. I see it with the side of my eyes. Harabakli, mi yi, dini, et sa, hara, la, la, tardi, ebis. Original, religious war that will burn with it, the green and the dry. You mean the one we're in right now? Yeah. The one that will go on for a very, very long time, even if it appears to have ended. Yeah. So it sounds like you think that in planning the attacks of October 7th, he saw the long game and understood that it'd be hard for Israel to deal with those consequences over time. I think to put it a little more specifically, I think, I think to know what understood that the status quo that fell into place after 2014, this long silence, that it was poison for the Palestinian cause. Yeah. The notion of Palestinian resistance, but if your cause is that Palestinian should just leave, go to work, bring their bread home, then it's certainly antithetical to that. I think he understood that this was poison and that if he continued on this way, well, the next generation say when they didn't grow up with any wars. How long can you go on putting on marches for martyr children with cardboard tanks and fake RPGs? How long can you go on convening your aimoms to talk about the day after? Who's going to be the next aimarm of a locks after we liberate Palestine? How long can you go on with the with the foaming platitudes? It can't go on. And the longer you let it go on, the weaker you get. And I think he understood that one thing was certain. You know when you shake a snow globe, you shake a shake a shake, the flakes fly everywhere. And the one thing of which you can be certain is that the flakes won't fall in the same place. That's the one thing you can know. And I think he understood that in attack like this, it's the 9-11 of this conflict that whatever was before won't be after. And that's why he caught a bloodbath even since the snake cleaned. And it's having or likely to have similar effects to the effects of 9-11 in the US. It draws the country into all kinds of unanticipated conflicts that weaken the country and cause internal division within the country. Yeah. That'd be my guess. So to that extent, it's successful. It is strategic and it's effective. In the short term, it's been successful certainly. And I think in the long term, I think everyone, especially Israelis, has to wait. You know, there's a status quo that dies. And there's a notion Israel now that status quo died and we immediately established a new one. Meaning they broke the last status quo where we had peace and we had these little box in around every two years with Hamas or whatever. But now we're strong. Now we do whatever we want. We bombed them. We bombed them. We bombed them. We bombed it on. We're in control. But you don't decide when a new status quo comes into birth. So that's history. There's there are millions of variables that come into that decision. Gaza is not even be rebuilt currently. Hamas has control of, I think 40, 640% of Gaza. So Israelis are groping around. I think they're entering into probably what will be in retrospect the darkest and most fraud period since the establishment of the state. They're groping around in the gray. Cost of living is already making it hard to live here and it's not getting any better. Unfortunately, it's likely to get worse. And a lot of Americans feel the gap with credit cards, not just for fancy dinners, but to cover things like groceries and bills. That is a disastrous understandable, but don't go down that road because there is a tax in effect, a survival tax of 20% interest or more. Why would you do that? Why would you hand money to the big banks when you can keep it for your family? Our friends in American financing have a better way. If you're looking to buy your first home or refinance your current one, they're helping Americans achieve the dream of a ownership with monthly mortgage rates currently in the fives. American financing saves its customers an average of 800 bucks per month. That's nearly 10 grand every year back to you. This isn't just a loan. It's a total financial reset. So debt is tough, but there's a smart way to do it in a reckless self-destructive way to do it credit cards. And so we recommend American financing. They're salary based, not commission based, which means they actually work for you, not the banks. They're called America's home for home loans for a reason called 800 6 8 5 56 96 96 8 6 8 5 56 96 are visit American financing dot net slash Tucker. So I want to hear where you think that's going and why it is as dark as it's been in almost 80 years, but back to October 7th itself. Yeah, sure. So that was, you said you thought it was probably in the planning phases for at least a year. It would have had to have been just given its scale, I would think. I think if you also look in October 22 and you see this with the Israelis, I think they found some kind of binder on the border. Yeah, October 22 on it. But that was the year in which Hamas repaired their relations with the Shia axis. Yeah, that's the year in which suddenly you had I think India going to Moscow. They repaired relations with Syria. And that was kind of I think the key into getting the back into the fold with people like Nasser Allah. Right. Suddenly you have as long as you had an Hamas or meeting with Nasser Allah on a regular basis. I think they were they were invited to Iran also at a certain point. And I think so those are some pretty serious indications that's that I mean, Israeli intelligence of being, you know, as effective as it is clearly must have picked up signals that's what's going on. That's already been released. Yeah. So explain. I mean, there are people probably know this better than I, but there there's there's a document that circulated within Israeli intelligence called I think Jericho wall. There was intelligence analysts. I believe she was a female who sort of saw what was happening in Gaza that there were certain military drills, certain speeches. And there's an indication that they were planning something really serious. And the story goes that her higher ups. I think we're then Bergman reported on this. I'm not mistaken. The story goes that her higher ups basically said like, yeah, yeah, that's cute. But no, we don't suck it in missable trash. You had also soldiers at the observation posts along the border who I don't know when exactly. I don't know if this was in the weeks or the months leading up to October the 7th, but that we're reporting to their higher ups that like there are some strange little movements. It commences and much has been written about and even more speculated about so-called stand down order or the Israeli government response to it. What's your belief about what happened? Are you asking whether or not I think the Israeli higher ups wanted this to get out of control? No, I'm asking like what did happen? What do you think actually happened? Why from an outsider perspective, it seems like the response was inadequate. It was certainly inadequate. Why? Look, I don't know. But what's strange to me is that I think it was in the week or two after Takya Niggby who was like the equivalent to the head of Homeland Security, I guess, or the National Security Council, something like that in Israel. He came out and admitted that I think for three to four hours before the attack, there are certain intelligence officials. I think the general, like they convened, there was a discussion. It's not like they woke up at 6.30 AM. So there is certainly something that happened among the highest echelons. One question I've had is why do we know what they talked about? No, but there's a quote that circulated in Israeli media that apparently the general at the time got out of bed and his wife was sort of like what was going on. And he just apparently turned around and said, Gaza is going to be destroyed. It's a quote that circulated around Israeli media. I don't know at what time this happens could have been at 6.29. I doubt it though because apparently the people were convened before. I don't know. I know what I saw on October 7th. I know where I was. So what did you see in what's your conclusion? One thing I'll say is that three weeks before October the 7th, I met with a journalist. He's a British journalist. And he'd come like a year and a half before and he was starting out fresh. I don't think he knew Israel's Palestine super well. And I wanted to become a mainstream journalist at the time. So I thought he could help me scratch each other's backs. And we would talk a lot about what was going on. For about a year and a half, I was telling him that something's going to happen. Like there's something weird that's going on. And he'd listened to me and he'd help me out. And about three weeks before October the 7th, we met for Beer and Jerusalem. And that was the same day in which the Palestinians, I believe it was three weeks before before. We're doing these marches of return. You know when they flood the border, they throw in the airy balloons, burn some fields and wait for the Israelis to come back and be like, okay, what, what, we'll take you. What's your price? We'll take you to shut the fuck up. And he asked me, he's like, what do you think this is happening? And I remember distinctly looking at him and saying, I don't know. Because after 2021 or 2022, I believe Benin, that's Tally Bennett, lifted the permit. What do you call it? The permit ceiling as it were, like the quota. It's like some 2022,000 gazins per seas permits to come to Israel after years of them not having any. And so usually they would do these sorts of antics to get something we want construction materials. We want work permits. We want something. But there was nothing really to ask for. And so he, when we said goodbye that day, I remember, I'll never forget this. He looked at me and he said, you know, I think you're a really smart guy. I appreciate you taught me a lot. But I just think you've misunderstood this place. I think you're a bit apocalyptic. I looked at it when I said Tom. I think he'd spent a little too much time with Israelis. And so if I could have come to those conclusions with the limited amount of information I had, I'm sure there were many people within the intelligence establishment that had some idea. Do I think that BB allowed 3000 or 2000 Hamas militants to enter the country and kill people? I'm a little, a little doubtful. But I don't know. From an American perspective or the perspective of anyone who's visited that border, which I have, pretty secure border looks like. The southern border. So like how, how did that happen? Does anyone fit? Let me rephrase. Has there been what you consider an honest and reliable accounting of how it happened? Like how do these guys get in here? I think it's known what even by how I think physically speaking people know how they got in. The border was largely, I mean, people were in their bunks sleeping. It was also a Jewish holiday. There is no increased level of alertness as far as I've heard. You certainly didn't have drones or anything in the air, which could have solved this entire problem. Of course, like 15 minutes. So you have enough guys and enough RPGs and enough explosives. You break through concrete. Oh, I know that. But you just imagine that the border with Gaza when there are credible intelligence reports, something where it's going on, maybe we don't know what it is, but they would be on, you know, sufficient alert to have stopped this at the line. Why something didn't happen between that meeting, which I've heard was between certain members of intelligence, and maybe three in the morning, why there weren't drones that were put in the air or a helicopter or heightened alertness significantly heightened alertness. I don't know. But what I have learned over many, many years in Israel is that you would be surprised by what people can get away with. I know people in the West Bank who are fake Israeli ideas who slip. But what I have learned over many, many years in Israel is that you would be surprised by what people can get away with. I know people in the West Bank who have fake Israeli IDs who slip in illegally and stolen Israeli cars to smoke cash with their friends on the other side and then go back. You'd be surprised. So the myth of Israeli government efficiency is a myth. Yeah, I don't die. Yeah. So it's not security is not as competent as people imagine it is. When it wants to be competent, it's very competent. If you ask yourself, for example, in Lebanon and Iran right now, how is it that they have thousands upon thousands of targets that are readily available? Exactly. Right. It's because they wanted to have them. They set their sights on Iran and Lebanon and they neglected Gaza. Yeah. And that's the central question is why. And so once it's in progress, there is a stand-down order. What was that? Like why did they do that? Well, you can't flood the area with IDF because look, you're talking about a lot of troops, especially for the holidays or maybe in the north, it might be two, three hours away. Yeah. So I think it's a bit unreasonable to expect that they would have flooded the whole place with troops. It's harder. They could be put together guns and get equipment. It's like it's just a just a just a little mayhem. There are soldiers in the first weeks of the war that didn't even have helmets. You had Jewish communities that were sending like basic equipment because there were massive shortages. The real question in my opinion is why if there was some kind of indication around 3am, why the Air Force wasn't involved. Why helicopter's drones or fighter jets weren't involved because that doesn't take a whole lot of time as far as I'm concerned. No. And we don't know the answer. No. I mean, no. I don't expect to know the answer. At least for a very, very long time. Jewish rare these days, a company that actually makes things here in the US, not just designed here or assembled here, actually manufactured here, start to finish in the United States. Brooklyn betting builds every mattress in their factory in Arizona. Not in the far east in Arizona. No middleman, no cutting corners, no outsourcing to save a buck. The founders started with nothing, no degree, no corporate backing, just learned the craft, built a factory, created a product that actually works. That's the American story we ought to support it. And we do. And here we love the Thermo-balanced mattress collection. It's made a huge difference in the quality of the sleep of a lot of people who work here. No more waking up hot in the night thanks to their cooling technology. Your back feels better when you wake up. They're endorsed in fact by the American Chiropractic Association. So it's not just marketing. It's real. They'll give you 120 nights to try it out. That's a lot. If you don't love it, they take it back or swap it out. No hassle. That's how confident they are. Visit BrooklynBedding.com used a promo code Tucker at checkout for 30% off site wide. This offer not available anywhere else. Once that happened, once those attacks happened, was it always inevitable the response? Was Gaza always going to get leveled once that happened? If that operation, if that attack were to be successful, and I think if we follow Sinwars thread, I think it's right of us from that he knew. What do you mean by that this war will take with it or burn with it all the green and all the dry? It's called Scorched Earth. I think there was an assumption that something of this nature would happen. The exact extent, no one can predict it. Of course not. But that there would be massive change potentially even of borders long term. Potentially. In Gaza certainly, I think the talk of border changes, for example, in Syria and Lebanon, I think it's a bit overblown. I think it's a bit overblown. Yeah, I have no idea. We'll see. But things change. I just have to pause and ask, what at this stage, you know, years later, what is the plan for Gaza? Do you think the Netanyahu government's plan for Gaza? You've got all these people living there. He said on television this morning, we're going to go with the Trump plan to move them all out of Gaza. Highly doubt that that's going to happen. Well, I kind of doubt that too. I think there's this myth that certainly, you know, circulates in the Arab world, but definitely here in America too, that there's a whole lot more strategy. That there's a whole lot more foresight in Israel. Yes, that's people definitely believe that this is part of a plan greater Israel. This is a strategy. I think you're overestimating the foresight. I wouldn't be surprised if I had not used specifically. But I don't think there's a massive plan in Gaza. There are certainly plans that have been thrown around. But right now, as far as you can see, and this is precisely what Sinwah said. So I know that the Israelis had zero plan, at least communicated to the United States for what would happen after the Ayatollah was killed in Iran. They didn't have a good government in waiting or any kind of... Because it doesn't matter to them. Well, clearly. What matters is, well, what's useful for be being a Netanyahu specifically is simply chaos. And the more definition that is given to the chaos, the more he has to account for the shape that it's taken. Right, smart. That's right. The difference between Iran and Gaza, though, is Gaza's on your border. So would they want... Would he want chaos in Gaza? Well, if you look at the border right now, I mean, you have a ton of buffer. It's not really bordering Israel anymore. True. And so in that sense, I think... And there's not a ton of chaos meaning Hamas is... I don't know if they're in shambles. I think there are a lot of tunnels that are still left, for example. They have light weapons. They have AK-47s. They have like tiny rockets that can sometimes send in. They're collecting taxes. Apparently, so they're functioning. Are they a threat to Israel at this moment in time? No. And that, since BB did the minimum he would have to do and still stopping short of actually determining a reality. Because then he would have to explain to these Israelis why did I do X or not why? So you don't think that there anybody has a clear picture of where Gaza is in 10 years. In 10 years? No. But I do think that BB and the administration and the idea, alongside, probably have an idea where Gaza... What they will do in Gaza, if X happens with Iran, if Y happens with Lebanon. BB is playing sort of musical wars. Why does he have... Why did they time Lebanon? Right now. It's a fail-safe for Iran. If Trump decides to pull out of it on, if Iran doesn't go the way BB needs, then he always has Lebanon. And if all of that doesn't go the way he needs, he could go back into Gaza. It's sure suggesting that he has to have a war. At least until he gets elected next. I think so. You really think that's the motive. I think there are many motives. I think this is certainly the timing of a lot of things. The strange thing about BB is that, look, on the one hand, there's a national interest that lines up with a personal interest. It's not just that BB is doing something that has no... That wouldn't in any way benefit the national security of the country. I believe that for as far as Israel is concerned, striking it on is quite possibly a great idea. You have from the largest proxy networks in the history of the Middle East. It's bent on doing something to Israel, destroying them forever. I don't know if that was exactly the case. You have a Master Parry Military Group on your board with Lebanon. Those are valid, relatively objective, strategic goals. But if you could tinker with them, if you can time them and modulate them to serve your personal motives, well, it's a win-win. Have you heard anybody articulate plans for just to be totally clear on this? For moving more than one, probably fewer than two million people in Gaza anywhere? No, but I have something else that I don't think has ever been released actually. I was working with the Washington Post as of until they fired their whole foreign desk, as you saw. And we were doing a lot of interviews on the day after, specifically reconstruction, and trying to follow the money. Because that's what Gaza is about right now. It's all about money. It's not just American money or Israeli money. It's the Gulf country. It's a huge yipped. The PA wants to get the finger in there as well. And I confirmed this with two, actually quite possibly three sources, if I'm not mistaken. And this might not end up being in the case. But I understood that the center that was put together by the American Army and Kiritgat to map out a strategize about Gaza, and assist the Israelis, that they were making calls that their lawyers were making calls to certain organizations to look into the status of private property in Gaza. Basically, among many things I heard that the plan was, have you ever seen the flyers that the Israelis drop in Gaza or the evacuation notices? And they usually divided into blocks. You have numbered blocks, and those are private properties. Right? Now, if you have an entire swath of territory, entire neighborhoods that are upside down or backwards, that no longer follow the logic of a grid, you can't expect that it's some katari or Saudi or whatever company is going to come in and rebuild Gaza identically to the way it was before. No. So I heard that the plan was to have to sort of like rotate, like take a population from an area, move them away, build a massive complex as it were. It could be condominiums, it could be apartments, I don't know what. And then move them back and continue doing this rotation for however long it takes. What does that mean? It means that you are fundamentally altering the urban planning and with the demography of private property of Gaza. If you have a building on a swath of land, on a plot of land, that used to have five to seven bits of private property, you have to reconfigure and you have to suspend that private property and create a new precedent. I was told by someone very, very high up in the PA that this was intended that there was going to be a suspension of private property for a period of maybe seven years. Now, what does that mean? It quite possibly, and this is the most cynical possible conclusion you could draw. It could mean that it could mean basically that, look, in the West Bank, it's sometimes Israel struggles to take certain parts of swaths of land, or to build actual settlement. Sometimes they'll have caravans in certain areas, but not houses. And the reason is that to some degree Israel still beholden to Ottoman and Jordanian legal precedent. And they can wiggle around, you can maneuver, but it can be nullified. It's very hard to see. It's an East Jerusalem. Exactly. So what happens, I'll probably do the question, I guess. What happens in Gaza if you suspend all of private property, and you're going to say in seven years we're going to revisit it, or it will be reconfigured by legal experts who by then will have disappeared? You break a massive precedent. It's just a reset, exactly. It's a golden opportunity. Will that happen? I don't know. But based on everything I've heard, it is within the realm of possibility. And it makes logical sense as well. So it's a, yeah. Did people in Israel take the Trump administration's plan for redevelopment with casinos and beachfront condos? They take that seriously. I like citizens and Israel people. You think the government did? I don't know. Did you? No. Yeah. No. That's not going to happen. I highly doubt it. Yeah. It's still run by a militant group. There's still some, there's hundreds of kilometers of tunnels that I have been dealt with by the IDF, which they also lied about. I spoke to a general. His name is Yitzhak Braek. Have you heard of him? No. It's strange because he's not. I think his English is a little bad. So we don't hear from him a lot in the West. But he was a guy who went on three months before October the 7th and said, quote, there will be a massacre here. This is a guy who was a general reserve general who also audited. He was tasked with I think for many, many years auditing troops. He works for the IDF audit, meaning he would go between fronts between units and assess true readiness, routines, equipment. He knew the IDF inside and out and he worked under several generals leading up to October the 7th. And for years he was screaming that we are not really ready for anything. And we're cutting our ground troops because we want to be a compact technologically adept army. We're basically rendering ourselves naked on the ground. And he went down to the Gaza board and he sees that basically the soldiers treated like summer camp. He had girls and, you know, doing talk videos. So summer camp reached the point again back to the status quo where Israelis genuinely believed that the conflict was kind of over. This is just, it's going to be this way. There's going to be a big wall. They're going to be there. We're going to be here. And it's like a big guy sat with him a lot about a year ago. And he was telling me he was getting calls from a lot of soldiers who work in the tunnel units. And I spoke to several soldiers who either worked in the tunnels or were guarding tasks with guarding them supervising the work. That there was tons left, tons left. He said this general said 75% I don't know if that's definitely true. But I heard from a lot of soldiers that the material used to totally destroy tunnels is very expensive and perhaps in short supply. And so a lot of what was happening was sort of sealing the tunnels. You pour concrete inside. And it just takes probably some dudes, however many days later to come and undo the concrete. Break the concrete. And I also heard from soldiers that Hamas was repairing tunnels during the war. In the midst of fighting, there were tunnels that were being are shaft that were being repaired. For decades, Russell Bran was one of the most famous actors and comedians and agnostics in the world. Today, he is one of the most sincere Christians we know of follower of Christ. His personal transformation is remarkable. We saw it up close. He has now recounted it in an amazing book called How to Become a Christian in Seven Days. In a recounts, what happened to him? And it makes the case to all of us for stepping away from our secular assumptions and returning to the only thing that matters which is God. I've read it. It's amazing. And right now there's only one place to get at Tucker Carlson Books.com. This is the first release from our new publishing company. We created Tucker Carlson Books to bypass the censors and bring you things that are actually worth reading and sharing. And we're starting this venture with what matters most. And that's Russell Bran's message of the promise of forgiveness. Enjoy through Jesus. We're proud to launch our new bookstore with Russell Bran's How to Become a Christian in Seven Days. It is the message this country needs most. Find his day on Tucker Carlson Books.com. There was a big debate in this country about whether or not the Israeli government sent money, not its own money, but the money of the United States and Qatar to Hamas, whether or not I would do that. And then it seemed to have been confirmed. We tell us what you know about that and what the motive was. What kind of time we talking about the money that came in before October 7th? Of course. Before October this. Oh, the suitcases of cash. Exactly. Yeah. Well, yeah, I know that there was tons of cash. I don't actually have the numbers. I forget what was the thinking. I mean, I think it's confirmed now. That was considered very controversial. There are pictures of the pictures of the suitcases. Yeah, no money going into it. Yeah, definitely confirmed. The thinking was we keep them happy in fat and they don't bother us, which is getting the logic of the marches of return. We're going to calm. We're going to make some noise until these raids come and say, what's your price? What will it take to get you to shut up more money and more work permits construction materials? It was part of maintaining a status quo. And someone probably soon water realized that this, if I get too fat, if we get too fat, we won't be able to move anymore. Right. I think it's that simple. So from thousands of miles away, it seems like, but Israel seems like a pretty tough project to keep going over generations. Because of the numbers, just tiny countries surrounded by people who don't like it or recognize its legitimacy, some of whom are motivated to do harm. So that's like, that's not a good ratio over time. It's hard to maintain that. It's like, Courtney is really perspective. Do people think of that? No, but I think there's maybe two or three ways of looking at this. And the one hand, there's a demographic perspective where, yeah, that's what I mean. Yeah, that's one perspective. And if you look at the numbers, how many Jews are there in Israel? I think there's seven, seven, seven, yeah. And you have two million Palestinians who have citizenship. But I think the proper calculation is within the area under control, under Israeli control, what's the population divide? And at that point, you have 50, 50. If you take West, the West Bank, where there are also Jews living, but also Gaza. Because these are all areas that are that in hinge upon Israel, and which are under Israeli control tacitly, or actually, you have seven million Palestinians, two in Israel, three in the West Bank, two in Gaza, so seven. You have seven million Jews. It's halved right now. It's split. Half half. Demographically speaking, that is a problem. Do I think that will be what brings Israel to its knees if it is ever brought to its knees? No. I was thinking more the macro demographic problem of the Arab world, the Muslim world, almost two billion. So when I hear Netanyahu say we're fighting a seven-front war, whatever number of fronts it was seven fronts recently, yeah. I think you don't have the economy. You don't have the manpower. And you no longer have the goodwill to sustain that for very long at all. Like, ultimately, if you have enough enemies and there's too few of you and enough at them, you're going to lose. People have been saying that for a long time. Well, it hasn't even been there 80 years. So I think they bet on a few things. They have nuclear weapons. They have a great intelligence agency and they bet on the incompetence of the Muslim countries around the sure. For sure. But there's also a sense in which you can't fight everybody. And so I don't see when I talk to Israelis and just when I watch, I don't see any long-term strategy that rests on real alliances. Like, you have to have, this is true not just for Israel, but for each one of us as a person in this world. You have to have more powerful friends. You do enemies or ultimately you get destroyed. And I don't see that realization at all. It seems almost arranged. I guess we have new who cares if you have nuclear weapons. So does everyone else. Like, so what? No, everyone else doesn't have nuclear weapons. But I mean, a lot of people have new people. A lot of people are including in your region. That's true. But I think right now you have this logic being pushed around by BB, which is, you know, piece through strength. I think the Israelis have this sense that if we push long enough, let's say we do manage to change the regime and add on. Not probably but change it. We can have an arrangement. The Gulf countries because they've felt very exposed right now. Maybe there'll be tension. There'll be tension with the United States. Maybe this will also bring other Gulf countries closer to us. There are already tassel relations between Saudi Arabia and Israel. They exchange intelligence among other things. But maybe this will bring them closer. They have pretty, yeah, well, the Saudis have been pushing for this war. Exactly. And in other than the same side as Israel, basically on this question. And in Lebanon, what was the aim when Israel went into Lebanon in the 80s? The aim was we want to change the demography. We're going to change the government. We're going to put the Christians in power and make peace. The opposite happened. The opposite happened. And where are they doing now? I believe that in some dim recess, it might not actually be an active strategy, but I do believe that in some dim recess, Israel would like civil war in Lebanon because between you and me, if I'm being totally honest, the only way to deal with Hezbollah is not just a paramilitary group. They are a demographically entrenched in the country. They are self-leaven on. And they are the Shiite population that was also oppressed for a very long time. There are a lot of shits in Beirut now. It's not just the South. Yeah. Yeah. And so I think there is a desire for potentially civil war in Lebanon. For sure. And that, I mean, you've seen this, well, you saw in Syria, you've seen it in a lot of the same strategy. I'm just saying, and I'm not attaching values to any of this. What's right or wrong or even once good for the United States or any of that. I just think as a general principle that's day trading, that's like a short-term strategy that doesn't work long-term, but maybe people think it does work long-term, or you can do that forever. I don't think you can. No, probably not. I think they're hoping that either this alternate is out exactly the way they want it, which is highly unlikely, or that you have enough chaos. This is a desire for chaos. Right. But all of these places should be at least uncertain. If we can't determine what the best possible reality for us and the very least, the reality should be indeterminate, it should be in flux. Right. No, I get it. I totally get it. And again, I'm not even judging this, or that's where I'm not. This is not a lecture. I just mean like as a kind of almost a physics principle in the end or over time, chaos is bad for you. It's bad for everybody. It's bad to have chaos nearby you. It's bad to have your neighbor get divorced. That actually increases the chances you get divorced. There's a way in which chaos is a virus, and it hurts you in the end, even though you think you can control it, you can't. I think that's a pretty stable principle of history. I think the big weak point of Israel, I think sometimes when you look strategically or at the surrounding countries, there's another point here, which is Israel on the interior, Israel psychologically. Right. Israel is like exactly. I think that is the actual weak point. If anything brings Israel to its knees, which doesn't mean it will be exterminated or extinguished that it will die as a state, but the thing that will fundamentally shatter the foundation either to end the country or to start a fresh status quo for the country, it will be internal. I believe so. And if you want to understand that dynamic, I think you have to look to the West Bank. What kind of you say this is so often overlooked, one of only real genocides in history was the Romans in the 1970s and the 1980s in Jerusalem. And one of the reasons that they were able that seas were successful is because of the almost unbelievably barbaric fighting between Jewish factions within Jerusalem. Like the Romans got through because the defenders were fighting each other. I just think that's also another principle. It's like if you don't have a unified country or much weaker than you think you are, I guess. I mean, yes and no. Sometimes I do think about that. On the other hand, Israelis do at least until now they've shown a pretty serious ability to just put all of their problems aside. Right. I mean, if you look at Bebe's opposition, you're the peed. He was asked I think two weeks ago about Greater Israel. And he couldn't even reject that as a political position. Yeah. He talked about scraping away at Lebanon, which is fine if you're Bebe. Or if you want to be with Bebe, that's the doctrine. But you have this thing within the Israeli opposition that Bebe has put them in a corner that over the course of the war, they have had no choice but to parrot his speech, to use his language. And he buried them in so doing. No, that's certainly what it seems like looking from the outside. Can I ask them, but again, this is an outsiders perspective of non-hebrus speaking perspective, but it seems like the core division is religious non-religious. Or it has been. Is that still true? Where is that? The idea that a certain percentage of the country doesn't serve doesn't participate meaningfully in the economy, and there's deep resentment toward them by people who do. That has been true for a while. Is that still true? Is it more true? Less true? I think it's where it was a year ago, probably where it was two years ago. Tensions, they rise and they fall. I'm also not like the greatest expert on that. But if you live there, does that seem like a crisis in the country? I don't think it's reached the point of a crisis. It could. But again, I don't think if you're determined to go back to something else. I think you were mentioning the Romans, and it reminds of exile. And I think what you see in the West Bank, if you're talking about long-term in the darkest depths of the Israeli psyche, what is going to affect longevity of the country is the interplay, the psychological interplay between the Israelis and the Palestinians. In the West Bank, it manifests itself most in the West Bank. Because in Tel Aviv, you have a bunch of Shmaki lifestyle yappies. Tel Aviv, you just want to forget. Tel Aviv is the subconscious of the subconscious of Israel. But the West Bank is where the complex is. At the bottom of the Israeli psyche, it's where they play out. And so at the end of the, you have a strange problem, which is that the Israelis come back, the Jews come back after two to three thousand years. There were exiles. We don't have to debate when exactly how many years. But what happens is you have people who have a kind of, I'm not a native right, but a kind of native claim, who come back in colonial costume. There's a reason why the relationship between the Palestinians and the Jews is different than that of between the Palestinians and the British and the Ottoman. Because Ottoman never came and said, like, this is our home then. We're coming back now. It's all ours. In order to the British, that's what the Israelis said for the Jews did. And again, I don't want to debate sort of like what is right or what is clean. I think by and large, it's fair to say that the Jews have some kind of relationship with the land. Meaning there are many Palestinian villages that have, that you could trace their names back to Jewish ancient settlements. Does it mean that in Israeli or a Jew can come and take it? No. But what it does mean is that you can't understand the conflict between the Israelis or the Jews and the Palestinians without realizing that this is a struggle for nativity. And that in some way they are the mirror images of each other. And in many ways, the Palestinians are the new Jews. And neither one really wants to admit it, especially the Israelis. And so in the West Bank, I've been in the West Bank a lot the last. The new Jews in what sense, the people who have the moral authority of victimhood. Like the world looks at the menses we feel sorry for you. You've been mistreated. Not about that. It's a tale of exile in the Stalja. Right. The differences of the Palestinians are exiled on their own land, which also makes it very hard for these Israelis to be. What this problem? For them it's a problem. We have people, I always say to Jews to Israelis and Israel. And like, look, if the Jews came back after 23,000 years and didn't forget that there were periods of forgetting. Why do you think that the Palestinians won't do the same? And they're right on the borders. They can see it. Couldn't see Israel from Europe. But you can see it from Gaza. You can see it from the West Bank. What do they say when you say that? They just go silent. They don't want to understand. There's a point that the problem in Israel is that, you know, I used to have a lot of, I used to have some Israeli sort of religious friends who would come to my dorm when I'd have my Arab friends with me. And we'd have some really nice conversations that even befriended each other. But at some point my Israeli friends stopped speaking to them. Because there's a point in any Israeli dialogue. There's a point at which an Israeli has to make a decision left to right. Am I going, if I go down this path and really try to understand the other side, I risk exposing certain things with the grounds of my own identity here, but the foundations of the country that risk my identity and the other option is, I'm just going to stop it here, turn around and forget this happened. And so in the West Bank right now, there's some very, very weird trends. You have, you know, the number of outposts in the West Bank has increased. I don't know by hand, the hundreds of outposts, every, almost every other hill in the West Bank has a shack on it. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's into the scale is insane. And I visit some of these outposts and what you see is a, is a, is a little bit of a strange thing. You have something called the hilltop youth. Have you heard of this? Of course. So this is like the third mutation of settlers. The first settlers were kind of like kibbutznik people, right? Right. What's their goal? The goal, the goal that kibbutznik is I need to revive some kind of relationship with the land. Settlers the first set of those were kind of like kibbutznik people right what's their goal the goal the gold the kibbutznik is I need to revive some kind of relationship with the land The first iteration sellers were not going down the hill and like pug roaming people They had their hill they had their barbed wire and shacks and your go self-improvement seemed like one of the main goals of the first The kibbutz generation generation. Yeah, we're gonna like improve ourselves by Making green and growing things. I think a lot of it also had to deal with the exile thing that we haven't been here It's like a prisoner who comes home after 30 years walks into the Kitchen sees his wife and kid and says like hey honey how you doing since sounds if nothing happened That was the design you know, but there's 30 years to make up for in this case You have two three thousand years to make up for so part of the kibbutznik ideologically was like we have to revive So sort of connection with the land, but my point is that the third mutation of the set of those which is now the hilltop youth Their strange I mean they now wear Palestinian coffee is Palestinian headdress and a lot of fun. They're wearing those things Black ones but white and black are the Palestinian ones Yeah, which is kind of strange because if you even dressed up for Halloween like that and tell a few people would say things People are very sensitive to symbol of terrorism in Israel And you have the settlers running around throwing stones wearing the very thing that once frightened them as children and you have another trend Which is now they want dunkies or there's a lot of shepherding, but with machine guns or you have you know settler chic which are like young outpost women who are what they call Israelite fashion You see where I'm going be more specific For those of us who live in the United States. What's Israelite fashion? You know, it's kind of like in Hebrew They use words like sort of Apology is realite or pastoral. Yeah, which is also the word in Hebrew used to describe The vibe you get in areas that used to have Palestinian villages that are now either forests or or towns Lots of wild natural treboring foliage the point being is that We've seen the West Bank now is an attempt to double down on And so I was in a Palestinian village. It's called Todmo's idea It gets attacked 20 bit. I don't know if you saw there was a report Maybe six months ago from that mistaken like three to four thousand all the trees that were cut down the way Yes, it's a big story and I was there when this happened that weekend by chance And I remember sitting with one of these Palestinian guys And we were attacked by settlers once and they went back. They burned about four houses down right in front of me I saw it they stabbed a bunch of sheep It's the first time I ever saw this with my eyes some videos all the time, but I actually saw the smoke building out of the houses and The guy said something pretty interesting. He looked at me and he was he was very calm and he said You know, they want they wanted all that once That's what he mean He goes He goes, you know, they kind of want to be like us You know, they want they want shepherd But they also have to machine guns and they want they want all of trees But they don't see that we we pave our roads around all the trees They want all they want to slice the mountain Get the barbed wire on you put your houses there. They want they want to compensate for three thousand years They want to get back to some point But they were three thousand years, but they want all that once they want it now and they don't want anyone to be there to disturb them And so it puts the settlement movement into a strange league. I'd call it an auto immune position sort of auto immune Because these people are simply taking Hill after Hill after Hill hoping that they will come a day one fine morning They wake up and it's empty and they have quiet But even when that happens it all enough people to populate people don't want to live in the West Bank why? The average Israeli does not want to be sitting on a hilltop surrounded by a Palestinian The average Israeli wants to you know sitting on the V Blacks, maybe smoke a joint make money by house and grease The Kefia is very confusing to me settlers dressing as Palestinians So is the message where the real Palestinians? I think what's going on is subconscious I don't think they're actually conscious of it because I went to a settlement to I went to a fresh outpost a few weeks ago I'm surprised they let me in someone put the gun on me when I went in and then they realized I you know my name is Are you high in flanzer I shouldn't they're like come here you're right come in We got to talking and this guy's wife is one of these settler chic influence And I wanted to talk to her about the fashion I wanted to hear like how do you explain this so that I could then put it into a piece and her husband is also sort of this lumberjack He guy he's got blue eyes dirty blonde hair. He's like Towing the the fields to pretty sure belong to people just down the hill and Where are they from originally? One of them is actually from the West Bank was born in another settlement in the West Bank And I believe she is from some more inside Israel maybe Jerusalem, but I might be wrong Times of Israel did a piece on her actually like a week before I was there And they got real weird with me real weird Yes, like what do you want? I was like I'm just here to talk about fashion and then her husband gave her a look She walked off went completely silent. He sat down with me alongside the guy who pulled his gun on me And the guys kind of looking me like who are you? What do you want? I was like the journalist. He's like can I see your work? I said yeah, I write about like security matters. This is for a magazine piece Long story short they kicked me out They said you should probably get out of here and when I went outside smoke cigarette before leaving The guy who pulled his gun on me is just sitting in that six and asked you a question. You go see I said Why can't we have a conversation? due to do Because I told them like I'm wondering about this the nativity thing and this the coffee is and the guy looked me He knew something was off because he's like it's not that many people who do that And I was like the fact that you know it that you're aware of it probably means that I struck a I triggered him a little bit And when we're outside smoking the cigarette I asked him why can't we talk? He goes, you know, it could have gone a lot worse for you today That's what he mean He goes, you know what? I mean, I said he's threatening me He said no, but there are people who would do a serious number on you And I said even even to a fellow Jew And he said it's beyond the theology. He said this is beyond ideology I spent the whole car right home thinking about what he could have possibly meant by that. What is it about then? When he said this is beyond ideology and I already laid out sort of like the nativity dynamics But within the settlement movement What it what can possibly mean by this is beyond ideology? I haven't the fact are these religious people? That's another question about the settlers in the West Bank They're not entirely religious, you know, you have a lot of religious there are religious people There's also a lot of people who aren't that devout or pious that religious the religion in certain cases becomes a kind of aesthetic thing Or a vehicle for sort of nationalist against right I mean the settlement that I was in with this sort of the settler fashionista A week after she had a DJ At the outpost and outposts is two people living there. It's a shack A DJ at a bunch of women dressed in is where like clothing doing a meditative and like like trans Disco kind of like party What? Yeah, it's kind of strange So I'm having trouble fitting this into a category so the two Yeah motives that you always hear here in the US or when I've been in Israel are either these are You know religious people who are sort of acting out some kind of malenitalist vision or There are people who want you per housing and housing in Israel. Those are two separate categories of settler Right that's yeah, but you're describing a third category. That's kind of like cosplay kind of like What are you describing? What why are they doing this what I'm describing is a part of The broader category of settlers who are there to have the forefront Or forwarding the set who are pushing the set up. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah forward as opposed to the people on she pouncing who just literally go into Tel Aviv You know, yeah, oh my god. I've seen that. Yeah Um Where it all comes from I don't know but I think that it's a big commitment to move to a Hilltop surrounded by concertina wire like you don't do that by accident But if you're 14 15 16 17 years old if you're in your early 20s you want to be king of the hill Want to play cowboy? Yeah, so is that what you think it is? I think in many cases again like the hilltop youth I found them once you know these snotnows BD eyes like kids with their head shave driving a stolen palestinian car on the Sabbath Tell me to get the fuck out or I'm gonna get beat like it's it's fucking weird It's weird. Where where where where these really? authorities Sometimes absent sometimes present And even when they're present they can be quite absent If I'm running Israel, I'm I'm paying a very Gunpan close attention to these people because that they could be a threat to me. You know armed people who are increasingly radical and nobody's kind of Controlling their behavior. They could form a militia and overthrow my government. That would be my thought if I were Nenya who I'd be worried about them. I thought about that quite a few times I mean it's there's a few things going on here right in the security establishment in Israel There are a lot of voices who are very concerned and this is what you hear publicly you can imagine that behind closed doors There's a lot more talk They are concerned The people in order for his coalition also has to keep serving them right whatever they want The real problem in the West Bank is that you have these guys who are armed and that you know You had Abraham on the other day And he said that I believe that at some point or another the settlements will be collapsed I would agree with him But the question is not whether or not they'll be collapsed the question is what is gonna have to happen For that to happen what will have what will happen on the way before you reach that point where the settlements are collapsed Will it be some sort of civil chaos will be a third in Defada? There's a lot of talk in Israel But a third in Defada but my sense is that what happens next is not something that follows the sequence of Intifada But you know kind of like what happened in Gaza this shattering of the status quo I think there will come a point where something analogous in lot like logically speaking Happens in the West Bank. Well it looked like Gaza not at all. Will it be equally as Cataclysmic maybe Possibly that's my sense But I mean, there's it's a different dynamic in the West Bank. I mean isn't it? I mean It's first of all it's richer than God's ever was when it's more kind of established series of towns Which is why oh in terms of the settlements you mean no no no no that the Palestinian population in the West Bank I mean, it's not I don't know it's just harder to imagine something like that happening there Because I don't think as I said I don't think what happens there is going to look like right be like what happening Gaza But I think If you permit me a few minutes, you know the there's a reason why October the 7th came from Gaza and not from yeah, the West Bank I spent Last summer I was in the Janine refugee camp if you've heard of it of course And I sat with the who is then the leader of Islamic Jihad It was the Emir the prince of Islamic Jihad I sat with a few other guys from the various other factions And what I understood was That the resistance in the West Bank Basically, there's a thread going all the way back to 48 your exiled and you want to get back and you want to fight And then there is serious amounts of terrorist attacks and then eventually there's a political process and you'd assume that any resistance movements or any kind of You know terrorist operate whatever you want to call it that they would eventually want to yield some kind of political outcome But also eventually fails You have the first in defata you have the second and second into father is basically a lashing out Meaning the thread has reached its end And the West Bank at that point Was faced with the factions in the West Bank were faced with sort of two options either We pause and take a breath and figure out what the fuck we're doing here Or just gonna keep shooting Anelessly just like shooting to make it look to make it look like we're doing something We have two military marches. We're gonna act really cool But the guys are just like hood boys They're just putting on headbands and like with a marbrough red in their mouths and just shooting Usually not even to hit the aim is usually just to die The logic of the chaos the logic of the resistance in the West Bank is completely backwards Which means I don't think there's gonna be like an October 7th in the West Bank But when I was in these villages that were getting attacked by the settlers There's one line that kept coming up And I'm talking about a line I was hearing from your your average Palestinian farmer or peasants which was There will come a day There will come a day when we are pushed a little too far And at that point the question is how many minutes does it take for a bunch of people to run up to a hill and maybe overwhelm the settlement? And all men told me that we're gonna chew them like dogs I would think that's coming. I mean based on the behavior you're describing. It's quite possible. I wouldn't discount it Um, what do you make that the two most in the US the two most famous Cabinet ministers in the Netanyahu government or smotris and Ben Guevier Are they powerful figures in Israel? How are they regarded? What's what's their motive strategy plan? I don't think that they're close to as popular as they were I think bebe's popularity has increased actually over the course of the war because this really has a very short memory Especially when it comes to warfare Um, but I don't really know what to tell you about smotris engine and Ben Guevier. It's not really my specialty I guess it just seems unimaginably radical From an American if you if you think of Israel the post-67 Israel that most Americans, you know learned about visited all of a sudden you have these guys These two gosh kenazi guys sound really really radical Or it seems like a departure from anything Americans have ever heard in this really government officials say I think what you're hearing is what you often hear behind closed doors all over Israel What you can hear the cafe and said of you meaning that the notion of Yeah, maybe they could go somewhere The Palestinians maybe they just like they could be gone The question of those are questions that come up You hear it regularly. These aren't like completely insane conversations to hear you can hear it from like a hippie at a cafe Instead of even smoking a joint The what changes that suddenly you are hearing it more and more on TV I remember I heard one news commentator news anchor ask About transfer And I was like it this is a bit insane like imagine if someone on CNN came on and sort of talking about transferring another an entire other population Who are illegal Right people who are born there Been there For thousands of years maybe hundreds maybe thousands. I don't know but it doesn't matter. They were there when when these rallies came Yeah, it's a matter how long they've been there for So yeah What about I mean it used to be in my living memory there was a Significant population of Israelis who who had totally different views are like no that's wrong Human rights or thing you can't do that. How big is that an other Burg I think is either kind of Israeli I remember from 25 years ago there are a bunch of people like that. How many are left? I think the left is dead the left is dead. The Israeli left is dead and Question is to why they died. It's because they spent though. I think a bit too much time beating the horse of Oslo dead Oslo obviously failed And the left was unwilling to concede that fact which meant that for many many years I think unto this day the left never reevaluate it they never came with another proposal or another plan or another way of Thinking about the conflict They kept beating the the horse of Oslo dead. You mean while these rarely right continues to churn out active Propositions we're gonna reform the judiciary We want to take the West Bank very concrete things that a right winger in Israel Will tell you what they want a left winger in Israel tell you how they feel yeah, and Yeah, I think that's I think that's a long and short of it Good explanation what do Israelis have a sense of what the rest of the world thinks of Israel Yeah, I think they have a sense the question is is how deeply do they think about the sense and how much merit are they willing to give Do they care? I think they don't they care. No one let no one likes to be hated I don't think anyone likes to be hated But I think the more you feel like you're hated The more you want to hate everyone else or just completely discount them you the more you want to dig your heels and then double down Huh, that's interesting Yeah, I mean I feel like I'm often attacked for hating Israeli don't eat Israel at all I feel sorry for Israel. I think they're in trouble. They don't seem to agree, but I think they are but whatever my views um, I mean a lot of people hate Israel like around the world. I hear it a lot when I travel I feel like the moderate one and I think that's a big change and I always wonder do the Israelis know that do they care? I think these rallies are probably the most hated people in the world right now. That's my impression full stop. Yes um One of the greatest things I ever did was not get an Israeli passport and I feel bad for friends who have them I would be scared. I'm gonna be totally honest. I would be scared right now I'm sometimes scared to even say I'm Jewish. I'm lucky enough that I have Arabic and if I'm in Europe I just help people on Palestinian Some people might not like but I think I put in the time to warrant it um Sometimes I'm scared to say that I'm Jewish and I'm I would definitely be scared to have an Israeli passport I think that's totally fair. That's fair. I'm not I'm the last person to whine about anti-Semitism But I think Israel is literally hated so I agree with you completely. I just I just oh again Once Mars want to be clear You don't think Israelis have the sense that that's a bad thing and we should be worried about it or That we played any role in that at all. I think the Israelis there are Israelis who You have a small liberal population of Israelis many of whom I hear talking about The fact that they don't see a future for themselves in the country anymore right a lot This is about two to three years in the making even from the judicial format a lot of people telling me left leaning decent Israelis Who are like I? I don't know if I can have more kids here or I don't want my kids to be in the army or I don't want my kids to have to deal with Whatever the consequences of the judicial reform and now this entire war um The rest of the Israeli population. I think by and large are bent on They've all doubled down Really? I think a lot of people so be the reflects The population here represents you think I don't think a lot of people have Problems with anything that BB represents. I think people have problems with The fact that he might have a corruption case, which I think is right right Right, but you're never a dinner and people say man I can't be both those kids who are killed in Gaza. That's bad. I'm sorry. We did that I don't hear it a lot, but what you can say no you might hear it sort of a Might be a symbolic gesture like a virtue signal But it's immediately followed with you know That's what you got to do. I mean they came to kill us or their anti-Semites um Yeah Where do Israelis think anti-Semitism comes from? I often hear it invoked so-and-so's anti-Semite or anti-Semite. What how do they define it and what do they think it's root is? I think the root is age old as far as Israelis are concerned people hate us because people have always hated Jews You hate this all a lot in synagogues also across North America You have a message being pushed constantly that people just hate us And I think there are a lot of people who just hate Jews and there's a lot of people are waiting for an excuse to hate Jews But specifically why do they hate Jews? But the question is is there a distinction between those people and Palestinians? Are the Palestinians fundamentally anti-Semitic? You can spare me quotes from like an Imam here or an Imam there Well, the fact that they can flee Jew and Israeli by and large are these are these are these are this a people who has Premised its existence on Killing Jews as Jews and I do not think that that's the case Yeah, I would I wouldn't know. I mean, I I wouldn't know But I just think that quite there are a lot of anti-Semitic people in the hate Jews I agree with that and I think it's wrong. That's what I think Um, but I also think it's worth it. Like what is that? Is that a spiritual thing? I mean, we say well, it's always Existed I believe that but what's it's I mean, what's its cause And I've never heard one person ask that question and I think I believe in asking Or trying to understand the cause of everything you can't often but it's it's always worth doing I wanted to know why al-Qaeda attacked the US on 911 I thought it was horrible. I had a friend killed but I still want to know why then I never heard anybody asked that question You've heard anyone ask about the this sort of like the bottom root of anti-Semitic never not one time other than to say And by the way, I'd be willing to believe I'd be willing to believe that it's spiritual in nature what is spiritual mean that there's you know a belief among Jews and Some Christians that Jews are Distinct among people's because God made them distinct and that there is a spiritual reaction That is a religious belief that some people have many people have And I'd be willing to believe. I don't know if it's true that the this is like a reaction against that from Evil So that's one explanation, but I never even hear anybody ask the question like where's what I hear instead is people say It's just it's always been there. It always will be there. What does that mean? I guess that's what I'm asking. I mean Within the European context and look I'm not an expert on anti-Semitism. I'm not with any European context You have a people who are also forced into the margins of society They're easily scapegoated. They also maintain the certain level of distinction from the rest of society And those are people that are very easy to hate But I can't I can't give you a historiography of of anti-Semitism I can tell you why I think it's on the rise right now. I can why is it on the rise right now We have a bit of an issue right? I mean you have Israel doing what Israel does is getting record amounts of attention His record amounts of sympathy with the Palestinian cause. I mean there are many people if you have asked them 20 30 40 years ago if they understood what actually was the fate of the selling the Palestinian people they wouldn't have understood They wouldn't have known You know there's a famous coal by Ben Gurion Who following 48 you know there were 600 some 600 villages that were destroyed. Yes And I remember there's a there's a somewhere in the archive There's a quote which says you know people are soon going to come visit this country And we don't want them to see Have superfluous thoughts These are it's a perfluice meaning you got clean up the mess. I've like destroy them or we or plant trees But parks in their place which is why you have many parks all over Israel um And people didn't really understood didn't know that. I don't know. I not know that So parks you seen Israel often on the Physical spot of a former Palestinian village in many cases. Yes In many cases. Yes, which is also bound up with the JNF the Jewish National Fund. Yes And so I remember hearing from someone in Toronto that I think the government was going to start sanctioning The JNF and people were really up in arms about this and I said sort of The end of the day you have to decide what your relationship with Israel is You can't it's hard to have It's hard to expect people from without to understand why at a synagogue you also have an Israeli flag there if you don't also want to bear the brunt Of what's happening is we'll take some responsibility And I'm saying from without You can't expect people to understand that I think this is centered within the Jewish American community specifically, but also in Israel people expect everyone else to Understand them from within It's why it should be very obvious. Why israelis believe it should be obvious what we're doing All this should be obvious In the fact that you're asking questions as itself potentially an indication That you are against us that you just want to demise When I ask people questions in Israel the first thing is like why are you why are you asking? If I want to interview someone as a journalist in Israel I have to be very careful with the language I use If I use the word with banks that are Judean Samaria With within a certain demographic or act It's over Seriously? I tend to say we and not you because if I say you they're like what do you mean you? They're all in this together No, I'm not an Israeli citizen even that is of its sensitive You're describing narcissism The belief that other people should just understand what I'm feeling In a healthy a healthy person understands that each one of us is sort of locked away and around private traumas And that's why we communicate and I need to understand you It's very important to understand you and I want you to understand me, but it's not natural Right that's the basis of a relationship. It's an isolated and solipsistic society Solipsistic is a better word. That's exactly right in many ways Yeah, there's something in many cases. I find this thing a bit delusional about the mentality Um It's just the fact that for example Arabic isn't spoken in the country Used to be I mean those because they were Arab Jews who came from Arabic countries But they but I think there were also Ashkenazi Jews who spoke Arabic. I think that was more common I'm just I think that was my impression Not a whole lot Maybe if they were there for example before the establishment to the state As of the establishment to the state you didn't have people really learning Arabic I the changes that have taken place are maybe it's just a change in my perception But I just remember a country that was much more open to the world, but you know a lot has happened In that type of I should ask you Since you live there in Israel How much damage has been done during this war? We get no sense of it at all or I don't trust anything I see on the internet But do you get a sense? It's a country of war there Rubble you know it's rubble on the street and Tel Aviv or no No, in fact, I think the last round during June for example You know, I'm based in jaffa the moment. Yeah. Yeah, there are massive strikes in a place called Batyam to south of jaffa Where you saw I think there was a three block radius of damage Look, you do have damage relative the stakes minimal damage within it for all right now Does life seem Normal-ish? Yeah, it's really the Jews like the ish It's true. I'm pro-ish myself Um, so you do it doesn't feel like a country under siege under siege. Yeah. Yeah, the war's being fought about two thousand two thousand kilometers What correct yeah? Certainly not besieged Is there a sense that there's a physical risk to people you know feel like wow we could get like hammered by missiles drones No, I don't think there's like an apocalyptic. Yeah, that's what sense But there is a sense like damage can be done. These are ballistic missiles people can die But if you're smart if you take the necessary steps if you go down to your shelter You're probably going to be fine like a 99% chance that you will be just fine Do you talk to people who have a sense of how this would be resolved to people expected to end soon the war with Iran? I Don't think so I Think people want it to go on. I think people want the job done But what's a bit strange to me? What's a bit ironic here is that in America? It strikes me the perception is more zero some In America. I think there's a sense that if we went through all this and the regime doesn't fall then this was for not We wasted our time and we jeopardized our for the GOP jeopardizer base or whatever else you're better expert in this than I am Within Israel though. It's not a zero-sum game If Israel if this war ends because Trump decides it has to better expert than I am. Within Israel though, it's not a zero-sum game. If Israel, if this war ends because Trump decides it has to end because of internal pressure, economic pressure, and the regime hasn't fallen, BB is none the worse for it. It's not the ideal outcome, it's not the best possible outcome, but it's something he can work with. It's a good enough show. It's what you call in Hebrew, an image of victory. It's the phrase that Netanyahu has been using since the beginning of the war, an image of victory. Part of our problem in the US may be that we take our own rhetoric more seriously or perhaps too seriously. And so in order to justify this and the previous exchange in June, we had to endure like weeks of hearing that we were all about to be killed by Iran, by this regime, which some people didn't believe, including me. But some people did believe and we have a whole TV channel devoted to telling Americans their single biggest risk is Iran. So if that regime is still there, it's kind of hard to walk down from that if you see what I mean. I think in America, the big problem is that Americans are fundamentally divorced from history. They forget that they're actually inside of history. That's for sure. I think that's a for a non-American that's a perceptive observation. And the juice thing that history is over is over. Yeah, I think Israel believes this sort of, you know, you got back to the land. We have our state and it's kind of done now. History's over. I think that's the distinction between Israel and America. America forgets that they're at the center of history in these realities believe that they're enjoying the aftermath of history as if there can't be another exile, as if there can't be another catastrophe. And that's the short side in this. Interesting. Where does among, is there any discussion of like restoring the third temple? That would seem obvious, at least from my reading of the Torah. No, that's not even enough. No, but I personally think if you're going to ask me, I personally think it would be great to build a third temple just on like another hill. I don't think you can do it on another hill. I bet you could get a rabbinical precedent. You could definitely pay some guy off to let you go. If you're going to have a third temple, I'm strongly in favor of putting on another hill just because then you avoid global religious war. Yeah, but it would also be a shame to come back to the homeland after 3000 years and leave potentially without having built something, you know, sweet. But is there any effort to do that that you know of? No, no, no, but there are a lot of people recently is funny. There's, you know, the Messiah patches on that a lot of Israelis do. There's now on the back of cars. There are these stickers now that are sort of like the image. It looks like a Greek, like a Roman temple, but it's a temple image. Oh, I've seen it. I've seen the sticker. Yes, I have. So that's blowing up as of the last year or two. Do I think it will actually happen? No, but before the last year or two, or what's just say before October 7th, there was none of that that you saw. You had a guy's trying to like secret in like red heifers every now and again, they're serious minority in the country. And as Avra mentioned, you had people, there were attempts several times to five. He said, five. Yeah, I knew, I knew about one. I didn't know about five. But again, I think this is not there's no state level or institutional policy that's working towards the construction of a third temple. I mean, look at the buildings in Tel Aviv. I don't think these railies right now are in a position to build a big beautiful temple. The best buildings in Tel Aviv were built by Arabs in the Ottoman era. I knew that. I knew that there's been a, I think his roles, you know, it was an amazing society in some ways. They built a lot considering how young it is. Architecture has not been on the top of the of the achievement list, I would say. That's why you put the city beside the city. Yeah, no, it's it's still not. It's yeah. So yeah, I share, I share your a little market sector. It's fasting. So how has the country just big picture? How is it changed? So in the seven and a half years you were there before, two and a half since, yeah, October 7th, like what changes have you noticed to people's attitudes? You know, there was at the height of the war I went to buy a new laptop from a kid. He was like 18, 19 years old. And because of that, he's a soldier. He works with the Navy. So he's like young, you see, and he looks very, very young. I went to, we started talking and I explained that I'm a journalist that I do some work. And he said, listen, after October the 7th, we can't trust the Arabs. I said, really? Like, like, not? He's like, no. I was like, I have a question. Like, where do you travel within Israel? And he goes, you know, back in the day my father would go to a place called Calakili, which is on the other side of the green line. And he goes, but we with the family would go to a place called Calakili, which is on the Israeli side of the green line. There's like rice, nug on the line. And he said, but ever since the war, I stopped going to Calakili, and I was like, dude, who went out of the place called Tida, which is even closer to Tel Aviv. And he's like, no, I won't risk it. I don't even like go on a Jaffa. And I told him I said, like, I what what's going to be left to if you keep operating this way? Like, you're, you're king of the hills of where you're the landlord, but you're scared. It's like, you're like, owning a house and being scared to walk into four of the five rooms in the house. It's not a way to live. It's not the way to be a homeowner. Right? You have this thing, Benovir's big platform, when he was running for elections was, we're going to be the landlords now in Hebrew, Balaya, the landlords. Actually, yeah, that was that was that loud. You said that? Yeah, that was a platform. There were signs in the West Bank about that. We're the landlords now. Yeah, we're going to be the landlords. And the problem in Israel is that, especially in the West Bank is that there's a lot of folks on the Lording over the land and not really dwelling. Benovir's election slogan was we're going to be the landlord. So we're dealing with lack of self-awareness now to say something like that out loud. Quite the opposite. He was very, very aware. It was very strategic and very tactical, especially within the settlement population, of course, you're in a place where you don't feel like you're really the Lord. You don't feel like, except for the gun, you don't feel like I'm really the king of a hill. There's a guy who's saying, I'm going to make you king. I'm going to put the crown on your head. It's tempting, especially to like naive young, potentially troubled youth who are running around the hilltops. Interesting. How long can Israel go with all this territory that's not part of their country, but that they like what? With Gaza in the West Bank and now Southern Lebanon and parts of Syria, like, does that just go on forever? Do people envision a time where the official borders of Israel expand? And like, this is our country. Like, no, I mean, look, if Israel can't manage Gaza, I don't think they can manage South Lebanon. I don't think that what's happening in South Lebanon is going to be permanent. There might be a poster to on the border. Like, you could potentially expect that. Are they going to take a large swaths of Lebanese territory? No, but what they will do is render them uninhabitable, which is a kind of way of, you know, doing on this, but not that. How do you do that? It's the art of indecision, which is BBS art, you know, you don't occupy, but you leave it unoccupied. Unoccupied. Well, because there's just, there's nothing there. Well, that's the Lebanese border is right now. In many cases, not across the border, but there are many spots in the border in which everything is completely raised. Those were also houses used in many cases, but Hezbollah, so like, I kind of get that. In Syria as well, like, I don't think that's a permanent decision. I think it's leverage that could potentially be used against Giuliani to come to some sort of agreement, which I think will eventually come. Not a peace deal, but something and understanding. Joining me being the new head of Syria, exactly, who a lot of people assumed was installed there with the agreement of Israel. I assume that I still think it, but now they're against him. What is, what is the truth there who said they're against him? I don't know. I've heard recently that these Israelis are troubled with Johnny. I don't know if that's true or not. I don't know if they're, I mean, he's moved troops toward the Lebanese border, and there are rumors that he would be willing to fight Hezbollah. There's a common enemy. I think, I think these Israelis fear Giuliani long term. And they also used to have a very good understanding with Assad. The problem is that Assad was also in bed with Iran and Hezbollah. So there's a bit of a realm. I don't mean Israelis ever had a problem with Assad. I think as far as I know before this effort, there are also secret talks going on. These Israelis were also preparing to make some kind of agreement with Assad. In the short term, I think Giuliani and the Israelis can work together relatively well because he, it will take Giuliani a very long time until he will be able to build or as it were cement the ground beneath him. Yes. He can't start problems with Israel right now. But in 20, 30 years, he might be able to. What's the typical Israeli view of the United States? I think Abraham got it right. Like stupid Americans, stupid Americans. These sometimes want to live like you. You know, I think they want to speak English. They want certain, some kind of American lifestyle, but they don't want to be you. They think you're naive. Is there affection or mostly content? A lot of affection from what I hear, a lot of affection. I mean, definitely over the last year or two, I think this has a lot to do with beep, there has been a kind of redick of like, you know, who's the United States to tell us what to do. They shouldn't be telling us what to do. And Israelis get frustrated when there's talk of that like beepies can abandon to Trump or that America says, like, Biden says, you can't do this. This is the red line. I think there's a deep frustration inside of Israel because they want to have their cake and eat it. They want the money, but also total. They want, they want support, but also I think they want American knowledge that like we're in a way doing your bidding. I think a lot of Israelis believe that we're doing your bidding. We're doing something good for you. Doing the hard work that you want to. Yeah. They feel that way. I can speak for the whole kind of I mean, you hear that. I hear that. Yeah. What about Trump? What's the view of Trump? Love him. Really? Yeah. A lot of Israelis love Trump. Again, I'm speaking from my experience. What do they like they like that he's willing to take the gloves off for once. I think they sub Biden as a pussy. Yeah. As a faceless pussy who wasn't willing to make a decision wasn't able to do it, for example, be be is willing to do even though be be was also a pussy for a very long time. And so yeah, I think it's refreshing to them. And I think they don't see. Look, as Avraham also said, Israelis don't have a very good understanding of what happens on the American interior of American culture. Most Israelis do not speak English. I think this is like a delusion people have because they go to Tel Aviv and people speak English. Outside of Tel Aviv, there's not a whole lot of English being spoken. And so there is a sense in which all they see Trump as is what he has done for us. For the fact that he would be more willing to help us. And that's what matters. If you're in Israeli, you care about Israel. Just like you are an American and care about America. That's right. That's always been my favorite thing about Israel is their nationals. What's the view of the Gulf states? It's been more specific. What do they think of Dubai and Abu Dhabi? They love the UAE. They love the UAE. The UAE also loves them. But I don't think the government is a big fan of Israel. I've heard from people, for example, that like Emirati diplomats are a bit shocked when they come to Israel. And they're also in some cases mistreated of the airports. I think the fine Israeli society, a big shocking. And it's rudeness at times. I think they're not given the kind of respect that they're accustomed to having within Gulf countries that have pretty standard royal hierarchies and different manners. Those are elaborately polite societies with all kinds of rituals around manners. Yeah, no, I think they are shocked. So Israelis love the UAE. And they're very, very close relations between the UAE and Israel. What do they think of the Saudis? I don't know. Couldn't tell you. Qatar? I couldn't really tell you. I think, you know, a lot of Israelis, I mean, they house Hamas as far as a lot of Israelis are concerned. I don't hear people saying like Qatar, like Qatar as a country is our enemy. I don't think Israelis think a whole lot about Qatar. Yeah, I believe that. I just don't think they think about the Muslim. What do they think? So Israel is a lot of high profile defenders in the United States. Are they well known in Israel? Like who? Well, why don't all Ben Shapiro or no? No. No. Unknown. Mark Levin. No. No one's ever heard of them. I'm sure there's many people have heard of them. Are there do have like the average rarely averages, rarely listen to Mark live in her bench, Shapiro? Absolutely not. Because also Ben Shapiro is speaking in the name of if anything American jewelry, right? His conversation is maybe about Israel, but it's between Western Jews or English speaking Jews. It doesn't really impinge upon these realities. To Israelis, what's their view of American Jews specifically? I don't know if I could give you that in a sentence or two. I don't, there's all kinds of different relationships. I'm avoiding falling into like certain kinds of banalities or stereotypes. Totally. Totally. I just, of course, well, you can't generalize actually about most of the but I just think if there's like an overwhelmed. And they're mixed and they're also mixed feelings. Yeah. They're mixed feelings. I have issues with with Americans, but they're also my people. And this is, I think, the overarching sentiment of the end of the day, there are many disagreements between the two peoples, but they are also a single people. It's just like you have disagreements with your family. I'm sure. But I'm still your family. And that's by and large. If I to sum it up, that's the dynamic. But there's certainly a generational break right now. I think the younger generation of liberal Jews, I think they're beginning to see, and this isn't the majority of Jews right now. The majority of younger generation Jews, I think, are still following in the footsteps of their parents. But there is a significant population of young Jews, so I think are looking at Israel and saying, we don't like what you're doing, and it doesn't necessarily matter that you're family. What changed that view? Do you think Gaza? Yeah. And the fact that it's also unpopular. If you're a liberal Jew in a liberal circle, you don't want to be the guy who's liberal on every single point, but stops at Gaza. It's socially awkward. In many cases, it's a social decision. I don't think it's a major theoretical decision. Right. This is on question principle. It's just like it's becoming unacceptable to be pro. It could be both. But also, you know, principles in America are a big part of sociality or social life. It's certainly hard. Right. That's true for any society, I think, especially America. You think so? I think people like touting their morals quite a bit in America. Yeah. Really? Yeah. I've never sat with an Arab, and he tells me like, you know, I believe in this, and I believe in that. And I think this is really wrong. I don't, I don't, I don't see it. I'm like, I'm like, the subway in Toronto, you can hear people talking through each other about their, their various moral beliefs. They've never had to act upon in their lives. That is, that is a very wise observation. I've never sat in an Arab, and he's like, I think this is wrong. You get it in your head. Yeah. It's been like, I'm sure the Arabs have moral opinions. Of course they do. Of course they do. It's not just they don't have standards, but they're not throwing in them at you at dinner. They don't, but they're just not the foundations of their identity. Yeah. Well, there is a certain suffrage system in the West. That's not the same as righteousness. I mean, that's just definitely there's a posturing that goes on. Here's my last question. How do you think it's impossible to know? But like in five years, what is the landscape look like is in the Middle East? Is the United States still as closely led with Israel? Is it is today is Lebanon, territorial intact? Is Israel safer? Have we gotten the seven front wore down to two fronts? Say no fronts is BB still in power? Like what current trends continue? What does it look like? I think BB very well could be empowered five years. I think I think I'll probably get elected in our level. Yeah. I think I think it's highly likely that I'll get reelected. And I think everything that's happening right now is in some way or another engineered for that to happen. Again, as we said, you know, the personal ambitions of BB happens to align with some of the strategic ambitions of the state. And if you can just modulate that, then it's perfect to respite it when elections. In terms of Lebanon, do I think these realities will be highly active deep inside Lebanon? No. And I think a lot of these BB doesn't want a ton of war. I think after BB gets into, if he gets reelected, I think you'll see Lebanon sort of come to a close, even Iran can come to a close. He'll want to just sort of like bringing a new status quo. That'll be useful to him. And when he has to turn up the heel turn up the do you think again purely speculative? But if Donald Trump went to BB tomorrow and said, we're shutting this down with Iran. It's terrible for markets. It's terrible for me. My political party. Yeah. Could he make BB stop? I think he probably could, but BB would probably want to find a kind of middle ground meaning they had a ceasefire in Lebanon, but there were still Israeli strikes in Lebanon on an almost daily basis. Right. Yeah. I think you could call that the Israeli ceasefire. Yeah. In the Hebrew, you call the war between the wars. Um, four, but so funny when, you know, growing up here, we were taught that Israel had wars in 48, 56, 67, 73, 82, and then the Antifadas. Yeah. That that's the official play history of it, right? Yeah. And then you get older and you realize, no, there was kind of a war continuously. I don't know if I'd call it a war, but there is fighting, just fighting or there are strikes. Like there's activity. I don't know if I'd call it a war. Um, but I do think you could potentially see a situation and it depends on the conditions of the end of the war. If there's an agreement, what the stakes are and the stakeholders, but there could be a situation. I can visit a situation in which Israel, for example, is still striking a lot on a necessarily on a daily basis, but that they operate on the skies of Tehran, that they strike as needed. Um, and there's still a lot to be seen. I mean, I don't, I think there should be there's probably going to be some attempt to activate people to try to get protesters up again. I would be entirely surprised. In Iran. Yeah. I find it hard to believe that these Israelis put all this together without the hope or those some expectation that when things quiet down, things internally will begin to sort of move again. Yeah. Um, I don't know if you can expect people to go and protest while there are strikes. The strikes should, I think they would expect lay the groundwork for something to happen to have. Any idea how these really government winds up with so many agents of influence and just agents in all these hostile countries. How many are so many people in Iran working for Israel, same in Syria, same in Lebanon? Like how do they do that? People are easy to buy. People are easy to buy. Apparently they are. I mean, I like to say that the best spies in the Arab world will work for the Mossad. That's what they don't do. That's why they don't have good intelligence agencies. How do they do that? I mean, it's just remarkable. I don't think the United States could pull that off. They could if they wanted to. I think the CIA is probably just lazy. Mistakes aren't as high in many cases. You know, you find someone's weakness. We're homosexual. We only do that in the Senate here. We haven't bothered to do it in Iran, I guess. That day might come. You never know. All right. Thank you very much. That was interesting as hell. Thanks for having me.