Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night, all day. How are you, sir? Pleasure to meet you. It's great to be here. Thanks for having me. Great to be back in Texas. I'm glad we finally did this. Yes, me, too. I wanted to do it the first goal round. Yeah, I know. Well, when I got the invitation, we were in the middle of the election. And we just don't leave the country during election campaigns. And the problem we've had is we can't get you to come to Canada. And so we've actually hatched a full strategy to get you into Canada. Because we think it's going to do big things for our tourism numbers. So do you mind if I present you with something right out of the gate? Sure. All right, this is from a gunsmith and machinist in Calgary, Alberta's name is Jay. And he's designed, look at this, Calbone. Guess what the way it is. 70 pounds. That's the way you have it. It says on the front here, Jamie, it says here on the front. Jamie, pull it up. We've got, you see here some other stuff for a stand. Oh, wow. That's really cool. Look at this stand here. So we've got seeing his believing, which I think was the slogan of the first UFC that you were the commentator for. I think it was number 13. 12. Number 12. And then we've got here your favorite quote from, was his name, the Japanese martial arts. Yes. And it says, if you know the way broadly, you will see it in everything. Yeah. So that's here. And then Morris code, there's a thank you letter for you. You've got your flying saucer. Oh, wow. And we've got your logo here too. So, but most important of all, we've got a subliminal message, which is the Canadian Maple Leaf. Oh, cool. Every time you do a kettlebell swing, you do a snatch, you do a clean. You're going to be seeing that Maple Leaf, and you're going to be reminding yourself that you need to come back to Canada. All right. All right. All right. I appreciate that to you there. Thank you very much. Oh, there you go. Very cool. Is that in the way Jamie? I can take it off. We'll take it off. So I saw your interview with Pavel. And I'm a big kettlebell freak. Are you really? Yeah, absolutely. And I started researching him after you had him on. And I was trying to, I love history. I was thinking, why did the Russians come up with this? And it turns out they used it as a counterweight at the farmer markets. So they would say, you know, you come in. You have to say, this is how much potatoes you're buying. But instead of trying to do it by eyeball, they would put what is now a kettlebell on one side of the scale and then the produce on the other. And then at the farmer's expeditions, you have these big Russian farmers who want to show how strong they were. So they would pick them up and do all kinds of displays with them. And then then the Russian army took it on. The Soviet army took it on. And then that's where Pavel picked it up and then brought it over the Atlantic and introduced it to America. Wow, that's crazy. So it was just accidental that they made this very functional tool for fitness. Yeah. It was just you'd go to a farmer's market. You want to buy some barley or some potatoes. But you don't know if you're actually getting the real weight. So they'd have a scale, a balancing scale and they'd put the kettlebell on one side and the produce on the other. And then you knew you got the right amount. And then of course they have these big farmers farm fairs and they're showing off their horses and their cattle and stuff. And they'd want to do strength displays. So these farmers are throwing these things around. And the Russian military picked it up. And then the Soviets of course took over and they took it on. And then Pavel, I think he was a Belarusian though if I'm not mistaken. Pavel. I'm not human. He brought it over to North America. But the ancient Chinese did it as well. You got, yeah, the ancient Chinese, the Shaolin monks have used them. But they didn't do it with cast iron. They had, there's sort of a concrete block. And they did first strength training as well. Oh wow. Little history. Yeah. So I'm a big kettlebell freak. I love it. And I really started to study what Pavel's teaching. I wanted, I think he's an accreditation or something of every time I might take it. Yeah. And that's his organization. And you're doing, you have a whole program. I think you, you do clean depress and then. Yeah, I do a bunch of different things. So watch with overhead squad and all that. It's a great functional tool just for your whole body. Right. It's really one of the best pieces of exercise equipment I think I've ever found. Yeah, I think he calls it a cannonball on a handle. And the thing I like about it is the, it's like a catapult, catapult, like it. All of the lift is in that, that instant where it flips over your hand. And there you go. Oh, so there you go. There you go. There you go. Wow, that's crazy. That's so interesting. So the handle was just to pick it up and carry it around. Yeah. Wow. The hell real functional use. Well, it's just amazing how good it is for a piece of exercise equipment that was accidentally designed that way. Absolutely. And I think it's far superior to, to a dumbbell exercise because there's no, a dumbbell, you get a consistent lift, but that's not real life. If you're in a fight or you have to pick something up heavy, it doesn't lift consistently. It's explosive in that small range. And when you're doing a snatch by the time you get up to your shoulder, the things wait less because the catapult, the catapult effect has taken over. And now it's actually negative way. It's lifting your hand up in there. If you're doing it right. But like if you're in a fight or if you're in a wrestling match or you're, you're trying to push really hard against a heavy object. It's all about explosive power. And that's what kettlebells give rather than just this sort of freeze and contract thing that you do with dumbbells. Have you always been a workout guy? Yeah. Look, I was big into sports and tell my mid teens. I was on the wrestling team. I wasn't great. I was good, but I wasn't great. When I got a wicked tendonitis in my shoulder and it ended my athleticism for like four years and that's how I got into politics. I was so bored. I got to get home from school. I had nothing to do. So I took my toe my mother 10s and I just got you into politics. Yeah. That's what it was. I just couldn't get rid of it. Like every time I thought I had it beat, I'd go in and I trained and it would be full of inflammation. No one could do anything about it. And so I was like bored out of my mind and I said to my mom, like, you know, you go to these local meetings with a conservative association. Like take me to that because I'm going crazy. And that's nuts. Yeah. So what were you interested in when you first went there? We just didn't like the way things were running. Like what was it about that got you so curious? Well, I grew up in a suburban neighborhood in South End of Calgary. You know, and my folks were teachers. I was adopted. My mom was a 16 year old. She was a, obviously single mom. She put me up for a stop and two school teachers. There was electricians and oil workers and police officers lived on our street normal, hard working good folks. And I always grew up with the impression they were getting screwed over and that the government didn't listen to people like them. They didn't listen to people who grew up on streets like ours. And living in Western Canada, there was a greater sense of that. We call it Western alienation at the time. And there was this guy, a kind of a quirky guy, but a really brilliant guy named Preston Manning. And I saw this billboard of him and he had his fist up and it said enough. And I said, yeah, I like that guy. So I got involved in politics. And I started reading about different things. I read a biography on Fidel Castro and then I read some more. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no. No, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no. Yeah, true to it is great conspiracy theory though. Well, it is a hell of a, I don't think it's a true one though. His dad is really his dad was very controversial. I grew up because he did a lot of damage to the oil sector and we're from oil country. And so that was one of the things that I felt kind of resentful about the national government and one of the reasons that got involved is because the West deserved a fairer deal. And I read a lot of books like Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom and I came to develop a philosophy based on just maximizing personal financial religious freedom, let people make their own decisions. And that animated me to get involved in politics and fight for that and I've been doing it ever since. Wow, that's a fascinating transition from wrestling and tendonitis. Yeah. Deeply involved in politics. Yeah, I mean, like, you know, your sports guy, if you had suffered an injury that took you out of Taekwondo when you were young and you simply couldn't compete at anything, you'd probably be looking for some other adventure. Yeah, which I was. Well, we're lucky that stem cells weren't around back then. You never would have gotten into politics. That's right. I would have been a wrestler. I don't know if I would have won any awards. But yeah, that was how I got started and I got very active very quickly. I got my first internship making 600 bucks a month when I was 16 or 17 years old and would take two trains and a bus an hour and 45 minutes each way. But I was so thrilled. My dad bought me a used suit and a used pair of shoes. And I thought this is so incredible. I'm an important guy. I wear dress shoes. I wear a tie. Didn't matter that the tie was bed bought from some dead guy whose family had sold it to a used store. But that was my start. I loved it. Well, I'm really excited to have you in here because I've seen you speak multiple times and you're a very reasonable, intelligent person that makes a lot of sense. And that is a rare thing in politics. And I love Canada. Like I should just say, I don't go up there anymore. But it's because I think the government went horribly wrong over the last, you know, X amount of years. But the people are amazing. I always said that Canada has like, it's like America with like 20% last assholes. Like every time I go up there, like people are so nice. They're like the nicest people. And I think that's part of what went wrong for Canada is that people are rule followers and, you know, they're trusting and kind people. And you know, this wolf in sheep's clothing snuck in and, you know, it was pretending he he's a sweet guy and passing all these crazy laws. And just when we saw what happened with COVID with just with what happened with the truckers and people's accounts getting shut down for donating to the truckers, like the whole thing was so concerning because, sorry, Canada was like a part of America almost. I mean, you're a different country. But it's like you used to be able to go over there with just a driver's license, you know, it was like it was such a cool place to, I started going to the Montreal Comedy Festival in like 1993. I loved it up there. It's like one of my favorite places to just relax. Yeah. Yeah. Good. How's your French? Not good. Okay. No work on that. We'll use some French. I don't know any French words. My wife is learning French though. It's interesting. She's got this app that she's learning French. But it's just an amazing place. It's a great country. And to see it go the way it's been going and sliding the way it's been happening over the last, you know, X amount of years. There's just so many things that concern me. You know, one of the things that really concerns me is this assisted suicide thing that one in 20 deaths in Canada is now assisted suicide. That's insane. Well, listen, my view is that people should have the choice. But the concern we have is the suggestion that it would be offered to kids or offered to people whose only condition is mental illness. Right. I don't agree with that. My concern as well, I mean, if someone's got a terminal, like a good friend of mine went to Oregon to end his life because he had ALLs. But I mean, he was gone. I mean, he could barely talk at the end of his life. His name is Michael Lair. He was a regular guest on Kill Tony. Great guy. Right. And it was horrible. I mean, watching him fade away and he wanted to go out on his own terms. So he went to Oregon for assisted suicide. And there's a place for it. Yeah. And the kid recently in Canada and he did it for seasonal depression. I'm sure you're aware of that case. I like who allowed that to happen? Who didn't counsel this young guy? Who didn't give him a hug? Who didn't tell him about diet and exercise and changing your surroundings, your lifestyle and just do something. Right. To give you some hope and happiness. Like seasonal depression really? Really? You're going to end your life, this beautiful life on this planet for seasonal depression. That's what we have to do more to give people hope when they're suffering with mental illness. Yes. You know, give people the sense that they can take back control of their lives. I think we do have to promote fitness more because it gives people, it turns them into a subject that controls their surroundings rather than an object being controlled. It teaches people that hardship is temporary and that the aftermath is positive. And we have to give people reinstell people with a sense of meaning when they're going through hardship rather than to say that it's all over. And you know, I think we have to, our system needs to be geared towards giving people all the best options to live on rather than just suggesting made as the as the automatic path for the system to impose on people. So one of the things our party is pushing for is to make clear that public servants who are getting phone calls from people or in need of help for something. They shouldn't be offering that. They shouldn't be offering made. People can seek it out if they want. But when you're calling up saying, I'm poor or I'm struggling or I'm having a mental illness or I've got an injury, we shouldn't have a government worker saying, well, consider made. Well, the unfortunate thing is that any organization that gets formed wants to grow and you get financial incentives and then you hire more people and then it gets bigger. And then what do you have to do? What do you have to keep doing what you're doing? Exactly. What are you doing? You're killing people. So you're going to kill more people because you're actually financially incentivized to put more people through this program and their lives. That's, it's very sad. I think we have to get to a point where people have the freedom to make their own decisions, but they also have hope that there is an option for them. Yeah, that's been a time to pathway. The exercise thing is not just give them control of their lives, it makes them happier. It's been studies that show it's much more effective than antidepressants. Absolutely. Well, it's the first of all, it's the physiological side which affects the brain, but it's also the sensation of discomfort that you push through knowing that you have to focus on the thing you have to do. And that I think it helps us in anything we're encountering, whether you're going through a divorce or a bankruptcy or an injury or an illness if you know that pushing through to the other side because you've got a meaning there that can give people hope for a better life. My favorite psychologist is Victor Frankel and he developed this Lagoz treatment which was basically giving people a sense of meaning. He survived the Holocaust in the concentration camp because he had a sense of meaning that he wanted his book was stolen from him in the concentration camp about this theory and he wanted to live on so he could survive and write that book. And then he found his, in his teaching that it wasn't so much people, circumstances that determined their happiness. It was whether they had a meaning in life and he tells this incredible story of a group therapy session where he had this very rich woman who was married to a very rich man and he had an next to him, another lady who was living in terrible poverty, she had lost his son and had a second severely disabled son. He said to both them, what will your life look like when you're 80 years old and you're on your deathbed? And the wealthier lady said, well I will look back and think that I had some fun and enjoyed this simple, the luxuries of being very wealthy and having an easy life that there wasn't a lot of meaning to it. And where's the mother who was struggling with a disabled child and it lost another one and said, well I gave my first child a great life, a short one but a great one. I struggled to give my disabled child a good dignified existence and I leave this world satisfied and happy that my life had purpose and meaning. And the lesson I take from that is that it is not about whether you have a gazillion dollars or whether your life is easy, it's whether you have some meaning to invest your life into. And I think we have to infuse people's lives with meaning so that they can, that they can live a good life. Well that's a great message and I think it's one of the most important parts of being a leader is having a great message and having a great philosophy and having a great perspective. And I mean that's what disturbed me the most about when Trudeau was running the country that I didn't feel like. I felt like he was manipulating people with woke politics and ideology and that it was just this weird slippery slope that people were falling down where they're losing rights and you're losing your ability to express yourself. And it just really disturbed me because I always felt that Canada was like one of the freest places and one of the most open-minded places and it just I didn't understand how it could fall so quickly. We are a free country and we are a democracy and we have preserved that. My lead, I did with this funny moment when Joe Biden came to Parliament Hill and I said, Mr. President, I'm here, Paul, we have him, the leader of his Majesty's loyal opposition and he said loyal opposition. How can you be loyal and opposition at the same time? What the hell are you talking about? And because you guys have a system based on a republic where ours is the British system and in our system that the opposition is an act of loyalty. That's what our system means that if you are opposing the government, you're doing it out of loyalty to the good of the people. In our House of Commons, you have a half circle in your Congress. We have two sides in our Parliament. It's two and a half sword lengths apart because they used to little kill each other in the old English days. But the idea is the opposition is to prosecute the hell out of the government, make the mighty low. The most powerful people in the country are supposed to tremble every time they walk in that place because every mistake they made, every abuse of power, every corruption they might have done can be exposed and in front of all eyes. So our system is really designed to constrain the power of government through what we call Parliament. Like I don't work for government. I work for Parliament. Parliament works for the people. We call it the House of Commons because it's the House of the Common People. It's green in there because they used to meet in the fields of England. So I really view the world of our Parliament to limit the power of government, to maximize the power of the people, make people bigger, stronger and more fulfilled by having the government narrowly focus on the things that it's supposed to do. Roads, military, basic social safety, net, borders, police, etc. But then leave people alone to live their lives. If I were to start a political party from scratch, it would be the mind-ro and damn business party. You know, just get the government to do its job well, do four or five things really well and then let people live their lives. Well, that sounds very reasonable. Yeah. I mean, anybody that doesn't go along with that, anybody that's opposed to that, that doesn't make sense. No, look, like I said, the way I grew up in everything I've seen ever since, when I talk to farmers or factory workers, electricians, I find they know just as much or more than the so-called experts I encounter on Parliament Hill. Like back during COVID when all these governments were printing money and all the politicians and bankers said, oh, this is great. We'll look at all this money we get to spend. I walk around communities and I'd have like mechanics say, you know, we're going to have inflation and I would say, yeah, it makes sense to me and I'd go back to Parliament Hill and the experts, but I'll say, no, no, this is not going to be any inflation. And sure enough, all that money filtered into the economy, bid up all the goods we buy and and everybody got to smoke with higher prices. But the point is that it was the, it was the common people who don't study this stuff for a living, who don't read endless reports and studies, who could just figure out that if there's money pouring into the economy that's not matched by goods and services, it's going to bid up the cost of everything. So that's my experience and my ideology is the common guy knows how to make his own decisions. We need to empower him to do that. Yeah, just to add up people's lives. Exactly. So there's a narrative in America and the narrative is that you were about to win and your party was about to win, but then Trump came along and said he was going to turn Canada into the 51st state and everybody went crazy. Is that accurate? I wouldn't say they went crazy. I mean, it like, well, it was a very upset. They should be upset though. I mean, what's a crazy thing to say? It is a crazy thing to say. Canada is not for sale. We're never going to be the 51st state. You know, we love Americans as neighbors and friends, but we want to be kind of uniquely likely and we want to be sovereign as Canadians. It's our country. It's where we grow up. You're a patriot as an American. I'm a patriot as a Canadian. It's where my grandfather arrived. It's where our collective ancestors put on military uniforms and sailed to fight wars. It's where our grandkids are going to live. We're very proudly Canadian. So we're never going to be the 51st state. And I just wish he'd knock that shit off so that we can get back to talking about the things that we can do as two separate, but two separate countries that are actually friends. Did that really have that much of an effect up there? Like did people take him seriously? I think at first everyone thought it was a joke because we've always had these jokes like, you know, one day we're going to take over Vermont and Detroit should be part of Canada and all that stuff. But then he kept saying it and saying it and, you know, it became, it became a lot of people got upset about it. And I think understandably so understandably. Yeah. It's a crazy thing to say. It's crazy. I talked to him and thought about it. It was like so funny. It's like, first I was joking, but then are people like it's a good idea. No, that's not a good idea. I always saying that. I can assure him of that. But and the tariffs aren't a good idea either. We should get the tariffs out because there's so much that we could be doing together as pollabors and partners if we got rid of those tariffs. You know, I think what are the biggest problems in America today? Affordability, security. And we can help with both. We knock the tariffs down. Let's look at affordability. We have the fourth biggest supply of oil anywhere on earth. You guys pay a huge price discount for our oil because we're effectively all our infrastructure to ship it is north south and it's a very unique heavy oil. So we accept, unfortunately, and for now, a price discount on the oil we send you, which can translate into more jobs and paychecks but also lower energy price. You've got $5 a gallon right now in lots of places in America. You're buying, I want to produce more so we can sell 2 million more barrels of Canadian oil into the U.S. market. And then there's, there's housing. You've got huge housing pressures on young people. They can't afford a place to live where the biggest supplier of lumber for home building of any country that imports to the United States, exports to the United States. You've got very low cost but high quality soft with lumber we could be shipping. Or the best truck, the best selling truck in America for 45 years now is the Ford series. It's aluminum. It's a military grade aluminum body. You guys can't make enough aluminum here. You don't have enough box site or electricity to convert it into aluminum. You get your, your aluminum from us. A tariff does not bring the production to America. It raises the price of the aluminum and therefore the F series truck. Get rid of that tariff. You lower taxes, you lower the cost of an F series truck for the, for the minor in Appalachia or the electrician in Ohio. And, and that's just on the affordability side. There's a lot we can do with our minerals to make the continent a hell of a lot safer as well. So I think it's an America's interest to come towards a tariff free deal and trade freely as friends and that will be good for both of us. Have you had conversations with Trump about this? No, I, I believe in the rule of one prime minister at a time. So I fought like hell to win. I didn't win. We came very close. So I've said listen, I'll leave it to the prime minister to do the negotiating and I've said I'll support him anyway. I can't even in my visit down here. I'm sending him tax messages to tell him what's going on, trying to support his work because what we want, we both won't what's rep best for Canada. Where are your elections now? When do you have the next elections? That's, this is a strangely hard question to answer because- I know you're a weird system. Yeah, it's weird in comparison to ours. Yours are fixed as you know ours. We have technically fixed election dates but the government can fall at any time. It's very simple. A rule is that if the opposition parties bind up and they can vote down the government, that is to say the majority of MPs in the House say we've lost confidence in the government, the election is now. Or if the prime minister decides he wants an election, he can call it and the election is now. But it has to be sometime in the next roughly three years. Oh, so you have a deadline where you have a deadline? Yeah, that's right. So- But it could happen tomorrow. It wouldn't necessarily be tomorrow but like in the next few weeks if there were a non-confidence vote and the government lost it, then they go to an election. So it's kind of like the British system. Interesting. What is the British system really? We adopted the British system almost identically. So when you're campaigning, you're essentially, this is like a long game. Yeah. You're just laying out your strategy, laying out what you would do to make Canada a better place. Yeah. Well, we have two roles. So I said I'm the leader of the opposition but I'm also prime minister in waiting. So the notion is that the Canadian people should not only have a government but they should have an alternative. And that alternative has two functions. Official opposition. It's actually called that. I think it's a proper noun of capital O, official capital O opposition and also government in waiting. So you have to be prosecuting the government. But you have to present to yourself to people in a way where they say, yeah, that guy or that team could actually be the government. Though those are the dual roles that I have to carry out. Interesting. And how long have you been attempting to become prime minister for? How long has this been going on for? Almost exactly four years because I launched my campaign in February of 2022. Was this something that you had always had in the back of your mind? Or I say in the back of my mind but it wasn't something I was set on. Like I thought maybe, you know, one of my my fifties or sixties, I would try it. But I was in no rush to do that. How old do you know? I'm now 46. And so what motivated you to do it? Well, you know, after COVID, as COVID was unfolding, it wasn't just the COVID policies themselves. It was the economic policies. As I've been very focused on economics in my parliamentary career. And I was seeing the size and cost of government, not just in Canada, but all around the world growing so much. And that inflation was just destroying the working class people and that it was going to get a lot worse. And so I ran on the platform of making Canada the freest country on earth. We had a tradition of freedom in Canada. Our one of our earliest prime ministers, Wilfred Laurier, we asked what's your what's Canada's nationality? And he couldn't actually list an ethnicity or a religion because we were already mixed up even 100 years ago. We had Scots and Irish and first people's. So he said, look, yeah, French, French most of all French and English and first First Nations. So he said, Canada's free and freedom is its nationality. And I wanted to reinstate that idea. I wanted it to be the freest country anywhere on earth. And so I ran on that platform and won the leadership and then ran in the last election and stayed on after that election. So that's kind of the last four years of my journey. And so the way your elections work now, so you're essentially just stating your case and going around and talking about what policies you would implement and how you would do things differently and just waiting to see how it all plays out. We have them. policies you would implement and how you would do things differently and just waiting to see how it all plays out It's we have See our our Prime Minister is different than the president. He's actually part of the legislative branch So he comes in to the House of Commons and we debate multiple times a week He and I so it's not just you know in your system The the Republican and Democrat hold like four debates right before the president the election in our system We're always debating so he comes in he's on one side I come in I'm on the other side and I ask him like six consecutive questions and he answers And we go back and forth and that's called question period Then we have these committees where we prosecute and propose On finance natural resources health care you name it so we're constantly prosecuting the government also proposing better ideas at the same time so Like the other day I proposed to bring back the auto pack between Canada and the US to have tariff free trade going both ways across the The border so that's an example of how I'm in a position actually offer solutions Even though I'm not in the government and then hopefully government actually steals my ideas and I've been encouraging them to steal my ideas So what is this coffee by the way? Yes, we talked. Yeah, it's a cafe in there. I'm a terrible caffeine addict two chairs Cheers oh and shout out to George St. Pierre for hooking this up. Yes George is a good man. He's the best great guy He said he's gonna have me do some pad work with him at some point. Oh real. That's pretty dangerous. Awesome. He's here all the time He's fantastic. Yeah, he's the best. He's one of the best representatives of martial arts. You could ever hope to meet Scott humility I remember he came to Parliament Hill years ago and I thought jeez He's gonna be because he's how do you be cocky and swagger, but he was so down to earth so much humility for what he's accomplished in MMA I've introduced him to people and they have no idea who he is Yeah, and then I go that is one of the greatest fighters that ever walked to face the earth absolutely no way He's so nice and that's the Canadian way though like it's soft spoken and Gentle and kind but don't don't piss us off. Yeah, but up. Yeah, that's what you all fucked up I wonder what would have happened if he didn't go along with that 51st state nonsense You know, I mean that that is the narrative in this country like I said that if he didn't do that The you would have won, but you never know But I try not to cry or rebuild milk I focus on what I have to do and live in the present but but this new guy Milot have you would follow him Mike Milot? Oh sure. I know. Yeah. Yeah, he's gonna be fighting Winnipeg I think he's the next GSP. He's very good. You like him. Yeah, he's excellent. Yeah, he did a great job in Montreal Mm-hmm, you saw him there, but you have I've been to many of us sort of called bunch of his fights Is that right? Yeah, he's excellent. Yeah, he's a my buddy is his trainer. Cara Corralon. How about going? in Hamilton he's a for Hamilton steel steel town guy and And we're hoping that he has a big win in Winnipeg So well you guys have one of the best gems in the world tristar in Montreal. Is that right for us a hobby? Okay, okay There's like maybe a handful of great masterminds in MMA as far as coaches Right, right. And the Rosses at the top of the list. Is that right and what's his dream? GSP is his discipline karate or Moitin he's I mean, he's a true mixed martial artist black belt in Jiu Jitsu kickboxing ever I mean he can do everything and yes Tristar is a place where a lot of people from America go up there for their camps interesting Yeah, I'll have to drop in and see those guys. It's phenomenal. I mean like I said GSP trained up there a lot of lot of fighters trained up there And he also had a great working relationship with a lot of people in America So he would come down and you know, they would exchange fighters back and forth and train with each other Yeah, well, we have a great martial arts tradition in Canada I don't know if you know Mike Miles he brought Moitin from from Thailand to Calgary like back in seven in the 70s or 80s and he still got a great Jim there and Johnny terio is yes, he's a buddy of mine. Oh really? Oh, yeah. Oh, no kidding. Yeah He was a hero of mine when I was a kid. Yeah, he's incredible. I was kickboxing. He was like my idol really. Yeah Does he know that I never talked to him while he's gonna see his book. Yeah, I bought his book I started running stairs because of his book right talk about I would increase his leg muscles and his kicking power I remember that it was in one of his documentaries or something He said his kicks weren't strong enough so he would do stairs, but I went and trained at his dojo a few times It's in South Ottawa. He was incredible. Yeah, he was he was one of the truly elite kickboxers of his time He was a great boxer to like I know he never competed as a boxer, but his his hands were fantastic and Well, that's really what separated him from a lot of other people was like his accuracy and his technique was pristine He told me that he would spend our studying the the distances that your limbs would have to travel depending on how you moved He was kind of like a scientist in the way he learned and studied and he was all about simplicity and removing anything unnecessary I think Bruce Lee said that he said simplicity hack away at the unnecessary and You know how do you what's the shortest distance to hit the strike and He's got a great he's a really good heart to you know he had He has a jiu-jitsu club as well And when I went in there there was a blind fellow who was into jiu-jitsu What you can do is blind person because it's so much about feel but with covid he couldn't do jiu-jitsu anymore They they this allowed that kind of close contact so he actually found a way to train this guy with focus mitzi Even though it was blind it was really incredible. Oh, wow. Yeah, it was just but it was incredible amount of patience He had invested in making sure this this young man could keep doing his physical activity throughout covid wait a minute So they allowed padwork, but they didn't allow jiu-jitsu. I don't know if it was a government policy It was just it was a policy at the gym because you know you're just so wrapped up in yeah sweating I'll eat this the gyms in America everybody just just kept going kept going they hid They would like put foil over the windows and like hide or coming through the back door A lot of the gyms in LA. That's what they did. They just plowed ahead this figured out a way to not get in trouble and right And some people did get caught and get in trouble and nothing ever came of it because it's pretty unconstitutional to tell people that they can't Work out together like the government really didn't have the right to tell people that they couldn't do what they wanted to do That was a legal thing that you can do like all of a sudden there's this Mandate there's this law or rule being passed down or at least it's being promoted that you're not allowed To go to a gym and work out with other people like but those are the healthiest people Those are the people that are at least likely to get sick Like this this is crazy to say and you know if you're sick and if you just have a good gym with good people say hey Don't show up if you're sick everybody should be okay. These are the people you should worry about the least We need to have common sense again and too many governments in the Western world have gone way too bossy they're just looking for every excuse to boss people around and That's what we have to push back again. It's you know EV mandates or You know excessive control of the internet or The massive increase in the cost of government which is really like appropriating the private a voluntary economy into the course of government economy That's that's what we're seeing across Europe in the UK Parts of the United States as well as back home So we need to we need to reverse that trend and get people back in charge of their lives. Well the narrative has always been that Rights lost or never regained or are very very difficult to regain them. So how could you reverse that? Well, you have to keep fighting. I mean we did regain our rights after COVID and You know the people have to look look at the history of it. How did Which rights did you regain? Well the all the mandates are gone now of course, but those were ridiculous anyway. Yeah, right? We're ridiculous but They also repeated business they they ruin people's lives social lives But freedom has always had to be taken. Let you go our tradition goes back to 1215 with the Magna Carta the great charter and most of the freedoms We have today. We're in that original document right to a jury trial No arrest without charge no conflict comp confiscation without compensation no taxation without representation all comes from that one document the Magna Carta and It was because King John was taken aside by the parents and they said listen pal This is the choice either you sign this and follow it or we overthrow you and As a result we got the Magna Carta and all of when you guys had your Boston Tea Party and said you can't tax our tea Because we don't elect you that was an appeal as English you were Englishman saying I'm not wearing Englishmen we have the right not to be taxed unless we vote for it and we're gonna throw you out otherwise But that came out of the fields of running me to England in 1215 So it's a long march towards freedom and it's never actually done like there's no permanent victories or defeats You just have to keep going forward So if you were elected, yeah, so you get in right now Well, what's one of the first things you would do? I would unblock our resources So we have the most resources of any country in the world per capita Barnun we need to have to make it happen though We did have the fastest permits anywhere in the world and the lowest taxes on producing those resources We're the fourth in oil the number number one in uranium number one in Podash for fertilizer. We have the fifth biggest supplier of natural gas We have the longest oceanic coastline like we are we have 12 of the nados Sorry, we have 10 of 12 of nados defined defense minerals So you know, you had that guy Palmer lucky on I don't think he can make his stuff without Canadian minerals I mean, maybe I'm wrong. We will correct me but like night vision technology you need to have You need to have Germanium for that you need to have galeium to make semi conductors and radar you need to have aluminum for armored vehicles and Airplanes you need cobalt for heat resistant alloys and fighter jets you need tungsten for body sorry armor piercing Ammon ammunition we have it all and What I want to do is unblock those resources Produce them in abundance for ourselves and our allies make you know $200,000 paychecks for our trades workers Build up an enormous strategic stock pile of it so that we have tons of leverage in international relations and if God forbid there is ever a global conflict we would have all the resources necessary to win it so But we need to we need to pass we need to get rid of a lot of laws that are blocking and And replace them with laws that have fast permitting so that we can produce this stuff on scale very quickly So is the concern the environmental Impact of extracting these things Is that what's holding it up that is the that's the ostensible reason But I just think across western the western world like Europe UK Parts of the US and Canada. There's a problem with bureaucracy just growing way to damn big Like you know the first nations in our country are incredibly forward-looking The squamish built 6,000 units of housing on 10 acres of land You can believe it in a town in a city of Vancouver where it's very hard to get a permit to do anything because it was their land So they did it They're trying to build their building now an LNG liquid faction plant where they replaced An old 30 mils. They cleaned it up and put an LNG plant there But the federal government took a lot of time 14 years to give them a permit so We need to think like their thinking which is entrepreneurial speed of business get it done quickly That's how you develop like we have this community in my my district is called hardest 600 people they manage a hundred billion dollars of oil in a town of 600 people Why is it there? Because their municipality offers a permit in one week with one page And I wanted to tell this story so I called them and I said can I have someone come into a video with me? And we don't have anyone here We don't have like bureaucrats that can help you that they're all out on their farms right now They come in they stamp the permit and they go back to their farm Well, that's why we have a hundred billion dollars of energy moving through the area Which is bigger than the GDP of many countries because they have vast permits And that's what we need in Canada We need to be the fastest place to get things done But don't you think you need some safe cards to protect the environment And how do you balance that out? Protect it quickly we can figure out what what whether a project is damaging to the environment in Weeks and months rather than decades Like there's nothing you're gonna learn in year 14 of the review that you couldn't have learned in Month 14 So there's ways to protect the environment when the Germans So with the Germans had to break their dependence on Russia after it invaded Ukraine They approved an an LNG import terminal in 60 days They completed the whole damn thing in less than 200 days And guess what no environmental problems They they got their engineers to sit down and figure out how to do it quickly And that's the that's the mentality that we need to get in Canada So what would you be able to do to bypass all this bureaucracy? How could that be done legally? Well, you slim it down to one project one environmental review instead of 20 or 30 You have a fixed timeline that the bureaucrats have to give an answer of six months Rather than just as long as they want to drag it on for And the other thing I would do is study areas where they're they're perfectly situated to have a project Like a pipeline or a mine or an LNG export terminal or a port expansion And I would pre permit it I would say to our officials go in study Make sure that the environmental aspects are all in good order I'll issue a pre permit and then anybody who comes along and wants to build it as long as they follow the terms And act responsibly has a guaranteed permit before they even apply for it And that I think we would have a roaring economy if we did that The town's awesome, but the great fear is that if you do have an impact on the environment that impact is often permanent And then it's devastating and I've seen some of the oil extraction that they've done up and Alberta where you look at the area It looks like like scorched earth. No no no no no no no no no that's that most Responsible or oil extraction in the world, but when you when you see these what does that one area that often gets criticized for it Mac Is that what it is? Yeah, they're open pit mines. You open the mines. You take out the you take out the bitumen You subtract you you separate the sand from the oil You you make it less viscous by putting diluent in it and and you ship it off And then after the oil is after the mining is done. They they resurface it and you wouldn't even know there was a mine there And there's no impact to groundwater no impact to the environment I mean there's an inventory impact no matter what you do But at the end of the day the people who live there are very healthy and very happy and they're the strongest supporters of the expansion of the oil sands It's an incredible economically. It's incredible. It's the best resource in the world. It's like There's no decline rate you guys have shale here, but you know as the years go by you get less and less out of a shale Reservoir we we have very little dick decline. We can keep producing and producing We have what's called the insitu where there's an entire oil sands operation under your feet You could be at an a forest hunting and you wouldn't even know that under your feet They're extracting it through a whole system of pipes where they inject just steam steam vapor that loosens up the oil It sinks down it goes into another pipe comes up to the top and you can have beautiful pristine nature of the bears the The deer the bird they don't even know that there's extraction happening under their feet So we have the best industry the most responsible industry anywhere in the world. It's been a really disgusting PR campaign by extremist environmentalists and frankly some of our competitors to try and make our industry look bad But it's the best industry in the world. Yeah, they got me. Yeah, we saw some videos on it I was like oh my god. What are they doing to the ground? They're doing to the earth. It looks horrible. They're all it's it's all bullshit We have the looks horrible. Yeah, but I mean it that's just a superficial look at it You I'll take you for a tour in the oil sands You'll be amazed we have the best engineers in the world and by the way the first nations people absolutely love it because it's lifting their people out of poverty They're getting an enormous job opportunities out at one of our MPs as a former chief The where they took 18% unemployment brought it down to three balance their budget Another one of my members of parliament in northern British Columbia Negotiate a 40 billion dollar LNG plant on his on the highs. Let territory It's completely eliminating poverty for the first nations there and by exporting clean Canadian natural gas Which we can liquify 25% cheaper because it's cold as hell in Canada They actually displaced dirty coal overseas so instead of Asia burning coal they're burning clean Canadian gas It's delivered by First Nations partnership So this is the best way to do it makes everybody richer and makes our entire continent better off What seems so simple the way you're laying it out. I don't understand why this has been implemented Yeah, this is this is the story of my life. It's frustrating. Is it that simple? Is it is it really that this is what's holding everything up the bureaucracy and the time it takes for permits and Yeah, like a lot of things regulations We have the same thing in housing and and so do you like if you look at you look at California's California is terrible Like why is there such a housing shortage in California? It's because it takes forever to get a permit and there's always bureaucracy standing in the way and it totally screws over the working Class youth who can't find a place to live because they're not being built and We have that challenge in Canada as well The last why proposed ideas to cut the bureaucracy and the taxes so that we can build affordable homes for our youth because Right now we have a whole generation that can't afford homes And that was one of the biggest issues I ran on home ownership is necessary for family formation For a civil peace and society where you know everybody feels like they have a piece of the pie We need to expand home ownership But to do that you've got to get the government gatekeepers out of the way speed up the permits free up the land cut the development taxes So let's assume that you got an office how Much time would it take to start implementing these things and how quickly would that impact be felt by the Canadian people? Look I think a lot of them can move very quickly There's a lot of projects that are people that that investors are sitting on but they don't have a certainty in permits So I would unblock that and I think in the first year you would start to see immediate benefits for the working people who'd be getting these jobs Some of it would take more and more like a medium term like The second thing I would go after is just the inflationary spending which is a big problem all over the Western world like People just can't afford to live. I don't know if you do you encounter that around here. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean inflation is crazy So it's I mean the national debt in America just went up to 39 trillion right which is bigger than your GDP It's a lot of money so so explain this to me 50 years ago a barber and A barber and a waitress could buy a house with a big yard for a dog and raise four kids meeting potatoes on the dinner table every night And now an accountant and a lawyer can't do that. Why is that? It's well there's a lot of spending. Yeah, and a lot of making money a lot of just turning you know just making Dollar bills with nothing behind it nothing to back it. This is the biggest fraud perpetrator on the working-class people in the last hundred years printing money is just insane Is the idea just print more money? It's like and people go. Okay Well, it looks it looks painless at first But if you have an economy with ten apples and ten dollars It's a buck and apple you double the number of dollars to 20. You still only have ten apples Well, all of a sudden it's two bucks in Apple. It's not that the cost of apples has gone up It's still cost the same resources to grow the and pick the apples is that the price has gone up because the value of the money has gone down So in America over the last 55 years You've doubled the number of homes in America from about 70 million to 150 million. You know how much the money supply has grown? 30 times so you have twice the homes, but 30 times the cash So what's happened? Housing costs have gone up 15 fold in 55 years and now an entire generation of kids can't afford homes We have exactly the same problem in Canada This is the biggest wealth transfer from the working class to the elites from I say the have-nots to the have-yachs and Washington and World Wall Street love it by the way because it inflates the stock market inflates the bureaucracy politicians get to spend CEOs get their stocks inflated But it destroys the working people and we need to get back to to hard money Everything should be getting cheaper by the way. You know it takes 80 to 80 percent less resources to grow food We grow four times the food on the same acre get four times as much milk from the same cow We use 80 percent less water and fertilizer So why isn't it that food is not less expensive? It's because all of those gains are being erased by monetary inflation So it's not that food is more costly. It's that the value the money we use to buy it has less purchasing power and We need to do what the Swiss do which is they don't print money they have balanced budgets They have almost no deficit and they have almost zero inflation in Switzerland They have the strongest money in the world the Swiss franc and We would all be better if we operate like the Swiss when it comes to our money So in a real world scenario Slight you you take over Canada. How would you go about implementing this you got to cut bureaucracy? consultants Which consumed by the way? 26 billion dollars of spending how big is your debt in Canada? 1.3 a trillion oh, baby debt it's come compared to you You guys are we're ridiculous wild, but you know you've gotten away with it because the dollar the American dollar is the reserve currency So all these countries prop up the value of the US dollar by keeping it on reserve Better hope that doesn't change. Yeah better hope we we don't have that luxury and so But we do have a lot of debt and we have a lot we have provinces too. They're quite indebted But I would cut the bureaucracy. I would cut consultants foreign aid had cut way back on foreign aid The we give a corporate welfare these checks the corporations. I believe business should make money rather than take money So I would get rid of that we're giving a lot of money to fake fake refuge people who come in and Don't actually are they're not actually fleeing danger Like I love real refugees my wife was a refugee, but I have no time for people who are pretending But they're not really and what you mean by pretending to be a refugee How they're doing this? They're not actually endangered in their home country so they've come to be declared themselves as Students and then wanting to stay declaring a refugee status. Oh, and this is common. Yeah, it just happens It happens and I mean they just want to have a better life So I don't I don't begrudge them as people, but we can't we can't spend money on social service Stanhand social services advanced programs that we as Canadians don't get For people who are not paying in so you're not opposed to them being there. You're opposed to them getting Well, I'm opposed to them If if they're not real refugees, they shouldn't be brought in as refugees I think we have to distinguish between those people who are actually in danger in their home country Which is the definition of a refugee and someone who just wants to come in an excess of of their their proper Emmory is this that common that it's actually affecting your economy? Right now it's a challenge because we had a big number of international students in temporary foreign workers that came in and very large numbers in Like two or three years We were bringing in about a million people a year which in in America's terms would be 10 million like just if you're doing per capita and It really caused a housing shortage Like some places where you have 26 of these students living in one basement So we're trying to unwind that now And how do you do that? Well when they're work permit and their visitor visa runs out then we have to encourage them to head back lawfully Right, but you don't want to do it I style no, I don't think we need to do that I just think we have to be orderly and lawful about it And is that supported by the Canadian people? Yes because we're a very welcoming country we're a nation of immigrants, but we're also a nation of laws and We the there's a general consensus like across the spectrum in Canada that there there was the population growth was too fast for like four or five years and So we're we're trying to unwind that now What are the other things that you would have to do to drop your debt and sort of balance your budget and begin to turn things around well in addition So I I like this idea that actually believe it or not the Clinton that Bill Clinton and the Republicans did in the 90s in the US It was called the pay go law. It was very simple principle every time the administration wanted to bring in a new dollar of spending They had to match it with a dollar of savings So there was no extra net spending For like eight years and that's when your government balanced its budget and paid off $400 billion of debt that law lapsed in 2002 and Immediately after that America went back into deficits and you have an emerge you've been in deficit now for 25 years This is about internalizing the scarcity every creature in the universe every bird in the trees Every fish in the seas has to live with scarcity Maximizing use of scarce resources the only creature who doesn't do that is the politician Because he's always using someone else's money right? It's like a wall just print it or a borlet or tax it It's not my money and so they routinely show up to their cabinet meetings and say well I've got a new idea. It's a hundred million dollars. Where are you gonna get it? I don't know well print it will borrow it will will tax it not my money But if you had a law saying you can't actually bring a proposal to cabinet unless you have matching savings to pay for it Well, then you'd have these politicians walking up and down the hallways and their departments looking for waste and like rooting it out So instead of making the single mom the senior or the small business owner live with scarcity I want the politicians and bureaucrats to live with scarcity and that's what I would impose by law on my government well, it's just a rational way to Deal to problem like don't spend money unless you could save money exactly that's how you balance things out I mean Clinton did balance the budget he did during his time and people forget that because we've always assumed that there's always been this Extraordinary debt, but that's not the case. They're in the 1990s. I mean he did a fantastic job at that Yeah, they I mean it was the Congress was was very disciplined as well and the American people just got fed up and said We're not tolerating these deficits anymore and and they imposed scarcity from the center and by the way the economy boomed because the government was restrained and the free market economy could just roar and That's another part of the equation by the way is Unlocked the power of free enterprise like this is the 250th anniversary Not just of the Declaration of Independence But also of Adam Smith's wealth of nations where he basically for the first time in human history described the free market system and that was starting to flourish in the States and in parts of Europe and that system basically started to come into place after you know the late 1770s The growth since the free market system has came into place in in the world has been 200 times faster than it was before Because there's is the most powerful system for generating material benefit for the people and that's what we need to restore in Canada I want to make it the freest economy in the world. Well that all sounds amazing. How the hell did you lose? How can a rational person look for that? I mean you're not saying anything that's restrictive You're not saying anything that is in any way infringing on people's rights or liberties or it just sounds like it's all just a hundred percent Positive for Canada. That's what I think that's why that's my mission and I think it will be pop And I will get there, you know Canadians do things through evolution not revolution So I'm just gonna keep pushing my ideas and I think that I think overwhelmingly will win the next election Well, it sounds like I just can't see how someone would listen to what you're saying and say I find fault think overwhelmingly we'll win the next election. Well, it sounds like I just can't see how someone would listen to what you're saying and say I find fault in this. Other than like the potential environmental impact of extracting resources, I could see how a lot of the greenies would get like really upset and get their panties in a bunch about that and be very incredulous to the idea that you're going to protect the environment while you're extracting all these resources. But if you could lay it all out and also lay out this enormous economic impact and how it would uplift impoverished communities, how it would completely change the economic landscape of the country. It just only makes sense. That's why I'm baffled. Well, listen, the people render their judgment, but I mean it's to have to do a better job of what would the criticisms of you? Like what did your opponent say that people that resonated with people? What were they trying to say that they're all disagreed with my ideas and they said these are all very scary ideas. Scary. And then they said, hey, growth, first of all, they said they said that I had no policies, then they said they're scary policies and then they stole my policies right before the election. So, but hey, listen, if the government that's in power now steals all my ideas and does the things I want to do, then I then I have one. That's why I came here. I didn't just do it so that I could have my name on the door. So, I keep saying to the Prime Minister, steal my ideas. Right. But he has a model. Well, he, I won't criticize him for in soil. But good for you. Yeah, I mean, we have a mutual respect. That's a Canadian thing to do. That is a very good deal. So polite, you know, that's what I'm saying about Canadians. They're so polite. It's funny, your security guy was talking about the Canadian standoff of, you know, when you get to a door, you go first. No, you go first. You go first. You can stay there all day. Actually, look this up the other day. Ontario actually has an apology act. It's a law that defines the apology because we always say sorry in Canada. So they wanted to clarify that sorry is not a legal admission of guilt. So like, we get into a car accident and I say, oh, sorry, man, I terrible your bumper doesn't mean that I'm guilty. It's actually in love. So polite. You know, somebody else screwed up. You say sorry. That's funny. That's so Canadian. But you know, the great thing about Canada is we've always sorted our shit out peacefully. Like the, the, the Protestants in Catholics tour each other's eyeballs out in Europe for like hundreds of years. And then we came to Canada and just got along. And, and that's the great thing about Canada is like you can come, you know, Muslims and Jews, Christians, and, sorry, Protestants and Catholics, Hindus and Sikhs, they come to Canada and they just get along. They live on the same streets. Eventually we all start intermarrying and it's a, it's a great thing about Canada. Well, it really is a great melting pot. Yeah. And, and like folks get to keep their, their cultures like at the same time is blending into the Canadian identity. Like my, my wife's from Venezuela. And so like, you know, oftentimes I, like I'm in the house and there's like 16 Latinos and they're all speaking Spanish. I have no idea what the hell is going on. And they have this food. It's called a jack-ass. And I said, they don't, they start start cooking this stuff. I thought my, I said, I'm going to, did your mom just call me a jack-ass? Because that's what it's selling. I don't speak any Spanish. But I should now. It's a great, my kids are starting to learn Spanish. So I'm going to be outnumbered. Yeah. Yeah. So what else is an issue in Canada that you would like to fix? We have to, we got a, our GMD deal with. We got a tough and upper justice system. We had, it got way too soft. And it's wrong. The justice system basically bail. I mean, we all believe in the basic principle that you're innocent until approved, proven guilty. But if someone's convicted as have like 150 prior convictions and they're newly arrested on their latest crime, yeah. I don't think we should be released releasing them onto the streets. And so we got two lacks on bail. So there's now a consensus in Canada that you should have severe restrictions on repeat offenders. Like in Vancouver, they had to arrest the same 40 guys, 6,000 times in one year. 40 guys, 6,000 arrests. So they're basically being released within hours of their latest arrest. So we're, we're, we now brought built up bipartisan, multi-partisan consensus to fix that. And we're pushing to toughen the bail system and ensure that it's the repeat offenders. A tiny group, we don't have a lot of criminals in Canada, but they do a tremendous amount of crime. So if you take them off the street, you put them in prison. You can basically reduce the crime rate dramatically. Well, we probably have more crime percentage wise in America, but it's still a small percentage of the population that commits the crime. But it's the same issue. Like in New York City, it's extraordinary. The amount of people that are repeat offenders. And they just let them go. And California, no cash bail, let them go. It's like it is bananas and it doesn't make any sense. And it doesn't make anybody help. I understand you want to be empathetic. And I understand these narratives that the prison system is racist and the justice system is racist. And these people never been given a great shake in life. Well, if you want to fix that, start in these impoverished neighborhoods, establish community centers, establish better education, fund that, but don't let harden criminals back on the street. Exactly. They, they're habitual. They, but if you've been arrested 40, 50 times, it doesn't seem like you're getting any better. So whatever rehabilitation, process they have going on there, that's not working. So keep doing the same thing over and over again. Unless you like crime, I don't understand why you would do that. This has been, you know, it's imposed by these so called experts. They tell, oh, we've done all these studies that show that the soft on crime policies work. But everywhere it's been, it's been tried. It's been an absolute disaster anywhere in the Western world. We have a town called Pinticton. There's one guy who the police can tell by looking at the crime rate, whether he's been in jail or not. When he comes out of jail, the crime rate for the entire town of Pinticton actually coats that so crazy. But you just keep him in prison. That seems so simple to solve. It's like, there's so many of these problems with government that it's just like rational thinking is in this way. One of one of great interviews that I love about you, you were eating an apple. And you were talking in this guy who has been completely ridiculous. You were asking him to define the issues that he had. And it was so funny. It was like, this is what happens when a rational person meets a person with empty narratives. It was such a weird moment because you just kept eating that apple. It was such a, it was such a bad apple. It was so kind. That's the thing. And the thing is, I didn't even realize I was being taped. I thought it was a print interview. Oh, that's hilarious. That's why I think I was so relaxed. But so I'm in the most beautiful place in the world. If you ever, if you haven't been to the Okanagan, it's unbelievable. Like it's lakes, it's mountains, it's nice dry weather, and there's orchards and vineyards there like you'd love it. And so I'm in an apple orchard. And I'm walking around just talking with people. And my staff says this reporter wants to do an interview. And I'm enjoying the apple. He comes up, starts asking questions. Nobody was there thought this was a moment like we thought nothing of it. We dumped the whole thing. My staff unbeknownst to me was recording my whole walk. We dumped this 50 minute video on the internet. No one noticed it. And like three weeks later, my phone blows up. And people say, Hey, how about that apple? What is it? What are they talking about? This apple thing. And then, you know, within three days, everybody's talking to me about this damn apple. But I had almost forgotten about eating. Well, weird that conversation sort of embodied this issue. It really did because you have rational thinking and empty narratives colliding, right, while you're eating an apple. Like, you're so casual about it. You're actually eating an apple, which was so perfect. I mean, you couldn't if you planned on it, like if you had a PR team, I think you should be eating an apple. So he's casual, you're eating fruit. It's healthy. You know, it was totally coincidence. Like, I don't know where not planned. And not even noticed. Like I said, no one there thought this was going to be a moment. We just like totally forgot about it. Well, it made it in America. It was viral in America. And we were like, how come that guy's not the prime minister? Well, that hell's going on. Well, in the meantime, you can buy in brogio apples from the South O'conaughey. And I'm really plugging a lot of sales for the Canadian economy today. You know what I found out about Canadian maple syrup? What's that? It is actually a super food. And it is actually better for you than honey. Is that right? Yeah, it contains a bunch of polyphenols and a bunch of like healthy nutrients. That was not maple syrup, but just a guilty pleasure. You poured on pancakes. No, it's totally interesting. Really good for you. So you take it before your workout? No. No, just watch the Instagram video yesterday. So we said it to me. And I was like, what is this? We'll have to send you a bunch of maple syrup from Canada. I've got a bunch of, we actually have a maple syrup reserve in Canada. Like a reserve of excess stockpiles. Like oil reserve? Well, we don't have an oil reserve. This is something I want to change. I want to have an oil reserve, but I also want to keep the maple syrup reserve because we're working 80 and it's after all. There's nothing more Canadian than that. Well, it's so delicious. I can't believe it's good for you. Make sure that's true. Are there nutrients? Let's put it into perplexed. Our sponsor. I compared it first honey. I'll give you what it showed. It wasn't that saying it's better. Maple syrup and honey are both sugary, but maple syrup is slightly lower in calories. Glycemic index has more minerals like mag, magnese, magganese, and calcium. While honey is a bit higher in calories, it has a slightly stronger impact on blood sugar. Well, this guy on Instagram was very convincing. I wish I saved it. I think it's convincing. I think you should go with it. I'm in it. I'm done. Stick with it. It tastes better too. Yeah, it's the best. It's fantastic. Put that with a little bit of Greek yogurt. You're protein. Yeah. That's what I do. Greek yogurt and maple syrup. Maybe it's hard to trend. Because everybody uses honey on their yogurt. No, maple syrup from Canada. It's not from Canada. It's not the real thing. Well, there's a lot of fake syrup, right? There's a lot of junk out there. When you go to a pancake house and they have that stuff in the little plastic cups, that's going to be a trap. Yeah, you don't want to have that manufactured crap. Well, that's the case with honey as well. I had a woman in here once it was a beekeeper. And she's explained to us that a lot of honey is not actually honey. They water it down with corn syrup. There's just a shit in our food these days. Yes. I believe in eating clean. 100%. Well, I mean, that was one of the primary factors for me supporting this administration was RFK Jr. in this Make America Healthy Again initiative. Because I think, you know, I had my friend Brigham Bueller yesterday from ways to well on. And, you know, we hammered this many times over and over again. But people need to hear it. We spend more money on health care and we're sicker than we've ever been before. And we have more chronic illness and we have more money. None of it makes any sense. It's completely ridiculous. And it's obvious that people are eating the wrong things. And there was so much outrage of him implementing all these healthy choices and trying to get rid of dyes that are illegal in Canada. Like the same cereals that the same factory sells in Canada. They sell with natural dyes. And in America, we demand them to be more colorful. So we put poison Yeah. Is that no, you know, what are the, what do you think are the dietary habits that are making people in the Western world sick right now? Like is it the dyes? Is it the sugars? Is it the carbs? Like what's getting people in there's a lot of things. First of all, it's processed foods. Process foods is an enormous percentage of a lot of American diets. Things with massive amounts of of preservatives in them. And that's like if you want like a general guideline, eat real food. Eat real eggs, real vegetables, real meat, real fish. You'll be healthier. As soon as you start having things that get sit on a shelf forever, except things like rice and you know, normal beans, like things that are dried, that makes sense that they could sit there. But if something can just sit on a shelf for a long period of time and you consume it, how is it just not rotting? Exactly. I'm sure you've seen where they've taken a McDonald's Big Mac and they've just let it sit. Take a cheeseburger in a box and the guy pulls it out like 10 years later. It looks exactly the same. That's not food. The bacteria didn't want to eat it. They looked at it. They were like, I'm not eating that. If bacteria doesn't eat it, mold doesn't eat it. That's crazy. Why are you eating it? Like there's something in it preventing the mold from growing. What is that? Well, that stuff fucks with your gut bacteria. It's terrible for your body. And empty calories. And we consume an enormous amount of processed food in this country. And if you want to be a healthier person, eat real fruit, eat real food, eat real vegetables, eat real meat. Is that simple? That would fix 90% of our problems when it comes to people's diets. And my wife once looked at some of the baby formula we had and she said, she looked on it. She said, there's no expiry date on this. This never goes bad. That can't be a good thing. Right. It means a lot of breast milk. You have to freeze. Exactly. And then what about on the fitness side? What do you think we can do? I mean, beyond, you've done a lot just talking about it. With the size of your audience, you've probably got a lot of people off the couch. But what policies do you think we could push that would get people physically active working out moving again? Well, the real important thing is community. The easiest way to get fit is to get around a bunch of other people that are also involved in the same endeavor. Right? If you have a bunch of friends that are unhappy with the way their life is, like just go walk together. Say, hey guys, let's all go for a walk after dinner together. It's all decide like as a to go walk. Just walk for a half an hour after your meals at a lower glycemic index. It'll change your body. It'll make you healthier. You'll feel better. Right. It just does so much for you. Just move that in activity. And if you're involved with a group of people that are also inclined in the same direction, they're also trying to get better, trying to get fit, then you kind of you're, you know, you feed off of your atmosphere. Right. People imitate the people that are around them. And you get support from the people that around them. You know, make it a little healthy competition. You know, who can, you know, do the most exercise and who can do the most, you know, whatever it is, like whether it's a sport or whether it's a game or whether it's just something that you enjoy doing that's physically, physically taxing slightly. It doesn't have to be a crazy kettlebell workout or a jiu-jitsu class. Just take a, just take a walk. Just, just the, if the world, if the United States or Canada or anybody that's got problems with their health, just decide to start walking every day for 20 minutes. It'll change your life. And then add things to it. Add some body weight squats, add some push-ups, skip a little rope, do something. Take a yoga class. It'll change your life. Right. Absolutely. You need activity. The human body has needs. And when it doesn't, those needs are not met and you don't, your biological requirements aren't met. You get developed anxiety, you get overweight, your muscles atrophy, your bone density decreases. You can't open up a jar anymore. There's all these problems that could be solved with just simple movement and activity. You don't have to become a fitness nut. You have to become a gym rat. You just do something at that alone. And then change what you eat. Drink more water. Stop drinking soda. Stop drinking so much alcohol. You know, stop eating processed food. If we just slowly but surely get this in people's heads, for the longest time, people didn't think there was anything wrong with eating processed food. They didn't think there was anything wrong with, they thought sugar just gave you extra calories. That's it. They didn't realize the catastrophic health consequences of consuming all this sugar. The increase in type 2 diabetes, all these problems that are people are having, that people are having because of poor diets. And what's your theory though on how that happened? Why did that happen? Why did what caused millions of people to shift their diets away from good, wholesome real food towards the process garbage? Well, first of all, marketing, right? And availability, right? The, the, the, they always say the center of the grocery store is what you should avoid because the center is all the stuff that doesn't need to be refrigerated, right? Everything on the outskirts, all the vegetables and the fruit and the meats and the milk, that's all the stuff that's healthy because it has to be refrigerated. Because it's not, it goes bad. Things that can just sit on a shelf, but things that sit on a shelf, forever, those are the things that are the easiest to profit from because you don't have to worry about storage. You have to worry about refrigeration when you're processing or when you're moving them and transporting them. You know, just education is the most important thing because there's a lot of people that don't know how much their diet impacts them. And then there's also the problems that happen in this country where the sugar industry literally bribe scientists to pass the blame on saturated fat and pretend that this was the cause of all these heart issues that people were having and all the obesity that it was just fat. So then people started eating all these seed oil rich foods like mayonnaise or excuse me, like margarine and you know, corn oil and canola oil on this one is better just to have tallow or butter. Yes. It's like natural food. Your body knows what to do with it. Beef is like a superfood. Nice fatty piece of beef. Best thing you can eat. It's so good for you. You've got iron, you've got fat, you've got protein and creatine. It's all packed in that one superfood. It is. And people, there's a lot of people that live very healthily off a carnivore diet and that astounds people. They don't understand it because they've been pushed into this idea. Well, one of the things they did in America that's great is they reversed the food pyramid. Our food pyramid was all grains at the bottom. It was all wheat and grains, which is like there's nothing wrong with eating that as long as you're being smart about it. You don't eat too much of it. But if that's your primary diet, like guess what, your insulin's going to spike. You're going to be hungry all the time. You're going to get fat. This is not good. Yeah. Good. When I cut the carbs out and I went basically into ketosis, I felt great because instead of having all the ups and downs when my blood sugar was down, when you're in ketosis, you basically live off your fat stores. Yes. You have a consistent flow of energy whenever you need it because I've got some here. I feel lighter. I have to sleep less now. I don't have to sleep as much because I don't eat the big heavy carbs. I cheat once in a while. But the big heavy carbs that your body breaks down, you've got to sleep more to work through all those heavy carbs. So I'm going to feel it when you eat them. I love carbs. Don't get me wrong. Like I love, I love, I love spaghetti. I love pizza. I love Italian subs. I love them. But I eat them sparingly. Absolutely. When I eat them, I feel it. I feel it. Like it's amazing while you're eating it. And then you're like, Oh, you're here with a tranquilizer dart. It's just not good. It's so good for you. If I eat a steak, I feel great. If I eat a steak, I don't feel in any way tired after I'm done. I don't feel exhausted. Like completely full. Also, they have a high satiety rate. Like, if you eat just steak, you're only going to eat what you need. Like, this your body knows when to stop. But if there's mashed potatoes next to the steak and spaghetti next to the steak and bread and all these other things, you're just going to keep eating. Exactly. And then cake and butter and ice or not butter, like cake and ice cream and all the you're going to keep eating. And you're going to consume excess calories. But beef is really expensive now. Like it's really hard to put a steak on your plate. These are the average guy. It's in saints twice as expensive pork in Canada right now. There's also this dumb narrative that cows are responsible for climate change, which is just absolutely insane. And whoever started promoting that needs to go to jail because it's you've done a terrible disservice to people, especially regenerative farming that's actually sequesters carbon. Absolutely. And it's healthy for you. So the farming, the ranchers in my area are fantastic. They produce an incredible product. We've got this. The North America has the smallest cattle herd since 1951 this year. That's not very small herd. And that's why it's so hard to get beef. Why is that? What is that? I think there's been a demand spike in the last couple of years. Beef prices were low for long. So a lot of ranchers got out of it. I just said, we can't. I can't stay in this business losing money every year. And then all of a sudden prices started to go up. And moods have changed a lot on beef, even in the last three, four years. So now they're trying to keep up with the demand. But I'm happy to see the ranchers doing well. But I'm sure like to see middle class families to be able to afford to have beef again. But you know, my theory on one of the reasons why the marketing has shifted towards all this processed crap. And this goes back to my obsession, which is inflation because what instead of just raising the prices, they downgrade the quality of the food, they strip out the nutrients. And they inject garbage into our food. The companies do that is ultimately less nutritious. But the price tag doesn't necessarily look like it's changing. So it's one of the more insidious ways that the system is able to charge you to pass inflationary costs on without you seeing it in that the price tag that's underneath the product. There's also engineer food to be compulsive. Like you're more compulsive. Is that right? Yeah, sure, especially like chips and stuff like that in America. What country do you think does nutrition the best around the world? Well, that's a good question. Well, Japan has one of the lowest obesity rates. Right? And when you look at Japanese food, like what is it? It's like fish and rice and vegetables. And it's, it's, they don't use glyphosate. I don't think, I think, I think the way they process their wheat is very different than ours. You know, we have a higher glycy. We have higher gluten in our wheat because of like we have more complex glutens in our wheat. So we have higher yield. And then on top of that, they dry all the wheat out with glyphosate at the end, which is fucking terrible for you. Interesting. And they were trying to ban that in America, but then Trump passed an executive order stopping it. So this is one of the things that Kennedy kind of ran on is that he wanted to stop the ubiquitous use of glyphosate. Okay. And especially glyphosate, you know, used with wheat to dry it out. So it's not used as an herbicide. It's used to dry out the wheat at the end so that it doesn't get moldy, which is crazy. You're spraying poison on wheat. And most Americans, if you test them, have glyphosate in their blood, you know, and the apologists will say, oh, but it's safe levels, but we don't really know what that means. You were talking about decades and decades of consuming this stuff. That can't be good. I mean, it literally kills plants. It destroys gut bacteria. It can't be good. It would be better when you eat overseas like a VIE pasta or bread in Italy. You feel better. It doesn't kill you like it doesn't America. It doesn't like, you don't get that same feeling. Interesting. I didn't know. I don't want anything about glyphosate, but one of the things that you guys used glyphosate in Canada, I don't want to think about it. I feel bad saying that, but I should do my homework on that one. We have corn that's engineered to survive glyphosate. We have Roundup ready corn, so that you could spray glyphosate on the corn that kills all the other things that you don't want growing. But how can that be good? Most, like, they did a test of California wines. And what was the number? It was like some preposterous number of California wines tested positive for glyphosate. Like in the high 90s, I think. Okay. Which is just nuts. Yeah, I don't know anything about glyphosate. I have to admit, well, I really should be. You've peaked my curiosity. The problem is in America, our food system is entirely dependent on it at this point. They want to change it. And so there's a lot of strategies. One of them is they have these machines that use lasers. And these lasers go over a field that actually target the weeds. So instead of spraying poison on them, they just zap these weeds and they can identify the difference between the weed and the crop. Really? Yeah. That's incredible. Yeah. The wine was 10 out of 10 tested, but 10 out of 10. I was looking at the Japanese obesity thing. They have an interesting law that they put in place in 2008 where I believe it says workplaces have to measure people's waste of adults over 40 to find out if they're potentially overweight. Wow. Those people don't get fined. The companies get fined. So they have to then provide them counseling, diet advice, exercise guidance. Wow. And they also use a lower BMI than we do. There's, it starts at 25. It says it's because they have a higher risk in Asian populations for obesity. Interesting. I wonder what that is. I wonder if that's because a lot of rice consumption way lower, 4% to 6% compared to 42%. Wow. That's crazy. Their obesity rates are 4% to 6%. And we're 42. 42 is nuts. 42 is so crazy. I find out what the Japanese are doing. My next stop is going to be Tokyo. Yeah. Well, they eat healthy food. You know, and that, but that doesn't make sense. I mean, implementing something like that. It sounds very restrictive. You know, I mean, I don't want to tell a guy you can't have a gut. Like, I have a lot of friends that are fat. I love them at death. I'd like them to be healthy. But I wouldn't, you know, I don't believe you should have that kind of control over people. No. I think you should encourage healthy behavior. I don't think you should mandate it. Yeah. We need, we need carrots, not sticks. Yeah. Carrots literally. Literally. But the system is like, you know, I think the opioid thing. That's an incredible story, really. That's a horrible story. That's a horrible story. And, you know, the fact that no one's going to jail for that is infuriating. They should. What they did and what the, the deception that they use to pretend that that stuff is not addictive, that it's not the same as heroin is just absolutely atrocious. And the fact that they got away with it and that the soccer family, just that one family, I don't know if you've ever seen the Netflix docgy drama series. Yeah. Painkiller. Was it, was it called Painkiller? They're the guys from Purdue, right? Purdue Pharma. Yes. I think they were Purdue Pharma. Yeah. I'm mistaken. I mean, how many lives were destroyed by that? Well, half a million ended in the US and least 50,000 in Canada. We lost, we lost more people in the last 10 years to opioid overdoses than we lost fighting in the Second World War. True. And that's so crazy. And we, you know, these companies, I mean, it started in the States, Purdue and a number of others where they basically started lying to the system and paying, they actually paid bonuses to distributors for every overdose they caused. They tracked the overdoses and then paid bonuses to distributors because that was an indicator of how successfully they were pushing the drugs onto doctors and pharmacists and the system. It's all came out in the court because there was a huge lawsuit and the companies had to pay $50 billion because of an American government lawsuit against them, but they actually paid bonuses for overdose rates. That's true. It's insane. It's wild. And they basically, they were very, very strategic. They said we're going to go to working class neighborhoods where there's huge unemployment. So you know, in the Rust Belt of America, where people were out of work and they obviously had some minor industrial injuries and said, you know, this will solve every A can pay and take OxyContin. And it felt great when they first started taking it and then it spread into Canada as well. And then it mutated in from OxyContin into fentanyl, which is 100 times more powerful than heroin. It can stop your, your lungs in 15 seconds, just absolutely deadly. And we, you know, these companies, these dirt bag companies should be paying hundreds of billions of dollars to cover the treatment and recovery of the people whose lives have been ruined by this. Well, it's just insane that they only had to pay a percentage of the amount of money that they profited. It isn't saying. They should have gone to jail. They should have gone to pay. First of all, give all the money back. Yeah. I mean, what you did was unbelievably evil. Absolutely. And you were allowed to profit from it, which is crazy. I'll give all the money back. Yeah. I mean, what you did was unbelievably evil. Absolutely. And you were allowed to profit from it, which is crazy. For years. Even the Sackler family, the amount that they got fined was a small percentage of what they actually made. I don't know how people live with themselves when they do that. They're so so fast. But they have to be. They basically got into the entire system, the health care system, the medical equipment community, and they pushed these over prescriptions. And then they got this crazy idea that they pushed in places like Portland and Seattle and San Francisco, that the government should start giving out opioids that are safer than the ones that are on the street as an alternative to keep people from having contaminated drugs, which made the problem even worse, because the addicts would sell those to kids so that they could buy the harder stuff off the street. And it expanded it even more. And so one of the things that we're focused on, my plan is massive treatment to recovery programs, to get people off drugs. Abstinence-based treatment is incredible. It gets very successful. And we're saving lives now in Canada. You get them in. You get them counseling group therapy treatment of sweat lodges for First Nations people's physical exercise is a big part of it. I went to one treatment center in Saskatchewan, and they actually bought these rusted out weights. And they had the guys like lifting weights, and the beer crashes. And why are you spending money on weights? What does that have to do with it? And he says, then the best thing we had, these guys started to see their biceps grow. And they're like, I want to look like this. And if I take drugs, I'm not going to look like this. So it was one of the best things they did. Then you get them into jobs and treatment. And there's one guy that I met in BC. He was going to kill himself. He drove his car into a brick wall, because he was so ruined by his addiction. But he didn't die. He couldn't even pull it off. So he actually went into treatment, turned his life around, started a business. He's got six employees. And now he's going out on the street, and like helping pulling guys off the street and bringing them in and saving their lives. So it's actually a really hopeful ending to the story. If we can get shift all our resources over to treatment and recovery services, which is one of my big objectives. Are you aware of Ibogaine? No. So former Republican governor of Texas, Rick Perry, is involved in this Ibogaine initiative here in Texas. And one of the things that they found, you know, he works very closely with veterans. And you know, obviously a lot of these guys, they come back from the war. They have PTSD. They have a lot of pain. They get addicted to pills. And then they have an incredibly difficult time getting off of it. And there's a treatment called Ibogaine. And Ibogaine comes from the Oboga tree. It's like a natural psychedelic that has no recreational use whatsoever. It's not fun. And it's apparently a brutal 24 hour experience, but it rewires the brain. It stops the pathways of addiction. And just one Ibogaine treatment, one session, the amount of people that never go back to using those drugs is in the 80%. Really? When they do two sessions, it's in the 90s. Wow. It's incredible. So they're implementing it here. And Rick Perry, who is like a staunch, anti-drug, hard-line Republican guy, great guy. But realized from talking to these veterans, maybe you have to have an open mind. And look at this. We have this blanket term that we use for drugs. And we say, oh, Ibogaine's a drug. You don't want to take drugs. But this psychedelic, this Ibogaine, apparently it's like a 24 hour review of your life, that in some way, some chemical way rewires your system and stops the pathways of addiction. It's like a factory reset. Yes. Wow. That's crazy. And so they're starting to implement it here in Texas. And they're going to use it for that study. So if that study is this, if they don't. And they've done, is it approved as a treatment? Well, it's being approved here in Texas. And they're trying to do it in other places. And I know a friend of mine, my friend, Ed Clay, he started a center down in Mexico. And the reason why he did it was because he got hooked on pills. He heard his back, he got hooked on pills. He had to figure out how to get off of it. And he did one Ibogaine session, got clean. Really? And it was like, I need to educate people and help people with this. We start this system. And it's very successful. I know multiple people that have done it. And especially veterans that have done it and have profound changes in their life. Because of this. Amazing. And again, there's no recreational use for this. There's no chance of abusing it. It's not fun. Like to get people to do it twice is very hard. But even doing it once. But if you do it, it's incredibly effective. Much more effective than any other form of therapy. Really? Yes. OK. Well, I'll have to look out for that one. Because we still have a challenge up in Canada. I can connect you with Rick Perry. OK. And he's a human-brying, Hubbard, or incredible, with the advocacy and the promotion of this. What they've done is really amazing. We got to get people off these drugs. And we're making some good progress in Canada. Our biggest challenges are just the long-term aftermath of the opioid problem. Like you have had to be here. But I think we can overcome it. And we have to try some new things in order to get people off these things. Because when you're doing fentanyl, it's Russian roulette. Yes. You might not have more than a day to live if you're still taking that stuff. Oh, so dangerous. And it's in everything. It's in so many different street versions of pills that people think are safe. Right. Like Xanax. There's like illegal Xanax, like street Xanax. And there's fentanyl on them. People take it and they die. Right. Absolutely. I've met so many mothers. They just come up to me at my rallies and things. And they tell me the story. And they show me a picture. And he's like, man, it's a beautiful child. That child looks healthy and smart. And she went to a party. And they ran in the shit out. And there's a high school kid here in town that took a street out of all. And then a fence will let me die. Is that right? Yeah. Somebody sold them what he thought was out of all. Look, that's what killed Prince. That's what killed Tom Petty. Out of all? No. No. Fenton. They got street drugs from someone, like they're both in pain. And they become addicted to the pills. And then they got like a pill from a roedy. I didn't know that. They took it and died. I didn't know that. Petty, did he sing Last Dance? Oh, he was a married. Last chance for Mary Jane. Right. That's really sad. Oh, he sung a much amazing songs. American Girl made Tom Petty was a legend and died because of Fenton. Oh, Prince is one of the great musical genius of human history. And Fenton all got him died from Fenton all. Yeah. He had a hip pain. He needed a hip replacement. His hip was blown out. And he was in agony all the time. So he started taking pills. And then next thing you know, you're hooked. And I've had family members that got hooked on it. Is that right? Yeah. Did they get through it? Well, one of them didn't. Yeah. I mean, he heard his back doing construction and started taking pills. And now he's a waste. That's the sad thing. That's the sad thing is it's their good people. And they're not law-breaking people. No. Often it's folks who work in physically demanding jobs. They get an injury. Exactly. And it's easy to judge. But when you're in excruciating pain, and you find something that makes it go away, you get understandable. So if you're not educated in these subjects, and you just trust the doctor, you go to a doctor, and the doctor says you need pain medication, and then all of a sudden you're on it. You know? It's easy to see how people get locked into that. And then they can't break loose. So that's the pathway to that. That's the way to that. That's the way to that. It's so well-known and studied. It's very, very addictive. Which is why it's so horrific that they actually promoted the fact that these things are not addictive when they were promoting them. Oh, they knew exactly what they were doing. They were absolute crux. And I'm hoping we get big settlements out of them the way you did down here. And I want to put all that money into treatment and recovery and get people off these drugs and rescue them. I think we can save these lives. The treatment, it works. It's tough. Like the people who go through it, they say, it was the worst experience of my life to go through that withdrawal. But it can be done. And you come out stronger on the other side. It can be done. And I think the most important thing is prevention, and education, and letting kids know, like, hey, this is not what you want to get involved with. You want to have a happy, successful life. This is going to stop that. This is going to keep you from having it. This might kill you. And it's definitely going to ruin you. Yeah. But you're right about fitness, though, because when I was young, I hung around with a lot of people who got into a lot of trouble. And I could have ended up there. The reason I didn't frankly is sports. So I had something else to drive me. So it's one of the reasons why we need to get our young people's active in sporting activities when they're in that age group. Because if you're not giving them an outlet, then they'll end up down that scary path. Oh, 100%. And also you realize that if you want to be effective in sports, like you can't party. Exactly. It'll rob you of your vitality. Exactly. Of your performance. No, when I played hockey, and I showed up a few times hung over, and I was just shit. Like, it was terrible. But you learn pretty quickly. You got to be on your game. So we've got to promote more of the fitness at the youth level as well. And is that happening here? It's funny. I remember when I came down here. as a 16-year-old. I haven't been here in 30 years. We got into town, and the people who were hosting us, were driving us to their home. We saw this stadium. There's like 20,000 people. And it was in Houston. And I said, is that the Cowboys playing? And they said, no, that's a high school league. It's like, OK. In Canada, we don't have high school leagues with 20,000 people coming out. But the sports are so massive here. Football is gigantic here. It's a religion. Yeah, it's crazy. And who do you cheer for, by the way? In Texas? Yeah. You personally. Well, I've got into UT football. OK. I really love going to the UT games. It's so fun. And it's so, they're so enthusiastic. And they just love it. It's like, when you're a part of it, when the touchdowns get scored and everybody's cheering, it's like, it's so contagious. Right. It's really amazing. And it's just like the enthusiasm they have for it. It's like, wow, this is a great. These people love this here. Yeah. But I've been to high school football games. And it's the same thing. Like, packed stadiums for high school football games. And they're like, this is nuts, man. These people love their sports. We're like that for hockey in Canada. Oh, yeah. They have serious, serious. Like, parents are very fixated. And I think it's actually a good thing. Some people say, oh, it's terrible. I think it's great to have parents that are competitive. Because they're pushing their kids to be better and more excellent. And even if they don't end up as NHL hockey players, it gives them that can affect competitive ed. And I want us to be a more competitive society. Well, when I was a kid, I worked at the Boston Athletic Club. And one of the people that I was a fitness instructor when I was 19. And one of the people that I worked with was Bobby Orr. Oh, really? Yeah, Bobby Orr used to come there and train them. We used to have to help him get on the Versa-Klimmer machine because his body was so wrecked. Really? He had so many surgeries. His knees were so destroyed. He had scars all up and down as he, because he had knee surgery back when they were just experimenting. You know, they didn't really know how to fix knees. They just cut your open, screwed things back together again. And then it would blow apart again. And then you'd wind up having another surgery. So he had many, many knee surgeries. And he could barely walk. But he was still doing some kind of physical activity. Yeah, he was playing racquetball. He was, how old was he at the time? This was 1986. So I mean, that's like what? 40 years ago. Uh-huh. Yeah. So he was, you know, he was probably in his 50s, 40s or 50s. Now he was. He could barely walk. I mean, his knees didn't straighten out. Really? They were always like slightly bent. And they only bent that much. His range of motion was very small. So you had to help him get on machines. But that nice is guy. Right. A legend. But you couldn't believe he was really there. Right. Like he would walk into the gym and he's like, oh, my God. It's really, yeah, as I was 19, I never met a famous person. And I was like, that's probably or? Absolutely. This is nuts. But it also made me realize like boy, knee surgeries, no joke. Like this guy was like an incredible athlete. And now he can't even straighten his leg out. Yeah. It's all temporary. You got to take care of yourself. Yes. Do you have like residual injuries from fighting back in the day? Yeah. Yeah. I've had three knee surgeries, two reconstructions. Was that from Taekwondo? Yeah. And Jiu Jitsu, one of my ACL injuries was from Jiu Jitsu. And what injuries are the most common in Jiu Jitsu? Knee's backs, necks, shoulders, those big ones, elbows. Is that because of the arm bars and all that stuff? Yeah. Not tapping. That's a big one. A lot of guys get hurt just because they're ego because they don't want to tap. You don't strike me as the type of guy who tapped very quickly. Well, when I was younger, I was really stupid and I wasn't into tapping. But as I got older, I got a lot smarter. Unfortunately, I got a lot better. So I wasn't like in a situation where I had a tap a lot. Right. But if I did, I did, I just tapped. And that's the smart thing to do. And I would tell people, treat it like you're playing basketball. Don't treat it like it's your life or death. The game is life or death. The game is if a guy gets you in an arm bar, he's essentially breaking your arm. He breaks your arm, he can kill you. Right. That's the game. But don't treat it like that. Treat it like you can tap and keep going. Or you cannot tap and your arm's going to be destroyed maybe for the rest of your life. And I've seen that happen with people. Whether they're form, snaps and they have to have plates in it. And then it's a chronic injury for the rest of their life. Right. Yeah. No, I can imagine that. And what about in Taekwondo? Like, you told the story once about how you really clocked a guy. I think it was a wheel kick or something. That like freaked you out. That changed my whole outlook on fighting because I realized that could happen to me. And I had knocked people out before, but I never knocked anybody out where they didn't get up. Like usually they get up and they're wobbly and you know, they get sat down and you know, medics take care of them. And you know, after a while they're walking around. And this guy never got up. And I never really got over that. I never had the same lust for hurting people. Because it was just, I was young, you know, I was 19. And when you're 19, you think you're invincible. Or you don't, you don't think about the consequence. I knew I could get hurt. I've been hurt before. I've been kicked really hard and punched really hard before. I knew I was vulnerable. But I didn't think there would going to be anything permanent. Did the guy ever get out of the hospital? I don't know. Really. I don't know what happened to him. Well, maybe I don't know what happened to him. Maybe I'll hear this show and give you a call and say that he's all right. Oh, no, no, no, he probably don't want to talk to me. Oh, your spinning pack kick is incredible. I saw you and GSP doing that video where you were showing him how to do the back kick. Yeah. Did he ever use that in a fight? Yeah, he did. Yeah, he did. Yeah, he used a lot. It's a thing that like, you have to almost grow up doing it. Right. You know, unless your John Jones developed it later in his career, I saw that. He's a wizard. But he kind of like started implementing it sort of three, two, three, three, which was career. Did you teach him how to do that? He worked with a tug with no coach in Albuquerque. Okay. And he just really worked on that one technique specifically when he went up to heavyweight, because the guys would be first of all less agile mobile. And also it was the kind of technique where you could stop a guy with one shot. Right. And when your guy is smaller than most heavyweight, it's just John is because he was a light heavyweight. So he's fighting it two or five most of his career. And just as a challenge decided to go up to heavyweight. But he's so intelligent. He realized like I need a one shot that I could put people away. So he spent hours and hours every week just going over this spinning back. Really? To the body or the head? Yeah, the body. Yeah. And it's like getting hit by a car. Right. You get hit with that. Like a wheel kick to the head is really difficult to develop. That's it's like a fast twitch thing that it's almost like your body has to evolve and grow doing that to really develop the kind of speed that you could pull it off on a skilled opponent and a bi accuracy. Yeah. And like a trying time that all that must be incredible. I mean, there's this freak athletes that could pick it up later in life. There's some people that are just really good at everything. They just have amazing dexterity and coordination. But for most people, you like I learned it when I was a kid. So like my body matured doing those things. Right. And it became a part of like just my average like normal movement of life. Right. It's amazing. And the spinning back kick though, is it typically a body kick? Yes. Throw it. I've thrown it to the face too, especially a jump spinning back kick to the face. But the head guinder wasn't it really the Koreans the develops so they could actually kick a man off a horse in war. Is that why the kicks are so high? I don't think so. I think it was just because they were they're smaller and stature. And they realized that you had have more powerful kicks. Okay. You know, like because your legs are always carrying your body around. There's a lot more mass to your muscles and your legs. And there's a lot more force to generate with your kicks. Did you ever see the fight between Rick Rufus and that Muay Thai guy? Oh, yeah. Isn't that incredible? Yeah, that changed kickboxing. We've we've showed that fight a hundred times podcast. It's amazing because it was like Americans versus Thai and we didn't really understand leg kicks. Right. Because P.K. A karate. And I found this out later because of Benny or Kita. So came in the podcast. He told me that the reason why they didn't allow leg kicks in P.K. karate was because of Bill Wallace. So Bill's super foot Wallace famously had one leg that he kick with it was because his other leg had a bad knee. And he didn't want anybody kicking his legs. Interesting. He promoted this idea that only have above the waist kicks. Right. And that's what we had in America. Like that's what Johnny Vterio fought most of it. That's right. He did. He fought Rufus himself actually. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. No, that that that was incredible because if you looked at the the art form, Rufus was so much more beautiful to watch than the Thai guy. He came in. He broke the guy's jaw in the first round. I think a no, he did not he knocked it down a few times once or twice. He knocked him down a couple of times, I believe. And the guy just kept chopping his leg and then I think he went out in a stretcher. His leg was busted in like nine places. He didn't know what to do. He didn't understand it. What was really interesting is his brother Duke became a boy tie world champion out of that fight. Was that the was that the guy who was at the fight commenting after the fight? Yes. Yes, I remember him saying it doesn't take it. There's no scale. Yes, I remember that. He was embarrassed by that later in his life because he became one of the top MMA trainers. Really. Yeah. Well, he became a boy tie world champion and he developed roof of sport, which is a great gym in Milwaukee, a top gym, developed world champions like Anthony Pettis. So he was, you know, he was a pioneer. It was one of the guys that had to figure it out. And you know, he spent time in Thailand. They all they all learned it. They had to learn. And because it was just the best place in Thailand to go. Is it Fukat? Is it Bangkok? Like where they go? There's so many good places. Thailand's the real motherland of Muay Thai, obviously. And it's like, you know, Pukat's amazing. Bangkok's amazing. I mean, there's so many amazing gyms that are in Thailand. There are tough guys. There's whole strips in Fukat. My wife and I were there in vacation once and we just stumbled on this whole street. And you could do. There was sort of American style boxing. There was there was a CrossFit type thing. Then there was that tiger Muay Thai and a bunch of other Muay Thai facilities. And then there's like street vendors that would work cooking meals specifically for people who are there training. Like you could buy a beautiful hard-boiled eggs and avocado and chicken strips and this is like high protein just catered to the people who come from around the world to train for like five, six weeks in a clinic. And there's people that do it just recreationally. My friend Mark, he's a business man. He's in his 60s. And he did it? He went over to Thailand. Did he survive? Well, I mean, he spars all the, I saw him the other day at a black eye. He's in his 60s. I'm like, what are you doing, man? So if you were starting from scratch, you, and you wanted to be an MMA, would you do? Like you go to Thailand and do like two months there and then go to Dagestan to learn how to wrestle. Is that, that would be the best combo? If you were starting out, if you were a kid, I would say wrestling. Wrestling is number one. Yeah. That's the most important thing to learn because if a guy can take you down, he could do whatever he wants to. If you could hold you down and beat you up. If you don't know how to wrestle, you can't fight. Right. You need at least to learn wrestling, just to understand wrestling, take down defense. But you did, you did too later in life, didn't you? Yes. Right. That didn't start to just do until I was 29, I think. Yeah. And who do you like right now? Who do you think is the most interesting fighter to watch these days? Oh, there's so many. It's impossible to say the most interesting. There's a guy from Spain, Iliad to Paris. Yeah. Yeah. He's what David Goggins calls uncommon amongst uncommon men. Much more confident. Thank you. Thank you. I'm good. He's just incredibly talented. We're weirdly talented. Like his last three fights, he knocked out three all time grades. A hallway. Yeah. A hallway, Alexander. And Charles O'Bare. Right. Volcanovski, who's like one of the greatest freth weights of all time, knocked him out, knocked out Max Holloway, another one of the greatest freth weights of all time. Right. And then Charles O'Bare, one of the greatest lightweight of all time. He knocks out three guys in three fights. And there's no one has a resume like that. And he's not like, as I understand, he was a Greco Roman guy. Right. And he became a boxer later on. He's just how do you describe it? How do you describe like, so I'm not, I'm not knowledgeable in this area, but the way he, almost looks like he has a Philly shell. Mm hmm. He's not a Philly shell, what he does with one of them. It's a little bit of that. Well, he has amazing defense. It's just amazing awareness and he pattern recognition, technique. It's like, he's a combination of all things, right? Incredible confidence, incredible intelligence, insane discipline, work ethic. But just great training methods, like he does everything right. And then insane confidence, like his confidence is insane. When he fought Charles Olivera for the lightweight title, he celebrated his victory the night before. He had a party to celebrate the night before the fight and then went out and knocked Charles out in the first round. And said he was going to knock Charles out in the first round. That's incredible. One punch, boom. But you know what? You know what? You know what? You know what? You know what? You know what? You know who else did that was GSP. Oh, he took that card. And he went down, but he recovered quickly. Yep. He was talking to me about how, because I said to him, like in politics, you get hit, you get hit, right? And not not physically if you're lucky, but you have to be able to get up quickly and react to it. And I asked him, how did you do it? How did you like, how does your brain go from taking that kind of hit to getting back in the fight and turning it around? And he said he like it's too very deep breath through the nose and then out through the mouth and get some oxygen back into your system and focus your mind. I thought that was an incredible lesson. Well, I mean, it's all in how you get kicked, because you kid just get knocked out. And then it's over. It is nothing you do. If you get shut off, you get shut off. Right. Certain people get shut off. It just, you just get kicked. You can get kicked and it kind of glances off of you or you can get kicked and it just slams right in the side of your neck and the lights go dark. Right. But if you're, if you're still able to recover and think quickly, it's incredible to have that kind of pre-programming to ready for a moment like that. Well, I mean, that's a big part of his, what I was talking about, the, the camp that he comes from. I mean, for us, the hobby is like one of the most intelligent and one of the most brilliant trainers in the sport. Who's this? For us, the hobby. He's the guy from Montreal. Oh, that's right. So he's the guy who trains just as trans GSP. O GSP. Oh, yes. Okay. And I mean, I think that is, that's a big part of why GSP was able to recover. If they prepare for everything, right? You know, it's like, there's nothing left to chance. Like he, he hires people to try to knock George out in training. That was one of the things he did. He would give them more money if they could knock him out. So they would just, so he would be like fully prepared when he was fighting. Like they leave no stone uncovered. Don't you have to like budget though the number of heads. Yeah, 100%, but he was pretty confident that George, I mean, it wasn't like he was doing this with the beginner. Right. With a world champion, one of the greatest of all time. Okay. You know, he wanted George to be in danger. You know, so George had to fight like he was going to fight inside the octagon. Right. In danger. Cause John Jones said somewhere that he had like every time he gets hit hard in, in camp. He's, he said like I just, that, that's part of my brain budget. That's, that's taken away. Well, that's why John's so smart. He, he recognized that. There's a lot of people that don't think that. John also famously won't take a fight on short notice. Is that right? He wants to be fully prepared for a fighter. Even a guy like when he fought Chelsea and they offered him a Chelsea and fight on short notice and he said no, like there is not a time, no disrespect to Chelsea. He's a great fighter. Mm hmm. No, there's not a time on this life in this earth where Chelsea on it is going to be John Jones. It's just not going to happen. He could have taken that fight on one day's notice and still beat Chelsea on it. He's that much better than him. But he still wouldn't take it. He's like no, I want to be fully 100% prepared. That's smart though. Yeah. Also he hated chill. And so he wanted to make sure that there was not a chance that chill could do anything to him that he would have been able to wouldn't have been able to do if he was trained. Do these guys hate each other? Sometimes. Yeah. But most of them, do they respect or is it, it depends on the fight? It really depends. Like when Iliad Taporia fought, um, Chaliverra, he actually apologized to him before the fight. I said I'm sorry it has to be you. I really like you. It's kind of crazy. He's got to be careful. But he hated people too. He's hated people he fought too. I mean, there's some people that just rub you the wrong way. There's some people, there's strategies to get inside your head and fuck with you and for you to fight with emotion. Well, he'd be with, um, Connor McGregor. With McGregor, he really hated McGregor. He wasn't going to almost didn't let go when the tap out. Oh yeah. Yeah. That was that was something else. Is Connor ever going to come back do you think? Only Connor knows. I mean, if he's going to, he has to do it soon. I mean, I think he's 30 holes. You know, 37. He's Jack now, eh? Yes, but I'm not more. Oh, he came back down. He was on the Mexican supplements for a while. Okay. Because he was trying to recover from his leg break. Right. Dustin Poirier, I remember that. He got on some stuff to try to recover for that. I don't know what he got on, but clearly it helped. He got huge. He got superjacked. The problem with getting superjacked like that is then you get addicted to what got you superjacked because if you're on steroids, you feel like Superman. You know, you feel like you could just run through walls and then you get off of it. And now your endocrine system has to kind of catch up to the fact that you've been giving it exogenous testosterone for all these months. And so that takes a long time for you to get back to a normal healthy level. See a village shit. It's hard for these guys to get off of steroids. Right. I can imagine you get addicted to being that's right. I've never done it. I don't plan on it. How old is he? 37. That's not there. Who's the oldest fighter that's ever been in the octagon? Like who's a serious competitor? Probably Randy Kotaur. I think Randy won the world title. The world heavyweight title in his 40s. Wow. Yeah. But Randy didn't even start his mixed martial arts career. I think I was there at his first fight in 1997. And I think he was 34 or 35, but we had ever had an MMA fight. He was just an elite wrestler who made his way into MMA because there's no real professional outlet for actual amateur wrestling. Did you ever interact with the Gracies? Because I remember way back in, like I remember MMA around UFC 2. It was the second one. That was when it really kicked me. The first one was a little bit strange. That big fat guy was tooth went flying out. The number two was the one with Shamrock and Gracie and Dan Severn. Was he in number two? Dan Severn. The rest of the year? He might have been three or four. But that was kind of the first generation of big names. Oh, always crazy. He changed the world. With his, he was a slow style though, man. Like he had had patience to watch him because he'd, he'd just lie on his back and wait, wait, wait. Well, with Dan Severn, he did because he had a catch him in a triangle. Right. And then no one even understand what was going on. Like why does he, he's got his legs wrapped around him? What the hell is going on? And then also Dan Severn's tapping out. You're like, this is crazy. Eventually tapped him and no one even understand what was going on like why is he he's got legs wrapped around him what the hell is going on And then also Dan severance tapping out you like this is crazy to a man who weighed literally a hundred pounds more than him or close to it right On top of them and hoist beat well that Dan severing didn't appear to have any finishing moves like he's thing I got you on your back. I've been to you. I've won the wrestling match Give you a little nugis right Well sandwiches like by Ben of course eventually that anaconda comes in and either chokes you out or takes your arm Well no one understood you jitsu until hoist came around You know, I mean was his dad wasn't it his dad that introduced it to the family his dad and his uncle So it was Carlos Gracie and Iliograce who are the real founders of Brazilian jitsu and then a Carlson Gracie Okay, and those guys were the pioneers and they were having no rules fights in the 1930s and 40s Wow Yeah, and did they bring it over from Japan? My aid up brought it over from Japan and they taught the Gracies and then You know, Iliograce famously had a match with Camora who is a Japanese judoka who broke Ilios arm with a Camora and that's how that that technique That's why it's called a Camora yeah in catch wrestling they call it a double wristlock Okay, but we call it a Camora because Camora broke Iliograce's arm with this Iliograce refused to tap and it's like Eventually it snapped his arm Wow, that's incredible. They're having these long no rules fights in Brazil long before Anybody had any idea what MMA was in America and then hoist his brother Hickson who was the best out of all Them Hickson was fighting people when he was 18 and like these big arenas brilliant in Brazil. Yeah, unbelievable and then they then I guess Dana White brought it in with you UFC no wasn't Dana it was there there was another organization before Zufa owned the UFC and this other organization they started it with hoary and Gracie So hoary and Gracie was the guy who founded the UFC Okay, and originally they were talking about putting like a moat around the cage having crocodiles And they wanted to be like completely insane because what it was for hoary and hoary is a brilliant man And what for him what he wanted was to promote jujitsu and he's like This is gonna be the best way to open up schools all over the country and to show this art that my father created Right so they had really taken some of the ground techniques of judo and really refined them Right a razor sharp edge and and also one of the things that helped a lot was that Ilio was a small man. He was only like 145 pounds and so he had to use only technique and leverage He couldn't rely on brute strength and so it was one of the best Sort of advertisements is to have hoists who was also fairly small. He's only 175 pounds Beat all these big giant muscle bound guys with pure technique because they didn't understand what he was doing And he was like this is gonna be brilliant. This is gonna and it worked. I mean the the name Gracie and jujitsu It's everywhere now like we even have them in Canada where these these schools will have the Gracie name and obviously They have no attachment to Gracie's you're the Brazilian Gracie's but everybody wants to learn the Gracie style Well, they probably do have a like Gracie baja which is a huge Affiliate of gems that they're all over the country. Okay. They're everywhere. Are they good? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, there's like It's very difficult to have a bad jujitsu gym today. Why is that because they're so contemporary it's too competitive Okay, there's too many good people there's too many good gyms like in Austin alone Austin alone has like 10 amazing jujitsu schools. Is that right? Oh, yeah, do you go do you go and roll quite? There's a place right up the street. Don't plan a jujitsu, which is the school that I started with okay in California Well, I started with them a chat Well, I actually started with Hicks and great. I started with Hicks and Gracie And then I went to Carlson Gracie and then I and that was just because I didn't know There was any difference in the Gracie's and then Carlson Gracie was closer to my house I was like oh, look at this Gracie place. It's closer. That's when I was a white belt I didn't know anything and then when they closed when that gym closed then I went to John jock, my chattos and so I started training there in 1998 and that was that was in the valley in California But then one of John jocks black belts my best friend Eddie Bravo He started 10 planet jujitsu and then I trained there as well. Okay And in Canada, we see a lot of places where they do Muay Thai and jujitsu You're striking and you're grappling all in one So it's planted here has a Muay Thai program. Oh, is that right? Yeah, that's all those now. A lot of those gyms have that you went to your first as a commentator You did it like for free didn't you? No, no, I I got paid in the early days in the 90s in the 1997 But it wasn't much I was losing money, but when the UFC was purchased by Zufa in 2001 That was when I was on fear factor and I Met Dana white and I became friends with him and he asked me as a favor to do commentary on this one show that they had UFC 37 and a half it was on Fox Sports Whatever it was that there was a cable channel. So it was best am sports show period had this UFC show And he said would you do me a favor and just do commentary on this one event right? That's okay I'll do it for this one and it's like I want you to do it again and then it was a girl So I I was like I just wanted to do it for fun Like for me is like I like going to the fights and I like going with my friends and having a good time and I did like the first 15 of them for free. I just They knew they were hemorrhaging money and I didn't need any money Love that you love in there. It was like a candy store Well, so it was very happy to try to promote this thing because for me It was the ultimate expression of martial arts like we need to find out what's the best style right and I'd kind of I'd been so engrossed in that world in Japan with pride and all these other organizations that they had over there It's like what happens if an alligator fights with a tiger What happened with a lion fights with a bear we got to match them up and find out well It's humans versus humans. It's just style You want to waste your time doing something that didn't work right and there was a lot of people that waste their time doing stuff that didn't work And we didn't really know what that was until the UFC came along and then we're like oh and now the evolution of martial arts from 1993 when the UFC started to 2026 in those years the martial arts have evolved more than they have in the last 30,000 year right well It's likely the gap between theory and practice. Yes, and like Bruce Lee when he when he started Wing Chun But he said that a lot of it was just ornamental and he called it dry land swimming Mmm, it's like you know you wouldn't actually do that in a fight and then he got into a lot of contention with the the scholars of the art form It's a very beautiful art form Wing Chun, but I don't know if it I can't imagine it works that well Well, it is like Wing Chun is effective There's a lot of things that you're going to fight is between like a moi ta guy and a wing chung guy who would come out The moi ta guy. Yeah, but it doesn't mean the wing chung is not effective and you could use wing chung in moi ta Okay, or in an MMA fight, but you have to know everything. That's the reality of it. It's like type one though Like type one knows not effective by itself in an MMA fight But if you know MMA and you know type one though Then you could do like with Edson Barbosa did the Terry Edham and knock him out with a wheel kick It's very popular fashion like But there's like a big blend right like yes and some moi ties and karate some yes That's what MMA is mixed martial arts. I mean it's like you take all and that's Bruce Lee's philosophy Absorbable it's useful right? He was the real first mixed martial artist and when it was very dangerous to do that Because people hated him. I mean they would attack him He would have he would have to have fights with people because they they thought that he was disrespecting their art Right now and he combined western boxing and wrestling He learned judo from Jean Lebel he learned things from everybody He learned karate, sivat he learned all these different martial arts and was absorbing what's useful And putting his own so jikun doe his style was really the first mixed martial arts got that right? Yeah, do people use it anymore? Well, yeah, there's jikun no schools sure yeah, yeah I mean in a lot of what krav magaz is really martial art is like kind of a Combination of things along the same lines of the way Bruce Lee did it is it is krav magra a good effective martial arts system every martial art system is effective if you have a great instructor, okay, right? but on their own Like the best styles are the really strong styles like jijitsu moy Thai wrestling Those are the best style western boxing those are the best styles on their own. Okay, but what krav maga is is a combination of all those styles And so if you have a great instructor and krav maga. Yeah, you'll you'll learn great moy Thai You'll learn great jijitsu you it's essentially mixed martial arts But with a lot of emphasis on real world applications treat fights, you know dirty stuff like eye gouging You know poking people in the eye kicking them in the nuts yikes stuff that works But that's what you like well if you see it in there My may fight all the time. I got gets poked in the eyes like hang on and he has to stop There's not against the rules punched in it's against the rules So this guy's getting punched and kicked and look Tom Aspen all he was in the heavyweight title fight and he got I poked in the first round. He's had to have two surgeries since that on his eyes And he hasn't made able to fight they had to stop the fight in the first round from an eye poke It's very effective but in krav maga though like go for the eye because in a real world fight for your life scenario You're in a war I mean there is for these really military I think exactly so they have to prepare for you know unusual situations where you're trying to survive in a you know a situation where your arm has been your weapon has been removed and You're just trying to fight for your life exactly We're just in your in a situation with hand to hand combat you need to learn how you need to know every you need If a guy takes you down you can't be lost. Oh, we have to get back up so I can fight No, you have to be able to fight on the ground And that's the idea of it like incorporate jujitsu incorporate leg kicks moy Thai western boxing even Gikun Do techniques even wing chunk techniques really there's a lot of hand trapping and things in wing chunk That can be very looks really cool what they do with that wooden Dummy yeah, it looks There's exactly I've never really got into that But if you do get into that you'll learn blocking techniques and you'll actually work. Yeah, sure Okay, but you don't work if you know the other stuff They won't work if a guy just shoots a double on you and takes you down and starts pounding You don't know what to do when you're on the bottom right you have to know how to then this is what really MMA is Taught the world like you have to be able to defend yourself everywhere Standing up on the ground you have to be effective in all the realms right But still we have a lot of people that are pure specialists that do really well in mixed martial arts because they're so good in one area Like Alex Pereira who is the middleweight champ in light heavyweight champion and now he's going up to heavyweight He's gonna be fighting in the White House card Alex Pereira is one of the greatest kickboxers of all time He's a two division world champion and kickboxer, but his style is all kickboxing But he just developed take down defense you can do it all you can do it all But he doesn't submit anybody if you're fighting him you're gonna get you're gonna get it's gonna be a stand-up fight Unless you could take him down and he's not gonna try to take you down He's gonna try to fuck you up. He's gonna try to knock you into another dimension. Thanks for the warning I'll try to avoid the kind by the street Why do you say I ever saw is there's this video of John Jones on the street somewhere and he bumped into He was talking and he leaned on some guys motorcycle I think he might have been in Asia or something the guy had no idea who he was and he started screaming at him Oh, no, and John said I'm very very sorry and he turned around He ran away like he was terrified and it was obviously he wasn't in any danger But it was so hilarious that this guy had no idea who he was begging a fight with that's hilarious No idea is like flash before his eyes, but he but he took it well because he was like, you know I don't have anything to prove yeah John's not a type of guy that would do anything to I mean also What a lawsuit, you know, oh yeah your your answer weapons. Yeah, his whole body's a weapon but Most of those guys are really nice guys in real life is that right? Yeah because they get all their aggression now They don't have anything to prove they're not the type of part of that They know what they can do. They don't have to prove it to anybody You should come to Winnipeg. They have a fight coming up. I think it's in I think it's in April You have seen it and what yeah, I've avoided UFC's in Canada. Well come on. I've avoided just because of the government Just what was going on as a protest. I was like this is so fucked. Well, we'll come back up and what you win I'll go up there. Well, we should get you a before-game minister. I promise. I'll do all the UFC events that they have in Canada We need you up in Canada to come come do any of your comedy shows and I would be great for I still work going up there. I still have going to Massey Hall. Yeah. I used to Toronto. Yeah. I love performing there I did you used to Montreal and How old were you when you were in Montreal? Oh, I start I think the first time I was up there was like 25 such a beautiful city Yeah, it's gorgeous there. I love you come back. It's a major beautiful province amazing food Shout out to Joe B for my favorite restaurants in the world. It's a Montreal. Yeah, they're Montreal is a great place and you should come up to the prairies to go to the Calgary stampede I've heard that's awesome. Oh, it's amazing. I've been to Edmonton. I've been to Alberta. Yeah Yeah, I've performed in Edmonton a few times and I've hunted in Alberta where well my friends John and Jen Rivet they have they have a Guide I mean the guide people up in Northern Alberta. It's all like Black bear hunting. Yeah, so it's like there's a lot of great hunting. I don't hunt myself But there's a ton of great hunting a lot of hunters in Alberta. Oh, yeah, well, there's talk about Alberta separating that won't happen What was that about it won't happen? People some people are frustrated, but they You know, there's some legitimate frustrations But at the end of the day Canada is gonna be united and Albert and this I'm born and raised Alberta and Albertans are seriously patriotic and very patriotic. Yeah, they're great people hardworking some of the nicest people you're very great people Harder they are a hearty people cold up there. It is Exactly you got to be tough to survive the cold in Canada car of a country like we have out of that cold weather on that big open land but people just keep on going and Alberta's got a real kind of rugged individualism and people People love their their agriculture with great ranches and Alberta beautiful grasslands in Saskatchewan Doesn't Brock Lesnar have a place up there? I didn't I didn't know that. I think Brock Lesnar really bought land in Alberta Really think he owns a ranch up there actually I had heard that from somebody Yeah, I never seen him fell in love with it. Well, he's a big hunter as well Right he fell in love with it up there because it's just it's so magnificent. It's so gorgeous It's a great country and the woods are so dense and beautiful and you got wolves and bears and moose and everything Up there it's amazing country the Canadian Rockies are spectacular as well There they're you know worldwide attraction You know you go to Lake Louise. It looks like a tropical lake because it's all this runoff from the mountain melt and You think you were in the tropics because it's this this turquoise green. That's where I grew up I love I love Calgary. I love southern Alberta. That's really my home and So you got to come to the stamp you'd greatest outdoor show on earth Lot of Texans go up for the the stamped because it's a rodeo. It's a huge rodeo. Yeah people don't think cowboy Canada They don't think of that, but yeah Calgary. Yeah. They've got some serious guys there. No. They really do. Yeah Look, I love Canada I just if you did your comedy show in Calgary, you'd get a massive turnout It was great think it over it I see when you was supposed to be up there before COVID I was supposed to do a show up there for 420 for April 20th. I was gonna do it in Vancouver That's another great city every year. I would do these 420 shows like these You know 420 is the marijuana number and Canada now you guys have legal marijuana too I'm in legal for 10 years. They should have in America. It's so ridiculous They just they just recently decided to make it schedule three is it a state by state? Yes Okay, it's legal in the last dates, but it's still not legal federally. It's goofy if alcohol is legal marijuana is far safer It should be legal. It's ridiculous. It's also a personal freedom thing. Leave people alone It's like no one's Robin Banks smoking weed fucking killer neighbors. It's crazy. It's like that's a personal Yeah, it's not it's not heroin. It's not opiates. It's not like Maybe you shouldn't do it if you have mental health problems, right? But there's a lot of people that just like take a pot gummy and go to bed and it makes them sleep better like leave them alone Like leave people alone let let people have a glass whiskey let people have a glass of wine with dinner leave them alone Like stop that's coming up with laws Where you can impose your values and your morals and your judgments on other people Let them have make their own personal look if you want to eat a fucking cheeseburger Eat a cheeseburger You know if you want to go and have five big max you should be able to I don't think you should do it But I don't think there should be a law stopping you and I think that's that should apply to a lot of things in life And we'd be a lot better all the the bottom line is as if you cannot trust a man to govern himself How can you trust him to govern for others like if you think if you think that Human nature is so flawed that people cannot make decisions for themselves then how could you possibly trust human nature to make decisions for other people to impose decisions on their lives and Who watches the watchmen right where to constantly told right? We need to be kind of guided by these people from ivory towers, but who are these angels? Anyway, they're just human beings like everyone else So when you give them more power and more you give them the power to impose their will on on people then that ultimately gets abused Yes So even you're right even when somebody is doing something that I don't agree with and I would think it would be better for all of us If they didn't do it The the the mal that is done by giving me the power to impose my decision making on them is worse than the benefit of Trying to direct them towards a better decision Well, so that's my philosophy. That's why I like you well That's right a lot of sense. It's pretty simple I think all the best things in life are simple. You know we over complicate things government is way too complicated You know, I think we need to get back to this simplicity the greatest speech in the English language was Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address 271 words, you know Einstein compressed Mass and energy into a five character equation Lee, you know Bruce Lee was an advocate of simplicity like simplicity is is a virtue and I think we have to get back to simplicity especially in government simpler clear Easier to do to manage that's the that's the kind of the philosophical take I'm I pursue Well, I appreciate that I think like That philosophy in that perspective from a leader is what we need in this world, you know And well, I think leaders have to have humility because the problem is that if you are an ego maniac and you're in power Anywhere in the world then you're gonna want to just continually impose new rules and laws to make yourself bigger Whereas if you believe in freedom then you have to take you have to be able to say to yourself I don't know better for this other person. He knows better with for him and You know, it's hard but politicians have to think that you have to trust the people But you know nobody wants to have he left people alone on their gravestone I wonder how he built this he he imposed that he made this grand Initiative that he imposed on the people in order to have a legacy My legacy is just to let other people build their legacies in their own lives I think the idea of forging a legacy based on controlling people and imposing your will is ludicrous exactly yeah and The problem is history is littered with people like that absolutely Alexander the Great Genghis Khan There's so many people that impose their will and left a legacy, but is that good? I don't think it is It's also their dead Doesn't matter No, nobody whacked by walk by one of those magnificent tombs in Petra and said well, I'd really like to be inside there exactly what what is happening while you're alive It's what's really significant and the most The most impactful thing like do well do good for the people and I think Your message resonates with me thank you. I was a Canadian. I would vote for you 100 percent. Thank you. Thank you for that. Well, it's It's you know, it's a privilege to do this work and I'm I consider it very humbling and I'm very proud to be Canadian and To take the message of Canada here to our American friends well, I'm glad you're here doing that And I think this is gonna have a big impact And I really hope it moves the needle up in Canada absolutely and down here We got to get these tariffs gone. Yeah get the tariffs gone. Well, let's work it out right on it out And if you win, I'm coming up there. I promise well, we're gonna try to get you up there I'm gonna keep working on you Okay, and you look at that that may belief on your new kettlebell every day eventually we're gonna We're gonna work subliminally into your subconscious and get you look like I said You don't have to sell me on Canada. I love that gift. So thank you so much