Joe Roman Fong. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. I'm y'all. I love not. I'm so excited to be here with you today. Yeah. This is our first podcast coming out as our true selves. We're furry. Yeah, we've been holding it in forever. This is my true identity. And you know what? It just eats me alive to not tell how we met at a furry con. Well, we didn't know that we met there. Remember? Yeah, I didn't know who you were for a long time. Yeah, we didn't know. I'm like, oh my god, you're meow meow. Dude, it blew my mind. I mean, to me, that is proof for an assimilation. Mm. Because what are the odds? They're not good. What are the odds, man? The odds are also not good that I'm going to keep this fucking helmet on. Oh my gosh. It's not good for me. I'm not keeping this on. I can barely breathe. How did I do it? I don't know. They fuck with these things on. How do you fuck with this on? I have heroes. Those people are heroes. Total respect for furry. Respect for the furry community. Who are you? I got the feet on and everything. It's like beep grump fucking. Yeah, it's very hot in here. If you can fuck with this on, you're an American hero. Yeah. That's how I feel. David Coggins, me use it, but I'm one of these things. Fuck for an hour. He should. Yeah, you think you're so cool running for a thousand miles? How about fuck for four and a half minutes with this on? I can't fuck for four and a half minutes without it. This is like sprinting uphill. This is really brutal. And just thinking about padding around, remodel it in one of these things. I get it. Or lando. I want to eat it somewhere. I get it when I put it on. I get it. I know why they do it. I don't know why all of them do it. Wait, why do you think they do it? I think they do it because it offers you an anonymity that is impossible any other way. And it turns you into your image. The visual that people get of you is this adorable cute mascot. Everybody loves a mascot. The mascot is literally here to pump everybody up. And yeah, and they don't talk and everybody loves them. Yeah. People at Disneyland, same thing. Wait, they don't talk? No. They don't talk. Like if you meet goofy, goofy doesn't say jack shit to you. We went to goofy's kitchen. goofy doesn't talk. Yeah, it's like I can't do it. Oh my god. Oh, so hard to breathe. It's so hard to breathe. Horrible. How about those fucking people that work at Disneyland that wear these things to walk around in the heat in the summer? Respect to them. Dude, those Disneyland, like the people who do this at Disneyland, they party. I heard it's like insane when they get off work. Like they fucking party. First of all, not even their fault. Their brains have been cooked all day. Do you know what kind of effect that must have? Oh my god. Cognitive function. Dude, like while we're bitching because they made us wear masks on planes. They're coming around in a hot box. I bet they made them wear a mask under their stupid mask. Guarantee it. I bet they're guaranteed it. Everybody does it. Yeah. It works. You had to mask up in your goofy outfit. Oh, dude, these are incredible. And it's kind of sad that we can't wear pussies of all the costumes we've worn. This I think this is the least time we've spent, even the hoods. But I was almost like hyperventilating in there. Dude, I was panicking. I didn't even see this awful wall. Yeah. It's terrible. But I don't you get it though, if you were like a very tortured, socially awkward person, your life has just been a mess. But you are, for whatever reason, attracted sexually to the idea of it or maybe not even sexually, maybe just attracted the idea of it. But then you do it and you just, you get to be not just innocuous, not just like someone that somebody gets picked on, not just not that. But instead attractive, you're this adorable thing. You're adorable. Hey, and people want, they come to you with a different energy. Dude, I've seen some really hot furry porn. Like I've seen some incredible furry porn. What's the worst furry porn? Have you ever seen something like God, you guys aren't even trying? I, those are still shots, usually. Like weird polaroids and stuff. Like, and generally those are like solo furries who are banging a stuffed animal. Like, you know, that sucks. That's not cool. That's not cool, but something, do they put a flashlight in a stuffed animal? No, they're not that advanced. They just rip a hole in the fucking things butt and just like leave their crustages on it as some arc of achievement or something, really bad. Oh, really bad. Human beings are so weird in so many ways. Yes. But it's like, it's so funny. It's like media, like Norman Rockwell paintings. There's just like image of us that we are when we're at our best, the family dinner table in a 1980s movie. Yeah. Yeah. That's how we're at our best. Everyone's getting along. How school going, junior? Yeah. Junior's doing great. But the reality is, like, there's no license to get a person. You don't have a license to become pregnant. You don't, you don't have a license to become pregnant. You don't have to go through any qualification process. Right. Literally the most important thing for the future of the human race. Yeah. That people who have children and raise those children are capable of doing it. You're capable of raising a well-adjusted person. Yeah. Like any person growing up as a human being today, baby to grown up. Like you're born today and you've got to become a grown up in this fucking wacky world. Good luck being normal. Oh my god. This is having kids right now. And just having a vague understanding of Kerzweil's predictions for the singularity. Yeah. And just considering with my kid, I will tell him, with the car, I'm like, probably when you're old enough to drive, they won't have steering wheels anymore. You're probably not going to be driving the way I do. Because definitely, don't you think like, if they can just prove, see this meatheads like me, that would be like, fuck that bro. I want to drive my own fucking car. Yeah. But if they can eliminate all deaths, you're going to have to take cars like that to a track. You're going to have to take the cars that I enjoy. You're going to take them to a track and drive around. Sure. They're going to be rides. It's not going to be your transportation. You don't think in 10 years that it's going to be. It's very possible. Very possible. It'll be a civil, like a rule fight. Like there'll be some dispute about whether or not people accept that. Oh, yeah. It's going to be a freedom issue with a lot of folks. It is a freedom issue. It is. Well, it certainly is if you have a totalitarian government, because there's only one way that a car can drive itself autonomously. It has to be connected to insane technology that allows all sorts of things, like what a Tesla does. Like you get updates online on your Tesla. They just send you an update. Sure. They fix things. They make things better. They make the auto driving feature better. And if that's the case, like if someone just decides to shut your car off, you're not allowed to drive done. And we don't like your views on COVID vaccines. No, yeah. So are your tweets. Yeah. I don't want that to fight. I want to tell you what, you think about the world and life and love. Yeah. You're confusing people. Yeah. You didn't jog today. You don't think exactly the way I want you to think. So we're going to steer you and everybody who's paying attention in the same direction. And everybody's paying attention part is huge. Because there's more self-policing than there is policing. There's more people that get scared of not going along with narratives than there are people enforcing that. You know what that's called? Cops in the head. That's a name for it. Cops in the head. It's like, this is when I was in college. There, I don't remember who came up with it. But basically, they're studying neighborhoods that had huge police presences. Like bad areas, hyper low income areas that just like that, well, you could do the math. So basically, the cops realized they didn't have to patrol anymore after a certain amount of time. Because people assimilate the police state inside of them. And just like you're saying, now you're policing yourself. And that is the ultimate when you think about trying to save money, when you think about controlling populations. Or when you think about the huge problem of empire is once you spread out too far, it's incredibly expensive to keep everything supplied and everything in control. And to keep your commanders doing what you say. And so the best thing for an empire is for people to not even know that they're there. But to be following the general prescription of the emperor. That's the ultimate empire. You don't put up statues of yourself. Don't like put your fucking face on the coin. What you want to do is get your philosophy into the brain of the people that you have. I think the problem today is that there's so many more interesting narratives than the official narrative. There's, what? It used to be that you had a president that would stand up and talk to people. And he would give these speeches that everyone would listen to. Yeah. And that's Eisenhower at the end of his terms, when he's saying he's warning America about the military and industrial complex. That's so crazy. There's a machine he's warning us. that there's a machine that wants to go to war. And you have to be very careful that. He's warning us about that. And this is like, you could tell the next president to not ever say that. And everybody else sort of steps in line. So you tell the next president, don't talk about that. You talk about the conflicts overseas. You talk about the desire to spread democracy. Yeah. You talk about these people that are a threat to everyone because they have weapons of mass destruction. Like you've got to follow a very, very, very specific narrative. And that's all we had forever. Forever. And so there was all these people that would have cocktail parties and they would meet at coffee shops. And then go, do you know what's really going on? Right. Because this is what I think. I think the CIA is giving people LSD. Like what? What the fuck are you talking about? Yeah. You know those meetings where people in South Central were like, I think the government's bringing drugs in here. And everybody's like, no fucking one. Yeah. No way. They wouldn't do that. Right. They wouldn't do that. But if you were, I mean, let's pretend you're a really good guy in your government agent. Right. You're the best. You want nothing but freedom in America and spread democracy around the globe. But Congress will improve funding some rebels. And there's the only one way. You got to get this guy out of office. All right. This guy's not playing ball. Yeah. With the agenda, he's a terrible dictator. Yeah. You got to get rid of him. And we need to fund this. We need to fund these rebels. So we're just going to sell some drugs. So crazy. But if you think about the fact that if you're in the DEA, or if you're in the CIA or the FBI, or any major Intel organization, they know the futility of the amount of drugs that have been brought into this country. And there's reason why, because there's a demand in this country. Right. You're not going to change it. You're not going to change it. And you see all these fucking scumbags, making billions. Yeah. And you're like, well, why don't I make some fucking money? Right. Why don't we make some fucking money and do some good with it? Right. Sure. That's the all over North story. Dude, here's the perfect business model. You create a situation where you are selling drugs to people and then arresting them and taking your drugs back, plus all their stuff. And then reselling the drugs, rinse and repeat. And you know who to arrest because you're selling it to the people. You just call your friend. And you just keep, it's basically like throwing out fishing nets. Man, you just throw out the nets, let them sell the drugs. Long enough to get a shit ton of money, some nice cars, pull the nets back in. You got the drugs. You got the cars. You got the money. It's an incredible, and also the, you know, I'm sometimes suspicious regarding like the idea that they incinerate the drugs that they, they cop. It's game. They, someone come along, go, we got that. We'll take care of it. We'll incinerate it. Get the incinerator. Some fucking guys, they just got out of the naval academy. You know, like we got it. Yeah, we got it. No problem. Yeah, they fucking scored that off to some special boat. Yeah. And there's a precedent for this. I mean, this isn't conspiracy. Like that was proven that like this shit is, remember that CIA playing the crash while the cocaine down it? Tons of fucking shit. It was over, it was overweight. That's why crashed because it had so much coke. Reed took him down. I think it had something crazy like a thousand pounds of coke. That is so much coke. I can't even imagine how much coke that is. How much was it? How many pounds was it? 3.3 tons. Oh my God. 3.3. How much does an elephant weigh? How many elephants were the coke is that? Oh, dude, that's crazy. That's CIA coke too. You know, that's not bad coke. That's like something incredible. Oh my God, it's pure. Pureock flake. The stuff that Eric clapped and you should get. Jesus Christ, who makes your entire body go numb. I don't like coke though. But you do look at all the coke that he had. Oh my God. That's the same. Oh my God. That is fucking crazy. Look at that. I can't get this fucking shit. Yeah, it happened to me in the five seconds. It's a bunch of little hairs. Holy shit, man. You want to napkin or something? No, I'm all right. How many bags of that do you think it consumed at like an average Coachella? How many bags of that the Joey Diaz do during his prime? That's what I went to. No. What is Joe? That might be like Joey Diaz's cocaine career right there. Yeah. Oh, man, that'd be so cool. If there was a way to look at all the drugs you've done, like if you could like, you know, have them laid out in front of you over the course of a lifetime. Oh my God. You'd be terrified. It'd be a room. It would be exciting. It might have weed. Oh, dear. The volume, just a sheer volume. Booze. Oh. Just think it all of just fucking miles of ketamine. Wow. And if you could do a chart to the size of your room versus the bad decisions you've made in your life, I bet you would find some correlation. Yes. That's for sure. 100%. Absolutely, man. Yeah. You do have to, I mean, there's just no way around it. This is why I think karma is a wonderful and perfect way to articulate this. Which is just like, where are your at? Everything around you. That's your karma. And that's you. This is your karma. And then I love that because it keeps me from going to victim. And I look around at everything. You're like, whatever it is, good. You did that for yourself. Bad. That to yourself. And you just have to deal with it. But you know, there's enough. But not necessarily. Right. Babies get shot and drive by us. Well, yeah. OK, yes. The baby thing. I mean, I've heard there's some theoretical. There's two ways to look at it. One, Occam's Razor. It's the same problem like Thea's face in trying to explain why awful things happen to babies. You know what I think? What? I think karma's an element. Yeah. It's that element of existence. But it's not a rule. It's like the evil people live to be 100. Get away with it. Well, for karma to really work, you need reincarnation. That's where the math goes into the unquantifiable. So like, so for karma to really work, I mean, it could work in a very simple mechanistic way with just one life. But the idea is that there's different types of karma. So there's the karma that's happening right now. This is like a flowering karma. But there's karma like seeds of shit that you did a while ago. Like when I was sudden, someone calls you up and is like, hey, I'm your son. You're like, what? Like, yeah, I'm your kid. That's like that seed has been in you. And then it grows into the present moment. That's. And then there's karma that's the same idea, but from past lives. So that's where it gets really fucking weird. And I guess there's some very blurry way you could connect that to epigenetics. You know what I mean? It's like epigenetics is sort of the way like you get reincarnation into biology. Except it's obviously not reincarnation. It's your ancestors. But it's essentially the same concept except one is quantifiable the other is mystical. I wonder if epigenetics is, if you're imparting some of your mind, some of your thinking to a child. Yeah. Would, I wonder what effect it would have as the age you were when you had the child? Yeah. Sure. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, yeah. Your, help a chinos kid is gonna be amazing. Amazing. He's 82. 82. Shooting live rounds. Incredible. Into a 29 year old honey. And people are fucking mad at him. What do they matter? They're mad because they think if you're that old, you're not gonna be able to care for that child. Well, that's one, that's the, to me, if that's the most logical, if you are gonna be such an asshole that you wanna, that you're criticizing al Pacino for pro creating. Don't you want more Pacinos? He's a great fucking actor. And you know, but, but the other one is just like, that's that age gap is insurmountable. And why don't think it was his idea? No. Yeah, I think he, he didn't, he have a paternity test. Exclusive, this is a real special coming at this time. Al Pacino 83 breaks silence to celebrate 29 year old girlfriend's pregnancy. After claims he demanded paternity tests because she hoodwinked him. Yeah, there it is. The actor revealed his girlfriend, Nora Alfala was, we're expecting last week. And this report's claimed that Al was not pleased over the baby, but how do we know? You know, it's like people say things like that. Cause look right under which he has now confirmed. Underneath it says his voice is delayed. Sources told Daily Mail that wasn't true, which is now confirmed. So that means it wasn't true. Not true. They did not hoodwink him. So the way they phrased that, that's weird. Sources told Daily Mail that wasn't true, which he has now confirmed. But look at the headline. Look at the headline. Fuck an asshole. This is so crazy. They're basically saying this is not true. So he's delighted to have a baby with his girlfriend. Yeah. And so people made up this story and we read it because it's the headline. Why not just be like Al, but you know, chopped his kid into bits. And then underneath say he didn't chop his kid into bits. Look, he's walking around. He's smiling. He looks very special. Yeah. Listen, man, that multi aging doctors get him on the happy sauce. Who knows? Yeah, man. Look at that. Look at that. Look at these wearing comfortable shoes. So that's how it looks. That's fucking cool. Look at that. That would wear those shoes. So old men shoes. Wow. Look at him. Looks fine. He looks great. That's going for walks. How old is he? Who's that with him? No, that's that other actor guy, isn't it? No. It looks like you look like Andy Garcia a little bit. Yes. That's what I was going to say. Are you sure? No. It's probably his friend. Yeah. OK. Dude, things are doing Denver when you're dead. Underrated movie. I don't care yourself. It was like their version. It was like when pulp fiction had just come out, and everybody wanted everything to be fucking cool. OK. And things became cool. Yeah. Yeah. I remember that. It's cool. That's got to be cool for Tarantino to watch his echo out, like to watch it shape culture. That's so bad ass that you do that. That's amazing. He's very important. He's very important because his grandfather did, like his movies are fucking bananas. Like once upon a time in Hollywood was fucking crazy. And his grandfather did in a way like you know what a Tarantino movie is. Right. Have you seen Kill Bill? Have you seen in Gloria's Bachelors? Have you seen these movies? Yeah. Then shut the fuck up. Because you know what you're in for. Right. Whereas I think if you were a young director, and that was like your first film, people would go. The violence was so unnecessary, it was so egregious. It was so like the language, the way people would find criticism in it, I think. Yeah, you see in interviews, he is like so frustrated with like endless question he gets from hacker reporters who are like violence. What about the violence? Like he just is done with that. It must be, I mean, it's so annoying to get that same question over to make great movies. What, like when did journalism turn into scolding? Because it wasn't all, it wasn't the idea like you asked people questions, but there isn't a moral twist to it. Or am I imagining it was like? No, you're not imagining it. Well Barbara Walters used to do it a little bit. You know, that was like she was kind of famous for being a tough interview. You know, she interviewed people and asked them like uncomfortable questions. Yeah. But it's like when it's got that, it's not even like they're asking you questions about shit you lied about. Right. They're making a moral judgment on you. They're essentially saying, why are you a bad person? Right. And movies that show horrible things. Yeah. You're contributing to this horrible culture we have, which is not true. That doesn't really work. Like that correlation doesn't work because when you look at some countries, like I think it's, is it Japan that has a very high rate of, they play a lot of violent video games, but they have way less violence. Oh yeah, right. Is that it? Whatever you've done? Like they've tried to make correlations between violent video games and an actual violence. That is so dumb. And some people think that it might actually have the opposite effect, that there is a potential in some humans that they play those violent video games and they would get out any kind of wild crazy instinct that they might have. Like just I want you to imagine if epigenetics are real. Yes. If you're really, there's a certain amount of us they're imparting memories of being in war to other kids. Yeah. And this is going into your baby and the mindset is going into your baby. Yeah. And it seems like that's an inescapable reality. Yeah. If there's a thing like a video game that lets them express that part of their brain without actually having a desire to do it. Yeah. No judgments, but it almost makes sense that it would work to actually stop violence. Right. The idea is like what is promoting violence? And my answer to that is like being a human poverty, you know, putting someone through a terrible life, like forcing someone into bad situations, that's what creates all of it. And until we, it's like very weird the way we address the problem of violence. Because we only look at it in terms of the action itself. We don't want to go all the way back to the source. We don't want to go back and try to fix the source. Well, there's a big problem that happens when you start doing that is instead of being able to transform violent people into one dimensional sociopathic creatures, suddenly you like get back far enough. And they're, I don't know, watching their mom and dad OD on heroin or there, you know, whatever it is. And again, not to say we don't need prisons and justice and all that. But when you realize, oh, yeah, you're just looking at like a misplaced defense mechanism that this human had to learn because of whatever they fucking came out of. Now I'm not saying it's all sociopaths had horrific experiences. I just looking at my own shitty defense mechanisms. And then like going in therapy and connecting them to the past, it's easy to see where like the aspects of my personality are not conducive to harmony came from. Yeah. It's just that you know, the kids are fucking so tough. They have to adapt. Yeah. Kids adapt and they develop these weird defense mechanisms. And then at two that the epigenetic component and then that what the United States has been at war 93% of its history. Yeah. So now you're just looking at like some like and saying number of people that are transmitting memories of being at war. Yeah. And other children. And you know, that was my theory about why history was so barbaric. But if you go far back enough, the pyramids. So like what happened between then and then and like say the Mongols? What happened? What was the transition? Why did people get so barbaric? And I think they're the people that survived the impact. Right. I think when the younger dryer's impact happened, if it happened 11,800 years ago, I believe, I think the people that survived that were fucking monsters because they had to be. Right. I bet there was, I bet it was a total breakdown of any civilization. That's why civilization doesn't really pop up again for 6,000 years. Yeah. I think for thousands of years we were monsters. Dude, it's so funny that we that on our planet are all of these megastructures that we just are like, I don't really know. It's just that I always blows my mind that like all over the planet. Yeah. Signs. Did you see that when I posted on this Grammy? No. Oh my God. It's just fucking insane. What is it? Um, a shit. What? You've got, there's a phone right there. Where? Oh, it was hidden by my mic. Oh, I'm going to send it to Jamie right now. Cause you got it? Yeah. So check this out. Give me some volume on this. Central Java's lush kedu planes in pursuit of this mythical peak near the little settlement of Bara. They chopped and burned the strangling vegetation for 6 weeks and removed tons of volcanic ash. What they discovered were marvelous figures cut in stone, thousands of them, hidden beneath the volcanic jungle. But they have been built in the eighth and ninth century. The Barobide temple is an uncontested marvel whose intricate architecture continues to confound scholars. Despite being one of the most important sites on Java, there is no written record of who erected it or what its intended purpose was. Because there are no inscriptions or dates on the monument, historians must make educated guesses as to when it was most likely created. The dating estimates are based purely off of architectural comparisons found elsewhere in Indonesia. Given the magnitude of the construction, it appears remarkable that no rule or dynasty to credit for it. Barobidear is the world's biggest Buddhist temple and yet nobody knows who built it. On the Indonesian, that's cool. Jamie, I'm sending you another one right now. I mean, there's a bunch of these things. There's a bunch of things like that. So who made this? OK, what are your thoughts on mud flood? What's mud flood? Mud flood theory. Oh, well I think that goes along with the younger dryers. But you might check this out real quick. I wonder if you watch this because this is fucking bananas. Same account. Now set out to empty ponds that residents said were bottomless. The long UK is located in the village of Shihn, Beechun in Jijang, province China, are a massive and majestic ancient underground world. The long UKs, also known as the Shounan High Stone Chambers, are thought to date back to at least 2000 years and represent one of the largest underground excavations of ancient times, as well as an ongoing mystery that has confounded scientists from every discipline that has researched them. 2000 years and represent one of the largest underground excavations of ancient times, as well as an ongoing mystery that has confounded scientists from every discipline that has researched them. Scientists from archaeology, architecture, engineering and geology around the world have no understanding who or why the long UKs were carved into the earth. Currently 24 hand carved caves encompassing a staggering 30,000 square meters have been found so far. Cheesage grotto is carved into solid silt stone and descends roughly 30 meters down, with stone rooms, bridges, gutters and ponds. The long UKs are supported by pillars that are evenly dispersed throughout the caves and the walls, ceiling and stone columns are uniformly decorated with chisel marks in a pattern of parallel lines and all-nate designs. Despite their magnitude and the work required to build them, no indication of their construction, or even their existence, has been discovered in archival sources. Despite the fact that the whole excavation involved about a million cubic meters of stone, there is no archaeological evidence explaining where that amount of stone went nor is there evidence of the work being done. Damn! Furthermore, there isn't a single historical source that mentions them, which is extremely remarkable given the scope of the undertaking. Despite their caves of analysis, the long UKs mystery remains essentially unsolved. What the fuck, dude? You know, when people like Bash Hancock or try to dismiss it or debunk it, it's so frustrating to me because first of all, nobody builds something, that big underground, just for fun. I think we burrowed in. We had to, like, whatever happened, or maybe something happened, and then we were so scared it would happen again, we created. That's like an ancient survival show. But they have them in Turkey as well. Is that where it was? We're randalous. Dude, those are crazy. Those are crazy with like air ducts. Yeah, just insane. And it's like, you don't do that unless you have to. You don't burrow like a human ant, high ant nuts. Yeah, these things. Like the amount of resources it took to do what these people did, these are huge chambers carved into stone. And the truth. I think that the sky was like fucking raining lightning at one point. Yeah. Poll shift. I mean, to me, the really eerie thing about all of this is the information gap. It's that we have this massive, like the hard drive has been like fragmented from what, like we just don't know. It's thank God they've made everything out of stone. The thing about it is whatever their technology was that existed to make the pyramids, it was different. We make everything out of metal and glass, and that shit's not going to be here in 10,000 years. It's just not going to be here. It'll all be destroyed by just Mother Nature. It'll just eventually get like, I think they've done like analysis of like how much of a city will be around after 500 years of how much you see, and after 1000 years. Detroit is a great example. You see what happens in Detroit? Yeah. Houses are just getting taken over by trees. Yeah. Trees go through the roof. They grow through the floor. They're literally devouring the homes. They've the homes that are abandoned or getting eaten by trees. So cool. It's very cool. But it shows you it didn't take, I mean, nature has a long lifespan. It doesn't get fog of it take a hundred years to reclaim a house. Right. Take a house back. Just get the roots of the tree. Just start busting through everything's rained on. The wood soggy. It breaks apart. It eats everything. It eats everything. It simulates everything. You know, there's like this, humans have this interesting like temporal blindness, like the way that we, the way time passes for us produces the illusion of solidity. And so that makes, that confuses people because they think that there's permanence here. When if we could just see, if we lived longer and we could see time faster, we would feel like we were in some kind of like ocean of like undulating matter with these voids in it that we hang out in like little bubbles in the ocean. That's what we build our houses. And we wouldn't look at this place as solid. We wouldn't think of it as like permanent. This is why everyone was so like fucked up by the pandemic is because you know, you watch enough TV. You buy into the permanence of civilization. Suddenly civilization like has a little, little rumble like a little rat like a house that needs some kind of serious repair. It shifts on its, it shifts a little bit. And everyone was like reminded, yeah, this, this doesn't last any more than any of that shit lasted. And I think that's very disturbing for people who've really anchored themselves in some notion of permanence here. Yeah. Freaks people out. Well, I think that was a great ad for Silla Sibern. Yes. Silla Sibern. That's what that was. That was an awesome ad for Silla Sibern. Oh, Zimpik now has Silla Sibern in it, which is better. That's better. You realize why you fat. It'll show you everything. It'll show you all the wires. You need it. The board, dude, the whole thing, like this, this is what one of the really funny things about humans. We are capable of ignoring internal realities. Like we can somehow distract ourselves from the obvious cause of our suffering and equate it with a million other things than just what it actually is. Like, dude, I got so fat during the pandemic, fatter than I've ever been. It wasn't a mystery to me. Like I knew why I was fat, but it is curious that there's a way that you can just kind of ignore that. Or like when I was drinking too much, you could ignore that you're waking up with like a low level flu every morning. You can somehow ignore it. It's so interesting. And it's common. Well, yes, we will do it, especially because it's so fun to party. It's so fun. When they're out there partying and getting lit, it's good time. It is a great, it is outside of the way it makes you feel the next day. I mean, what a wonderful high. I think what sucks about alcohol as a drug is that it's a depressant. And if you just do like one drink and practice mindfulness with that and watch, you realize like this is like this sucks. It goes away real quick. It lasts, I don't know, 45 minutes an hour, then you want to go back up. Right. But your liver can't process it enough. And that's where the hangover comes from is it's like, well, it's also dehydration. Dehydration is glutathione. You can you can mitigate some of that with glutathione. I saw that. I saw that on Twitter. Yeah. Um, light, pozomo glutathione I think is the best. Had some stuff you squirt under your tongue and you're like, hold there and it gets into your bloodstream better. But IV is the best. If you can get an IV glutathione, that's the best. Dude, if you're drinking so much that you're getting IVs, like it, you got to think about that. Or if you want to continue having a good time, but you want to take care of your body, get an IV. You know what? Listen, I listen, I sound like a prude. I don't care if you're, if people are there. You don't sound like a prude. You sound like dunking trestle right now. This is where you are right now. This is where you are honestly in your life. And in other points in your life, you've been different. Right. That's normal. That's how all of us are. Coordination. Yeah. And that's why when you see someone who makes a turn for the best, like you see good things happen to them and they the sparkle and there are and they're excited. Yeah. You get excited too. It's fun. It's great. Right. Because it isn't great if you're always like that. It's really great if you figured it out. It's like if your life has been kind of fucked. And then you went, what am I doing? Right. And then piece it back together again, then you're thankful every day. Right. Then you're appreciative every day. Yeah. It's like those negative things are actually can be positive. Absolutely. Dude, this is another, like this is the other thing, like we look, we focus on half of what's really happening. Like people focus on the light and what's good and when things are going right for them, completely ignoring the fact that like in general, when shit's going bad, like that's the stuff that's made you interested. Like down the road, that's what the stories are told about. That's like what the jokes are written about. Not the good times. Like the bad times. That's the, that's the fertilizer, man. Yeah. There's a saying, no mud, no lotus. You ever heard that before? No, like that though. And the two are completely connected, like especially if you zoom out of time and you'll realize growing out of your worst moment, hopefully for the better. And the worst moment actually made you smarter. It made you like appreciate life more. It made you like less like dude, once I got my ball cut off, that was a fucking game changer dude because like you just, you just learn how to be in the present moment. Like you can't get off, you like your illusion of immortality is destroyed. And you need that. Like it's really not good if you think you're going to live forever. I think that's one of the good things about you, Jitsu. You almost get close to death. Oh yeah. All the time. Yeah. You know, and you're so exhausted that you, it's easier to live in the moment. You're so less anxious. Right. I mean, I know I'm fucking beating at dead horse, but I think people need physical struggle. Not just even exercise. I think you need exercise, but you need, you need to exercise. It's rigorous. Right. You know, and if you can only do walks, that's cool. Do that. It's definitely better than not doing that walks or great. Look at Al Pacino. Look great out there. I bet he's got a trainer. Look, I, I hate it. It helps your anxiety. It helps, it helps way, think in a big way. And I'm thinking about it right now because I hurt my back a couple days ago. Like actually it's about a week now. Dead lifting should have done it. That will do. Fuck you. Well, stupid stupid. And it's not bad, but it's annoying. And it's waking me up to this like reality of what happens when you don't work out for a few days because I haven't really been able to work out. And I just started doing some stuff. I found out I can do some stuff. I just got to be careful because I don't want to re- aggravate it. You know, because I don't want to take longer than it. So two days in a row, I didn't work out, which is really rare for me. And then also I'm like, oh, feel good. I feel like, I feel like, yeah, I feel off. Yeah. You know, like even a sun's on, like, you pep me up. I go outside and stare at the sun's beautiful day. Yeah. It's beautiful. Beautiful clouds in the sky. I'm like, oh, you little pussy. You have to work out. You can't work out. Right. Oh my God. So now this is how, imagine that times like 20 years for some people of eating shitty too. You're not eating good. Right. And then not working right. And that's most people. And so your like normal reality is this like you're in a kind of decayed building. You haven't been, it's like walking the dog. You know what I mean? Like if you don't take your dog for walks, what happens to the dog? It's nervous. It's weird. Right. Just depressed. Your body is your dog. Right. Like, you know, so it's going to do the same thing. It just gets all freaked out. My dog needs exercise. He loves it. He loves it. I pick up that fucking, but I have a ball thrower when it's like, I go, like, a, a little, out of the ladder looking thing with a ball in the end of it. It's like really chuck it. He gets so pumped. It's a great dog man. Dude, I got the ball. He's like, no way. I go, it's right here. It's like, no, we're going to change the ball. My fuck. Yeah. So I get him all hyped up first. I get all excited. I get him excited. Yeah. I get excited. I go, here we go. Here we go. He loves it. Do my fucking poodle loves to get the ball. We'll not bring it back. You got to try and do that. Oh, I've tried. Retrievers. They do it instantly. Yeah. Marshall didn't then Marshall did it like from the time he was a little bitty bitty, but puppy. I'd throw something for me. Grab it and bring it right back. I didn't want to let it go. I wanted to bring it back. But if you say, come on, drop it, drop it. Drop it. Hey, come on, dude. Come on, dude. He'll drop it. Drop it. But then he's looking at it like a smile. He's like, he's like, smile. He's like, he wants to play a little tug of wars. I'll play a little tug of war with that. He's so playful. Dude, that is definitely the coolest dog I've ever met. That is a mystical creature. He's feeling like you're being visited by some kind of like magic dog. Dude, so happy. He's so happy. And when I watch TV, he just hops up in cuddles. He just wants a cuddle with me when I watch TV. Yeah. Like that's what he does. He used to be a wolf. Yeah. So there's a photo on his Instagram, the most recent photo that we put up. Like this, this is me watching TV. And homeboy just like hops up to hang out with me. That's what he does. So sweet. He hops up in cuddles with you. He wants a cuddle. He's just all love everybody. You come over the house. Like you never met him before. He's like, you're my favorite person. You see this? This is the going to be the aliens posing with us in about 50 years. I hope I have to wear a collar. I'll be good boy. I won't wear any traffic. You're going to have to prove yourself first. I used to love to take him with no leash when I lived in California because I take him in the canyons and we'd run around. But unfortunately, that's a little more problematic where I live. But I think dogs, they need something man. They need exercise. They need love. They need like a little, the little version of you in some strange way. Yep. You know, and their reflection of the owner. Do you buy into the idea that like dogs and their owners kind of start looking like each other? I don't think they're like Marshall. He doesn't look like me. But he's the sweetest. He does when you have your rough, rough costume. Ah, I don't know. That's the original Marshall. That's a wolf. That's what's crazy. That used to be a wolf. Right. That someone took the most ferocious predatory beast of the forest that operates in packs and communicate telepathically. Yeah. And they turn that thing into this adorable love sponge. Dude. Okay. When was the last time this connects? When was the last time you read one flu over the Ku Kluxines? Oh, it's been a long time. Okay. I think I must have read it when I was in high school and just didn't pay attention. It's completely different from the movie. Like 100% different. Maybe I never read it. King Keezy. He was like, can he be wrote it? Yeah. Oh, no way. So it's so psychedelic. The book is so psychedelic. But, you know, like the the idea is that the character of McMurphy, Jack Nicholson's character, again, this is my own analysis. I don't know what they're actual like literary analysis of it is. He represents an undemesticated human. And the people in the ward are humans that couldn't function in what he calls society the combine. They couldn't function in the combine. So they're being brought into the asylum to get like re domesticated this so they give function in the combine. And he represents like an undemesticated human who enters into like a conditioning center designed to melt people back down, build them back up and send them out in the world and be good functioning, domesticated humans. It's so good. It's so subversive, dude. It's such a brilliant like it's so funny how different the movie is from it. Like it like nurse ratchet. And again, because the narrator is chief that native and the big Native American dude who is in the movie, that's the narrator of the book. It's being told from his perspective. So you don't know like how much of what he's reporting is real and how much is like he's in a minimalist asylum. Oh my god. That's amazing. So good. But according to him, nurse ratchet can control time. She she'll speed up time so that like a year goes by in a day or slow down time so that like like a second last like 10 years. And that's how that's just one of the many ways that they're she's basically torturing the people in the ward. Constantly giving them drugs, tying them to their beds and always this threat. This like threat is hovering, which is if you fuck up too much, if you get to angry at nurse ratchet who is a monster, essentially the way he describes it, it's the demi or just the anti-Christ, then you know what happens? They're going to fucking give you a lobotomy. Cut out your brain. Turn on. You know they really did that. Yeah. They really did that. I really did that. I had a professor in college who used to work at an asylum and was the weirdest dude ever. It was an awful class on like psychiatry. And he was kind of talking glowingly about lobotomies. And like someone asked him like, I mean what happened to the person and he goes they became a very good patient. Totally was fine with the fact that they were like sticking chopsticks and people's nuke like brains severing the brain. Dude it's with a hammer wearing that weird outfit. Why are they dressed like that? And now they did a lot of those. He did a this guy. This doctor is credited with the majority of this. So are they holding this guy down while they're doing this or is he anesthetized? I don't know. I don't see any any strap. I see straps and I see people holding his arms. Jesus Christ. You know fucking terrifying that must be to feel that rod going into your brain. Yeah. Knowing they're going to turn you into a vegetable. Yeah. Electric shock. Dude. Do you remember that guy that was running for vice president who had to admit that he went through electroshock therapy? No. Yes. It was during the McGovern Nixon campaign. Eagleton. Eagleton. It was McGovern's campaign right? McGovern was like one of the last hopes. He was one of the last like truly rational what you really want out of someone that you consider a liberal, someone who's a compassionate, strong person who people thought that you know he could win. They thought that he could win. Yeah. And it says not 72 over two weeks after the 1972 Democratic Convention. Eagleton admitted the truth of news reports that he had received electroshock therapy for clinical depression during the 1960s. McGovern initially said he would back Eagleton 100% a thousand percent rather anybody didn't. He eventually had a let him go and then it was too late. Wait. That's what took him out was they. That's what took him out. Whoa. Yeah. Electric shock therapy for depression. As for depression. Don't people say it would have awarded if you had depression today. Today in this victimhood society. All right. If you said this vice president, he suffered from clinical depression, but he sought help. He would be a shining example. Look at him. Yeah. He's like us. He was clinically depressed. He got over it. He's a hero. Yeah. And then people would be fine with it. Yeah. Back then back then it was a giant sign of weakness and they they would shock your brain. Well, I think it works. Whoa. I don't have good reason. I would rather not. It's a smelly soul. Have you watched videos of it? Because it's like it's not like they're like vaulting you the whole time. They put these rods on your head and you like convuls for a second. It's very disturbing. Maybe it's like a reset. Like control all delete for your brain. Maybe it's like yeah. Maybe it's maybe it's doing like something similar to what the psychedelics are doing. Maybe it's bringing you to a near death experience because your body thinks it's being electrocuted. Maybe it releases all of those psychedelic chemicals that they think it releases when you're in near death experiences. Did you see that they think they found the mechanism for why psilocybin treats depression like they did some study on rat brains and a petri dish and they were watching the way it interacts with psilocybin like blocks. Yeah. This is what someone getting zapped. Nice hat for shocking people. You have to wear hat. Yeah, but you don't need to have pop their toes locked up. Look, she got knocked out. That's the receipt. Oh, there's old ones that really show the whole thing. Dude, I wanted to bring something up. But I kept forgetting. I want to interrupt your rant. I posted this something. I retweeted something the other day about this boy that was raised by wolves in India. Yeah. Have you ever seen that? No. See if you can find that from a few days ago. I retweeted it. I want to know if it's true. It's like, oh, my God, it was too lazy to Google. It was like, I was bringing up with a podcast. Yeah. Well, I just retweeted it. I take no responsibility for retrains. It's the best way to fact check is just tweet something. Also, retweets for me are just like, hmm, I think this is interesting. Maybe you will too. All right. That's what I do it for. So this is it. The wolf child in 1889. Wow. How do you say that word? Polandashar? Belandashar. Belandashar region of the Indian forest. They're resided. Dina sanichar, a feral child of nearly six years old. Sanichar lived amidst a wolf pack adapting to their ways and partaking in their activities. This remarkable case serves as a vivid demonstration of the impact of environmental factors on human behavior. It exemplifies how the availability of resources, the upbringing, environment, and the ability to adapt to surroundings during childhood can shape an individual's physical and mental abilities. All right. Ultimately, ensuring survival. I mean, this kind of what we've been talking about. Yeah, totally, man. Look at that kid. Look at his face. That's crazy. I mean, this is probably why you should be very careful about your friends are because like, you know, maybe we look like our dogs, but definitely like in a group of friends, you like warp, you will shift into like something that like harmonizes all of them. So how about girls who like become boyfriends with serial killers and they go and kill people they pick up girls and kill them together. So crazy. People have done that. Crazy. Like that's a real thing that's happened. More than once, where a guy will be a serial killer and he'll convert his girlfriend to becoming a serial killer and they kill people together. What does that conversation start off like? Starting to suffer a lot of manly things. Not true. The only thing that's not true about that story is that he wasn't the only kid. There was a wow. He was at least one of two at that time they found. Wow. There might have been a couple more. Wow. That's crazy. Oh my God. You know, look at him. It's like he got trained by a wolf. It's their reverse situation. Look at that. He took up the habit of smoking cigarettes. Wouldn't you if you're surrounded by wolves for your old child? Relax. What the fuck? At least five other. Did you learn how to talk and everything? No. It said that you never learn how to speak. Damn. This reminds me of that video. We played a few times from the dark white underbelly of that family. Yeah. The boy in Slim and story died within five died a few months after being brought back to human society. Couldn't deal with it. He smoked out of the wolf's den. Where did he get cigarettes? No. Did he? Is that what they're saying? It said he smoked out of the wolf den. That's kind of weird. Right? Like lived in the wolf den. They kept him there. Look, where was it? Scroll. Wait. The boy in Slim and story like the boy who smoked out of the wolf's den died a few months after being brought back to know. It says like was smoked out of the wolf. Oh, what? Like smoke him out. Like George Bush. We're not smoking out of the world. Okay. Oh, God. Yeah. You wasn't like everyone. W said that. Oh, we're gonna smoke him out of their holes. Oh, my God. Dude, you just said weird shit with Lindsey Graham. Like the way he's like, we're gonna kill Russians. Like it's the creepiest shit you ever saw. Did you see that? No, I didn't. Dude, it's so spooky. I don't know where I don't know where I saw it, but it's like he's like with Zelensky and he's like, dude, it's you saying that. I started getting the stomach. The way he talks about murdering people is really unnerving. You know where I saw it. I saw it on Tucker Carlson's first Twitter episode. Did you see that? No. Tucker Carlson's do you show on Twitter? So what is the show? It's just him like doing a monologue basically. It's like a monologue. It's so it's like his old show. It's like his old show, but now he's been like unmuscled. So it's like free based Carlson. He's like going hard. And you know, it's weird. It's like these days, I think a sign that you're looking at a real journalist. Is you worry about them? You're like, you're going to get you got to shut up, man. Like you should. They're going to get you, man. What are you doing? Are you safe? Because it gives you that it gives you that feeling. And you know what's really interesting about it? Like, you know, I get like people on the left are furious with him and just like people on the right hate Rachel Maddow or whatever. But he was mocked for talking about the UFO wreckage stuff. Like they people in the comments were like he's talking about UFOs. Like it like he like saw a crop circle and talked about it. Not like let's let's hear it. Here it is. Live free. No free. Yes. And we will be in the Russians or die. So the best money we've ever spent. I expect in the coming days and weeks for the Ukrainian counter offensive to yield results. And I'm here to tell you that the last chapter of the Battle of Baguemuth is you have to be written. I'm here to tell you that the Russian military is about to have Holy Hill unleashed upon them. That kind of guy you don't want running anything. You don't want that guy. You don't want that guy running a fucking Starbucks. Yeah, I don't want he's that that was creepy. That just just the way to talk that way about something was so much weight on it. Yeah, we went at the point that you're like talking like he's in a move. You're celebrating human the human debt. Like essentially the human sacrifice of conscripts. Like you're celebrating human sacrifice and and and and some of its human sacrifice that we've written off as being okay. Russia gave them there's an arrest warrant out for him for those comments that he made in from Russia. We said my crime was speaking truth to power. God damn, I hate that phrase. That phrase gets fucking thrown around by a lot of morons. You know, I mean, I know it's a real phrase and people when they mean it, I get it. But my crime was speaking truth to power. That fucking freaks me out. It freaks, hawks are creepy dude. Like it's like somehow they've managed to get to a place where they can publicly celebrate human violent human like the fail. It just essentially like if you wore as a failure of humanity, right? Like that's so people like him are celebrating the death. You're not like it doesn't matter if you're doing the right thing. You those are still people. Also the way he's talking. He loves it. It just I don't want anyone who gets to make those choices to talk like that. It says my crime was speaking truth to power said, Graham, Russia has illegally invaded Ukraine. Putin has committed war crimes on an industrial level. And I'm going to keep talking about it. Freedom allows you to say the things I said, we live in a country where you can criticize your leaders. Well, that's kind of true. But it's just what what you said with the magnitude of the weight of your words. It's on the line in the whole world's listening. And that's what you said. Yeah, the best money we ever spent. Like that's a crazy thing to say. The whole thing is, and the Russians are dying. We're going to, it's not a fucking football game man. Exactly. Like this isn't a sport. Exactly. Like what you like just like you can can you can clearly from like the micro their times where you're going to have to use violence in a society. There's times where someone's losing their mind swinging a samurai sword in the middle of the street and or whatever. And like cops have to take them out. There's obviously this is obvious. But like to then like celebrate that you had to like kill. Or whatever and like cops have to take them out. There's obviously this is obvious But like to then like celebrate that you had to like kill a lunatic or something is so Dark like why not collect their scalps? Lindsey Graham if you're so into this shit, why don't we start scalping the fucking Russians? We'll just cut pieces of start wearing a net a necklace of Russian fingers, you know if you're so into murdering people and also ignoring the Demographics of the people who are getting fucking slaughter. I mean you can see videos of them being dragged out of their houses and Take into the middle of you crane to just get thrown into a fucking blender dude And that's what he's tap dancing about he's it's crazy It's crazy It's crazy and that that way of talking that he just did is like it's a Standard politicians way of addressing a very complex issue. They do it with like there was a there was a raw raw Aspect to that we're going on leash holy hell on them Russians pepper alley pepper alley for murdering people dude Yeah, it's because it is a football thing like saying it like that. That's like we're gonna go fucking kick their ass Team right and but for sure there is no financial motivation in what Lindsey What would do that no all that money is just a coincidence. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's so fucking dark man like you It's Really so confusing to me like because I guess I'm a naive idiot that people like that even exist Well also the the exist on the left now That's what's weird Yeah, oh you mean like cuz the yet right because the general like Lindsey Graham is the a Democrat or Republican Republican Republican he's a Republican right he's a Republican So they're all united on this idea of course he's a Republican, but they're all united on this idea that they should Continue there's no one Whether it's a Republican or a Democrat like the Democrats were always anti-war always oh Yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, this is the first time where the Democrats are like whole Sale buying the narrative and we have to stop Putin. We have to support Ukraine I mean how many Democrat peaceful people that used to have syringes in their Twitter bio now have a Ukraine flag right? Yeah, you the if you articulate just the general common sense Reality that war We don't want war. We don't want war that we want we don't want anyone to die. I don't want Russians to die or Ukrainians to die We want to elevate our species to the point where somehow We can get along with each other without like resorting to Incinerating people and because the message is coming from Trump The people completely dismissed it, but did you see that interview with him? We said we I would end the the Ukraine war in a day right and he said do you not want Ukraine to win? Do you want Russia to win? He goes no, I want people to stop dying. Yeah. Yeah, I saw that Dude, it's perfect. You're allowed to say that. I mean, let's find that because they're playing gotcha on a subject they're they're doing gotcha interview real quick. You don't have much time with them So you got to get a gotcha and they're doing this with a subject that Literally has the fate of the world In front of it, right? Because if if nuclear war breaks out yeah because of all this yeah and these people are just Flippantly supporting this continued Conflict with no talk at all about some sort of a compromise. Yeah Some sort of a conversation. Anything or just starting a conversation just starting one. Let's hear what he says if I Were president and I say this I will end that war in one day. It'll take 24 hours I know Zelensky well, I know Putin well I would get that ended in You can break that deal 100% it would be easy that deal would be easy A lot of it has to do with the money a lot of it has to do with the military You know that we're giving but I would get that deal done within 24 hours that war has to be stopped that war is a disaster Final thought are you gonna win next year cool facts no, that's not very good chance That's not the same interview. There was another interview alone was interviewing him I believe and she asked I think I was a one Asked if he wanted Russia to win It was some weird gotcha interview. He said I want people to stop dying Yeah, this is it that's the CNN thing. Yes. Yeah. Let me just put it dice away If I'm president I will have that war settled in one day 24 hours People posting on me with Zelensky they both have weaknesses and they both have strengths and within 24 hours that war will be settled It'll be over it'll be absolutely You cray to win this war I don't think in terms of winning and losing. I think in terms of getting it settled So we stopped killing all these people and breaking So I Parafrays, I fucked it up, but that's essentially his answer It's a thing maybe even after that he might have actually said I want people to stop dying It's crazy that that's a controversial statement and it's crazy that people Can't like because he's saying it right they invalidate it exactly it's so weird like that that you know Like the truth Ideas there's the truth and and that it doesn't matter like if it's coming out of like a radio that has like woven into it Human skull fragments that man's known the radio. It doesn't matter if the radio is spewing truth That's truth. It's truth. I and I always thought that was sort of the General consensus like among people who were sane was It's not good to blow each other up and I you know, I get it. It's like okay. Well then what about when Invasions happen what about when land grabs happen when some news creepy imperialism happens or Hitler happens or whatever What about that but like look at the fucking letter gondi wrote a letter to Hitler. Did you ever see that? Yeah? You know like Ideas like you just try it's like worth trying like get people to talk hangouts it out Even if you can't fail worse than war Right so so so any attempt at like stopping a war Without World war three or violence or whatever. It's it's glorious Even if it fails even if it makes you look like a weak pathetic piece of shit Long term you're gonna look great if you were a peacemaker in the world versus a Lindsey Graham Yeah, Lindsey Graham's man history does not look at them In a kind way no they're they're the evil characters when you watch a youtube video on 9-11 It's these people behind the scenes it's these people that lie about weapons mass destruction. It's like there's like a type of person that you see that gets into office and There's this like there's a shameless Politician aspect of them that just gives me the creeps dude. Just I guess me the creeps and anybody talks like that about war Because it's so consequential Everything's on the line humanities on the line civilizations on the line the future of your children's on the line everything's on the line To like Make it and boil it down to a raw raw football Pap rally speech is crazy You know an AI wizard out there who wants to do some kind of like something that will probably be very controversial Needs to like put together a montage of the videos of all the drones blowing up Russians Uh and replace The adults with kids so that you see the children version of them Being blown up, you know because that's a weird thing about it. You there's this once you get to a certain height at that point We celebrate you getting exploded But you know like if kids were doing this shit Like we would end it immediately regardless of this is like I don't if my kids are Scrobling and like one of them bites the other or something or like whatever Like it doesn't matter anymore about the fairness or whatever's happening It's like we kind of you can't do that. Stop the violence. Right. Yeah, man It's that's the thing is like for to conduct a successful war You really have to disconnect from the human reality of who is fighting the wars if you say let's propose This is named per goes in the the guy who runs his own like battalion the private contractor who is like fighting pop moat that that crazy guy I'm not I don't know where basically there any there's a video that popped up of like someone getting their heads Smashed in with a hammer That so it's like these boys who is that it goes head smashed in he was somebody who didn't want to fight anymore That's what it was. Yeah, and to send the signal out like this is what happens if you try to run away We'll just smash your head in. Oh, Jesus Christ. So it's like So he was a fellow Russian. Yes Yeah, man. I mean that's the idea is like stop just know that the people who are out there thought it was a training mission apparently and If they try to defect and get out of there whatever they're probably going to get killed So it's not like you're on a Russian guy the kill got killed or you cring on your kill. It was right I thought it was a Russian dude you're saying and I'm reading about him Do you think he said as he recruited prisoners? Is there any chance he said he recruited fit this is the guy that got killed? It's a guy who Controlled the troops is he the guy that got killed with the hammer? No, no The guy that got killed with the hammer was just a soldier soldier. What am I talking about? Yeah? Where I want it is he's trying to get a bomb narrative You know what I saw you go deeper than this time. I didn't do it and so many of these episodes I forget the potency of this What you have here? It's so good, but yeah, man like so this guy ordered people out there and then when people said hey this isn't a Fucking a training run. This is a this is a real war Yeah, I don't want to fight in this war. That's what I read. I don't know if that's true. And the kill that guy with the hammer the guy seemed like resigned to his fate Dude, it's crazy. The The thing is When you so like the big critique of Russia that Lindsey Graham has is you get arrested if you say anything right? Yeah Meaning if we have prisoners who've been quote recruited fighting out there Then the Russia is sending Anti-putin people into a meat grinder to die so you spoke out against Russia You've been in a Russian prison You get recruited and then they just send you into All of these weapons given to Ukraine by the Western world. You're just dead. It's a death sentence So that's the you know so when you break it down at that level suddenly These aren't like something these fucking Russians are like let me go invade the place Where my mother-in-law lives right you know, it's like it's not like that It's like many of them are having they have to do it you There's you just there's no way out unless you want to die So you're have to choose like which way do I want to die? Want to get blown up by some fucking Ukrainian drone or do I want to get my head smashed in or just show on YouTube? Yeah It's really fucked up man An awful fairness. I think YouTube would take that down I think they changed it. I think they're changing aren't they did it It's I dream that YouTube was like Loosening up so we could watch those videos again on YouTube really I could be wrong But I feel like there was some shift in their censorship model was happening, but I could be wrong about well It's not when it comes to RFK Jr They're deleting his old podcasts. They deleted one from Theo Vaughn from a year ago And they deleted one from hot boxing with Mike Tyson, which is more than a year or two I did not know that they just did it. What the fuck they just started doing that that isn't that illegal if someone's running for President to you can't do that right? I don't know what you could say that it's because of misinformation And this is you know because he talks about vaccines and you know he talks about He was environmental attorney before he you know was anything And you know his whole thing was trying to hold companies accountable for what they're doing by ruining the environment and lying about it and for them to Take that guy and say you can't do that with other stuff You can't talk about other stuff like how come then what wants to hear him out? How come no one to hear him out with it with That book the real Anthony Fauci is fucking terrifying And if it's not true, why isn't he getting sued? You know if that book is true If all the things that he's saying and he has references for everything if it's all accurate We should all read that book. Everyone should read that book Right because if it's true. It's terrifying. I you've been captured by an industry That's forced you and to becoming a source of income for them. Dude censorship is Has this component of condescension and it is really like that to me is the the worst part is essentially you're saying You're too dumb To parse this information in a rational way So we're going to protect you from it because it's like a poison. It's going to infect your brain and we have to protect you That is really like like first of all If you do like that's bad parenting in general You know what I mean like the idea would be that you like teach your kid to confront False things learn why they're not real and then instead of like trying to prevent Your kid from seeing like everything. You know, I mean, I don't obviously like I'm not letting my kid watch Blade Runner or some shit like that But just that if you get too Overprotective with your kids like try to hide death from them for example That sort of thing like you got a trust we can deal with it. It's safe for us to encounter All forms of information. Well the problem is what when time the real little you line them Santa Claus gonna come to bring you all choice It's gonna come down the chimney Is any magically? Yeah Just teach your kid what the word agro-gore means and you can do Santa Claus Ethically what's agro-gore? Agro-gore is like the name for like a thing that exists within the minds of a lot of people It's an agro-gore So like if enough people believe in something does it have a material reality? Not necessarily but within the psychic mind space. It's real. It's right. Our Santa Claus is a thing. Yeah an agro-gore Santa Claus is an agro-gore. There's no obviously there's no real Santa Claus, but there is a very vivid Living entity within the interconnected minds of everyone who believes in it. That's an agro-gore The problem is if you tell your kid that Santa's an agro-gore And then your kid's gonna tell all the kids at school and then you're the asshole. That's the problem I'll be honest Joe. I have not told my kid Santa's an agro-gore. I just thought of it Like maybe I'll do agro-gore this Christmas, but you're just like a battle Like you get kids together You know and you talk parents like hey, if you've done the Santa Claus talk no like how old are they? They're five five and six Like if you get to that age, where you're like, okay, when do you tell these kids? When do you tell when you tell them? They don't like it when you tell them either they get very sad So is that like is that what these people think about us? But it's weird that they grow up with a lie That's what I don't like You grow up with a lie. Yes stupid lie and you you convince a child that this lie That we all have mutually agreed upon It's fucking kind of Santa Claus is kind of dangerous Because it's sets people up at a very early age for the reality that The possibility rather that everything you believe in is bullshit misinformation. Yeah, but everything you believe in is propaganda It's propaganda by your parents to get you to be good. Yeah You better be good. You better be nice better than how we should not doing that To town he knows when you are sleeping. He knows when you're awake He knows if you've been bad or good, so be good for goodness sake. Yeah, so breaking child predator laws My mommy and kids Santa Claus is like the ultimate overlord in the sky. It's a panopticon man It's a fucking materialistic panopticon. You're being constantly monitored by some mythical North Pole thing that's probably like I guarantee if we look at the way Santa is paying those fucking Elves I guarantee it's like they don't want to be there. I also want to be in the North Pole The whole things fucked up you had elf on the fucking shelf You know by elf on the shelf? Elf on the shelf now you have like a little fucking plastic security camera That's watching your kids all the time if they touch it. It loses its magic See you Larry so you put into the kids this like neurotic thing It's like think of how many kids have touched elf on the shelf and not taught their parents and live with that guilt Like knowing they fucking depleted the elves magic. It's not coming back. This is Sinister at one level. You know, it's is really fucking weird. It's lies And it's lies that are unnecessary It's not lies about like Something stupid it's lies about the like whether or not there elves flying around your fucking house Like you're getting your kids to believe in nonsense like very early on instead of just like reading Fun books where they know it's pretend Right, you can just pretend and also when you realize like the whole thing is just connected to getting the economy to get a little better Once a year you know, I mean the whole thing is just to drive up the fucking economy by Permanently relating children into believing in a fucking Santa Claus. That is wild Yeah, you were saying something about suicide and the civil cyber and study you You about something about connecting to brain and memory you're saying or what they recently Oh, yeah, yeah, they did some study The article I was really funny because they're like okay We found the receptors that civil society has working on and the way it affects the receptors Is a thousand times more potent than antidepressants and now that they know Where these receptors are theoretically they could invent a medicine that doesn't get people high So sad You're celebrating that like why we already have the medicine the medicine works Why do we need to synthesize that it grows out of the ground? But they're like now that we understand it We can synthesize it and take away one of the best things about it Duncan we figured it out and it's the best money ever spent Yeah, exactly Exactly instead of saying hey, we should legislate We should change the laws The like we really need to rally about this. This is an actual important medication for humanity Yeah, it actually could make people nicer. It might have made people people Just the problem is it's apparently too easy to grow those fucking mushrooms man like Yeah, you know what I want to be here. It's too easy. Yeah, so it's like you can't grow An antidepressant like you can't fucking create a lexapro. That's exactly We're promise and we're captive we're captive by this industry That uses you to make money on a regular basis and we'll oppose anything that gets in the way of that profit even if that thing Is overall net positive for humanity. Oh, so Simon is horrible dude I just revisited the thalomide thing you ever look into that. It's a little mind. The lid of my thank you. That shit like for like You know, it's kind of like the United States Does the what's the name of the incident? They didn't Vietnam that triggered the war like the Gulf of Tom can so they do that And then we get in the stupid war. Okay, then we get the yellow The what's yellow cake the yellow cake thing to justify the invasion of Iraq right comes out. That wasn't real We we just buy into That somehow now we got better like now it all makes this so the the lid of mine It's like it's a perfect example of a pharmaceutical company Pushing shit that they knew Was hurting kids they wanted to sell it in the United States They knew as fucking kids up. They somehow warped the studies in a way They warped them so much. It was one woman. I can't remember who who was like they were trying to get The right to sell in the United States and she's looking at the study like this is Too good like something is off here like this doesn't make sense for any Like generally anything has like more side effects than this shit that they gave We whoever she was I wish I could remember name but the point is man like to imagine that stopped to imagine like That was the only time that's happened and that will never happen again with pharmacy local companies is really crazy Well, it's really crazy that all it took was the pandemic for people to think that way But the problem is the way you think about it with the information that you have about the lid of mine with the information You have about the opioid crisis and The sauclers the sauclers. Yeah, I mean and they just you know They just got immunity for like yeah to give up immunity for like six billion dollars Wow, they bribed. Yeah, they brought they bought their immunity. I mean they're they lied the companies They owned lied. They got people addicted they lost people lost lives so many lost lives. Yeah, dude So many lost lives Vioxx the vioxx scandal they killed 60,000 50 60,000 people in America Same with the lid of my by the way apparently no one went to jail for that shit like nobody went to jail No, but the thing is that's how that business is the business has always been like that and we're one of two countries in the whole Planet Earth that allows them to advertise those commercials are so weird. Yeah Their cyops every commercials of cyops every commercial makes you think that you're gonna be on that barbecue You're like I don't have any friends But if I take this I'll be laughing and I'll be on that raft with everybody else going down the river having a good old time That's what I need Yeah, I can't get that's not gonna let all he needed was a little fucking electric pad on each year Or some psilocybin or exercise or all the above The electric shock Yeah, they shouldn't be allowed to advertise and they should not be allowed to have any lobbyists affecting Our government and the amount of money they're making right now, bro They want to keep making that money. That's the thing about money when a corporation has growth when they have like mass And growth like these pharmaceutical drug corporations had when they're manufacturing a medication that everybody had to take When they make that money and then it's over or they don't want to go back to like 2018 levels fuck that you can't you know We got to figure out a way to sell more. Yeah You just want to come up with some new thing and I think when you get in those corporations When you're working in them. It's a filter bubble So like you know if you look at corporations as cults, you know, there's a cult like aspect of corporations So you get into the cult and then over time you get indoctrinated into Like resonating without ever their particular version of reality out wherever their reality tunnel is and so when I think in that reality tunnel They truly believe that everything they're doing makes sense that it's good to do that it's all justified because they some of them when confronted they seem authentically shocked like they seem like wait Were we're trying to help like they don't Seem to have connected to how weird it is to have that massive a profit margin When it comes to giving people Medicine to heal them you know what I mean like that idea being Just generally you should not be profiting off of diabetics The level you are with insulin, you know like generally selected top diabetes drugs is expected sales in 2020 and 2024 Wow make a lot of money on diabetes drugs. Jesus right So with these diabetes drugs they make a lot of money off this stuff And if people all got healthy that would all go away Exactly so then there's that weird you know if you want to sell umbrellas you need it to rain So then you know weirdly The moment you start making mega profit off of people sickness You have an in like under the surface of everything you need people to be sick To continue to take those great feel fucking vacations Like and so so that's where it gets really creepy right that's the creepy part because you need them to be ill You want them to be ill It's in then you know I don't know if you looked up like I don't know the exact amount But apparently there's a huge percentage of money coming into Networks from the pharmaceutical companies like it's holding them up Which is why you know I guess you could just understand how much money they're getting Just every time you see a pharmaceutical company commercial come on on anything you're watching Make note of that and then you can see how much that programming is being Paid for by these companies Dude, that's really spooky man because Then they become kind of the de facto government. Yeah, they become sort of like The communications mouth yeah of the country. Yeah, I mean because that's essentially what news anchors are Do you see it? Is it true that's think about Anderson Cooper that they're saying that he was given 12 million dollars to promote vaccines Somebody posted that on Twitter 12 million what did they give him 12 million dollars to promote that insurance during the banana? That's definitely reworkeries Shaping everything his contract is for 12 million here. So that's just his contract with CNN So why are they saying it like that? But I think it was like a fairly reputable source, right? I mean, I'm just I just typed in Anderson Cooper 12 million. There's articles from a couple years ago about that's what is Okay, but it learns right, but if but it And says he won't leave this on and isn't it inheritance because he comes from a very rich family of her right? But was it 12 million on top of that that they asked him? Did you find that so it's too promote vaccine? I would someone know that I don't know that but but maybe they do Maybe they don't but let's find out um So it says Anderson Cooper was given 12 million dollars to promote vaccines. Yeah, there's a website called It's not a reputable website that says Pfizer pays millions to CNN for COVID jab promotion, which is like that's well They pay for ads right. Yeah, so I mean that's okay. So that's a slippery way of phrasing things just like that other stupid fucking headline You can't raise the other stupid headline again that would drove us nuts. Oh About Al Pacino. Yeah, yeah that yeah, you just you can't skim how gross is that that? But that stupid headline was crazy because that made it look like oh my god There's money grubbin whore. Yeah, and he's mad and he got a paternity test. It's not so Yeah, I love it that my loads work Yeah, you know, I think that you know the issue is it regardless of whether like Someone's writing someone a check Or whether or not it's just is in your paycheck from the company that's getting checks Right from another place It's just like it's adding this like extra. It's like the people who put their money in the Cayman Islands or whatever It's like adding this extra layer To you getting money from those corporations. Yeah. It's also what they do at firing squads. Right. We only put Uh, yeah, there's only so many people have bullets right. So you you if you want To ignore the reality that some of the journalism you're doing Is like being warped a little bit by the network potentially. I don't know if this happens I'm guessing it does too is that what you're doing is like being warped a little bit by the network. Potentially, I don't know if this happens. I'm guessing it does too. What? Matt, Matt, it's right. It doesn't do it. Maybe doesn't. Man, I've, you know, I really think that I'm a little stoned right now. I get it. But, you know, it creates his ability for you to sort of like cope with that cognitive dissonance. So like you don't have to like go home and think, am I really a journalist? I think that you might have. Breaking Robert Kennedy Jr claims that 80% of Anderson Cooper's $12 million salary comes from Pfizer. I read an article that was saying that he was done in an, I just couldn't get on interview yet, but in an interview he said that he, that 10 million of that 12 is coming directly from Pfizer and he's promoting it separately, but I don't know where he's not going to information from. Or can you find what percentage of advertising dollars for, for seeing incomes from pharmacy to old company? I see an especially, but in that same article I've seen with this, he makes a claim which we've read before is that 75% of advertising revenues in the mainstream media comes from that, but I just found an article from 20 or last month from February. It says at least for TV that's down, but it's because they're changing the spending the digital buys. You see they fired the CNN guy, the top guy again? The guy has only been there for a year. Oh yeah, my wife was telling me something was that. Because he keeps imploding CNN's imploding. All right. Yeah, they just can't seem to like get the air back in the tire can. Yeah, they've got a stink on them. Yeah. Yeah, they do. Yeah, they kept on living in there too long. Fuck, they kept him in the box too long. Dude, didn't like him. They felt like he was, you know, naked in the fridge, Don Lemon, that's the show. That's how he comes back. Yeah. I got my money on Tucker. Yeah, well, he fish. He's like, I don't know if Don Lemon's a fisherman. I think Carlson's like, you know, like if I bet Carlson will bring a fishing pole, like, you know that you can bring two things or something like that. He'll probably bring his fishing pole. What does lemon bring? I don't know. Alone would be better alone. That's the best show so much. That's the best. They throw you to the wolves. You buy yourself like a bow and arrow and a hatchet. So good. You get like three things. You get a bucket. Hooked on that show. So fun to sit on your couch, like eating and watching these people out there starving. I had a guy who was on who won it, Jordan Jonas. And he was a ringer if there was ever a ringer. Yeah. He's lived in Siberia with like the indigenous tribes. That's the unfair part of the show. Yeah. They're putting people like that against the people they found at a bar. Or like, I want to be on TV. There's just some girls hot. And once a lot of like, you know, money for Instagram. They're out in the wilderness for two days. And they're like, I have to see my kids. They're out. But if you go to do a show like that, you're not going to get that much attention for quitting. And there's a lot of money if you win, right? Yeah. What do they win? Like half a million dollars? I don't remember, but it's a lot. Is it half a million? Yeah. So you're going to get ringer's for the most part. You're going to want a real competition. You know, like the more episodes you get, the longer these people stay in, the more episodes you get, right? Yeah, man. Yeah. And they're by themselves, filming themselves. And the more drama, man, the more views you're going to get. So like, you know, they only stop to visit them to give them batteries and shit, right? I just, I don't understand the filming process because like, I was looking at some of the shots. And it's like, how are they getting these shots? Like, are you when you're... They set up cameras. They're supposed to, they have a tripod and they're supposed to set up their camera and then like film things. They're hunting. They're doing certain things. It's just all the survival shit to imagine before commencing with your survival activity. You're like setting up a GoPro on a tripod. Yeah, but how does that work? How does that work? Oh, they do. I didn't know that. Oh, that's cool. Yeah. They actually have some... They have one that actually is a iPhone. Like it's a magnetic thing for your iPhone that sits in your front stabilizer. I'm sorry, I forget the name of it, but it's pretty cool. So like, when you draw your bow back, you can actually press record on your iPhone phone and film the flight of the arrow with your iPhone. That's cool. So you can film the animal coming in. You can film the flight of your owl. And it's actually good for, like, ethical reasons because you can see whether or not you made a perfect shot. And so if you made a perfect shot, just let the animal die and don't freak it out and chase it. You see where it goes. Right. You could follow the trail because you're visually looking at the film like you shot off to the right. There it goes. And they do that all the time. So if you wanted to set up, like people do that all the time and deer hunting, they set up cameras. They have like camera arms. They have on tree stands and shit. Have you ever seen those? No. This whole show is dedicated to white tail hunting out of a tree stand. Like it's like it is a religion in the Midwest. White tail hunting? White tail hunting is a religion. It's the number one hunted animal, big game animal in North America. Why do you tell deer? Do they become obsessed with it? They become obsessed with the point where they create habitat for the deer to live. Like they buy enormous farms and set up food plots. So they're feeding the deer essentially with food. They have alfalfa growing everywhere. And deer just are constantly in their area eating. And then they hide and trees and wait until the wind is right. So you don't want to like a northeast wind that's like blowing the wrong ways. Your scent is going all over the field. You don't want that. So you want to get the right tree stand with the right wind and you sneak in on these animals that have been growing, eating your fucking alfalfa for years and years and years. And Jack, they're looking good. And all of a sudden one day he's out there eating and fuck. He feels an arrow goes for his ribcage. Jesus Christ. Yeah. But here's the other ethical dilemma. Why? They don't have any predators. There's occasional mountain lions. Oh yeah, right. There's some coyotes. Like how are you keeping these populations down? Because the number of car accidents that people have with deer and like IOL loan must be off the charts. We've done this before, right? Where we looked at the number of car accidents per year. Isn't it like something bonkers? Yeah. The number of car accidents per year in the United States. It's a crazy number. You ever had a deer on in front of your car? Yes. Dude, it's so scary. It's like they're so fast. Oh yeah. And they fuck up. They make bad choices. Yeah. They just decide like especially when it's when you're around here and it's like November, December, January, be careful because that's when they're horny. And that's what they're trying to fuck and they will run right out in the traffic. And they chase those. They're chasing those because they're trying to fuck them and the dose don't want to fuck them so the dose will run right in the traffic. Dude, how how weird is it that like horniness has the exact same component through all species, right? Like a horny human will also run in front of the car. Oh, also do stupid shit. It's so weird. Like it really makes you dumb when you're horny. Like 100%. According to State Farm and between July 21 and June 22, they're down 5.5% from the previous 1.9 million animal collisions and 67% of those are deer. 202 deaths. That's like over a million or deer almost. Probably 1.1 or 2 million. Holy shit, dude. 202 people killed by deer. That is nuts. My friend Cam Haines in his hometown or in nearest hometown rather. Some guy hit a deer with his car and it flew through the air and came through the window and killed the guy behind him. Jesus Christ. Jesus, I'm paled him in our seat. Are you liable for that? How could you be? Ping ponged a deer. Like is that? I'm sure you're in the conversation because you hit the deer first. But if you're on the highway and you hit a deer, who's fucking fault is it? You can't stop quick enough when you're going 60 miles an hour. Which state do you think is number one? Forgetting animals hit? Well, you have to think of cars driving a lot through interstates. Kansas? Ohio. Neither are on the top 10. What's the time? Iowa? Iowa's number 10. Wow. What's number one? West Virginia. That makes sense. They must be infested in those hills up there. Then Montana. That's Hannah's number two? Yeah. You could do like a cemetery of just people killed by deer. That is so, I had no idea, man. That's so creepy. Yeah, that's fucked. To think your whole life, you're thinking you're going to do a heart attack. Old age and a fucking deer is going to like slam into you one night. You get up in the morning, you know what? That's it. No more sugar. I'm cutting and sugar out of my diet. I'm going to start taking yoga again. I'm going to find yoga class. And then fucking deer through the face. Look at that. That's so fucked up. Yeah. It happens all the time. And a lot of times when they come through, their guts come through too. So it's not just a deer that comes through. it's like you hit it and then it goes through your windshield. And when it goes through your windshield, you're just covered in gore. Cover it in gore. And you know what? So like if we found some statistics for how many nighttime hand jobs happen in Ohio when people are driving that where they get hit by a deer. I'm telling you a few people are probably like, I say hand jobs. What about head? You know what? Yeah. You got me. You kind of like that. That's more exciting. That's more hard. Yeah. And then car blow jobs. Yeah. I've only gotten a couple of car blow jobs lifetime. It's a dangerous operation. I don't like it. It's not for everybody. And it's definitely when you're done, you're like, what the fuck is wrong with me? Because like if you wreck, they could accidentally clinch their teeth. Well, they are also you could wreck. Like you're not paying attention. You could hit somebody. Yeah. You could sell fish bricks. I'm like, just get a bite. My dick. Oh my god. Look, man, it's just like this. It's just pay attention. You're not supposed to look at your phone while you're driving. Shouldn't be getting your dick sucked. You should not be getting your dick sucked. Don't be your phone and don't get your dick sucked. Don't suck anybody's dick. We're getting old. I know what time people don't drink. Don't drink. Don't give dark blow jobs. Don't give dark blow jobs. Why are you driving? What have we turned into? What have we turned into? Santa Claus is a f-sy-up. Yeah, Santa Claus is fake. UFOs probably real. How about that, man? Oh my god. When that guy was talking when he was explaining that we've retrieved vehicles of non-human origin and pilots. And pilots. Dude. Yeah. Pilots. Yeah. It is astounding. Military Whistleball or claims US has UFO retrieval program. Air Force veteran David Grusch claims the government is covering up UFOs. He has seen evidence of a secret crash retrieval program. He alleges the US has even retrieved bodies from other species. That lid looks alien. A little bit. A little bit. A hot older alien. It looks a tiny bit. You're making big mistakes, Duncan. Yeah. You're making mistakes. I'll force Santa to kill all I would make. That'd be wild. The failures look like her. But really like a hot, like Sigourney Weaver in her prime alien that comes to visit you. Please. That would be the best. Sigourney Weaver from Alien. Amazing. Oh my god. People don't talk about that. When they talk about female heroes of major blockbuster films, that's the big one. Sigourney Weaver in Alien? That's the best one. Because you believe every second of it. It is completely inconsequential that she's a woman in that movie. That's aliens. It starts getting sketchy. I like aliens. Sketchy. Aliens is cool. Here's the problem with aliens. Why are they so hard to kill an alien but so easy to kill an aliens? They got better weapons. And then the big mama can't deal with the fucking slow moving mechanical robot. You're right. You're totally right because the first thing was like indestructible. Yes. There was no hope. Clever. It was like just the opposite of humanity. It hid in the escape capsule. Brilliant. Memory has to kill it and shoot it out in the space. Yes. Yeah. Bro. If you were, okay, here is a nerdy breakdown of alien that I heard, which is really interesting. Which is horror movies. I think this is like Robert McKee. This, you, you, like, teaches about writing scripts. Horror movies follow this very predictable pattern. There are all these things that are across the board in horror movies. And one of them is you can't call your mom. So, you know, and what was the name of the ship in alien? Mother. Yeah. And so like you, like there's all these like recurring like archetypical things that pop up in our movies that freak people out. Big one is you can't call mommy anymore. You're like, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you kind of get that in there. It's so creepy. It's so creepy that we're at this time where all this UFO information is coming out, but you know, people are still like very reluctant to buy into it or even give it attention. It's interesting. It's interesting. People are like, ah, I can't be bothered. Do you can't be bothered? Listen, because I'm obsessed with it, I've, like the, it's the reaction when you start telling someone, you know, there's now seemingly credible evidence that we have alien spaceships and to watch them be like, okay, it's so weird. Dude, and it's so weird that like now it's getting picked up by the mainstream media, but there was this insane pause and no one was taught like it, it went nowhere. And this, shouldn't, isn't this, if this is true, the most astounding thing in human history? It's the most astounding thing. It's the most astounding thing because it's the thing that everybody has always wondered are we alone. Not only are we not alone, but some people know we're not alone and they're not sharing it with everybody else because they want a profit. Yeah. Because they want to back engineer these things because they want it for national security reasons because they want to protect us from the possibility that China gets this technology or Russia gets this technology and then everybody has spaceships. But you're not, you're not the decider. You don't get to decide whether or not human beings go from cradle to the grave without information that you have that would literally change the way we think about the universe itself. Like for you to hold on to that because you want to win, get the fuck out of here. And if that's as really, if like if some sort of defense contractors are actually involved in those? Yeah. I mean, they can't look, I don't know anything about what I'm talking about. But when you say the government, oh, the government's back engineering UFOs, when you say the government's building secret hypersonic ships that defy visual, you can't take photos of them. You can't take videos of them. They fly through the sky in the same rates of speed. Who's making that? It's not them. What do you mean the government? What do you mean? They don't have the capability to construct those things. You have to go to defense contractors. Right. You have to go to the people that make those things. Like buddy, why you got to do it by yourself? Listen, I don't know you don't trust us because we're not the government. But listen, we worked together here. Yeah, we're going to shut the fuck up too. Everybody will shut the fuck up. We'll make this thing. Come on, you're going to fuck it up and then China's going to win. Right. Like yeah, go to good point. Go to good point guys. Let's all get together. So if you have a spaceship from another planet, I do not think that if you're actively trying to back engineer that thing that you're not going to involve defense contractors, right. You're not going to involve people that make jets. You're not going to bring them in. No, you have to. Of course, 100%. Yeah. So then it becomes a thing with them. Imagine them holding on to that. Right. This is their responsibility. We have the information that would literally change mankind. Yeah. I have to lie to my mom. And then you're sitting there having a whiskey with the guys after work. I've got a lot of my mom. My mom wants to leave the aliens a real. I'm like, come on, mom. Meanwhile, I'm looking at alien spacecraft seven days a week. Right. Like what are we doing guys? And all the implications of that. Right. The spaceships are the tip of the fucking iceberg. Like we don't know motivation. We like, you know, assuming all of this stuff is real. Now the question is, well, what are they? What do they fucking want? Well, there's all this talk of multiple species too. When we say they, it's like which ones are we talking about? Because if you want to go into the mother fucking rabbit hole. Right. If you're going to go deep in the rabbit hole, there's multiple things. There's like the grays that everybody talks about. And there's another thing called the tall whites. The people have described them. They almost look like Scandinavian or something like that. Like pale skin. Are these the nords? Yes. Okay. Yeah. And they think that there's different, like some alien life is probably, you know, 100,000 years ahead of us, 700,000 years ahead of us, a million years ahead of us. But some alien life is probably millions and millions of years ahead of us. They probably don't want to fuck with us anymore. Right. But I bet the intermediate classes, I bet they're like the watchdogs for the universe to make sure that intelligence reaches that crescendo. What it reaches that moment where you can join the intergalactic highs of minds. The moment where all the barbaric instincts of our primate DNA are expunged, we don't have any of that anymore. And the civilization reaches some insane harmony with the very universe itself. Right. That's probably where it goes if you don't blow yourself up. But I think anytime there's a hiccup, we go way back to his barbaric as possible and takes forever for things to relax. And you're seeing a microcosm of that with COVID. It's what's accelerated all these different social movements. It's what's accelerated all these different people that are what they would call activists. It's accelerated all this. It's just insane like pause in civilization. And then there's this sort of like rapid desire to claim ground and to reformulate and re-change and re-amagine restructure. And the government's going to try to get involved in social groups, they're going to try to get involved. There's a money grab. There's donations. And you find out that some of the people that are involved in the organization are buying mansions. They're like, don't worry about this mansion. And I'm out here doing good work. And then they're like, there's so much of that. But I think that's a microcosm of what probably happened when the fucking asteroid slammed into us. I think when civilization got wiped out, I really believe that it was the worst of the worst. And that's why we have such horrible instincts. I think we're just not far enough removed from that to get it like, rung out of your DNA. Yeah. If you look at like pinkers work, if you look at any of these people that are studying crime and violence over time, like if you just, I know about anecdotal experiences, I know about your own personal life, you've got to set that aside for a moment and just look at overall it's getting lower and lower all the time. It's always going lower. It's always going, except for like weird blips and war. It's always going lower. Less crime. Like we're trying to figure it out. But if something goes fucking psycho. Right. Shut boom. If Putin says fuck you if Putin really does have cancer and just fucking America. Fuck yeah. And then we go back to the worst of the worst and it takes a long, long, long time to get to where we are now. It takes 10,000 years to get to the, the place that we've claimed right now. And we can stop this in its tracks. It is possible like the forces that are moving this country in the wrong direction, this terrifying direction. They have power because we've voted them in. Yeah. That's a real thing. If you don't vote them in anymore and then the person you vote in has courage, things can change and if people demand it, things can change. But they have the fucking demand it. So then they have to pay attention and that's a problem. Right. Yeah. You get headlines like that fucking albachino thing. Right. They're just, they're just trying to get clicks. That's why CNN is dangerous. That's why CNN is dangerous because CNN with their biased reporting, the way they communicate things, people don't trust the news anymore. Right. That's, that's what freaks people out. Yeah. Okay. They don't know who to trust anymore. So there's this chaos state where people are very uncertain about sources of information. And you know what I must say, that is a good thing. Like I think that the weird voodoo that has fallen upon so many people believing that what's in your phone, what you're looking at is a reflection of truth is really bad. Like you want to talk about it as sometimes it is. Well, yeah, I mean, but you, that's the problem. The job is you have to discern one from the other. The idea with educating people wasn't like, teach them how to do fucking algebra. It was like teach them how to be rational. Separate truth from non truth because the moment people are incapable of doing that, then they become susceptible to con artistry at the highest level. And the moment that happens, you get all the awful events that have happened throughout history. So, so the problem is, man, this replication of reality, we're getting second, no matter what it is, if you're watching TV or you're looking at your phone or whatever, you're getting secondhand digitized reality. You've taken fundamental truth, which is nature. And you've converted into some kind of warped digital representation of it. And so the more you are sort of harmonizing with that, the less you're harmonizing with just basic, fundamental truth. You go outside, you look at the trees, you hear the birds, you know what season it is. It's real. Like that's not misinformation. That's just fundamentally true. You know, but what we've become separated from that by many, many layers of bullshit. And you're right. And so now what do we have? We have like people who are terrified. Have you heard the term fear American? Fear American? Yeah, like Americans go to other countries and they're all fucking freaked out. And just completely anxiety written because of the connection to world events or a reality tunnel that's being presented to them by wizards who are getting gold from the alchemists. That's basically what's happening is the alchemy guild is paying the media wizards and the media wizards are like casting a spell on everyone to believe this very specific reality tunnel. It is not real. And if it is temporary, it's very best. It's temporarily real. But it's warped. It's slightly distorted. That's the problem. It's like something in there is true. But it's been distorted in this bizarre way by the media wizards. And now everyone has like lost track of the basic human ability that has to be cultivated to detect bullshit. Like, you need to grow that in yourself. You need to be able to look at anything and think, I don't think this is true. Where this come from? Who's like every time something pops up, you're very good about it on your podcast, by the way. You like point it out. Like, wait, what did you say? And then you look it up. And then if it's not true, you admit you were hoodwinked. But that's not happening with most people. They're just reading the fucking thing and they're not researching it. And my God, that is how you get pickpocketed, man. That's like, that's the worst predicament of the world. That's a great way of pointing it out. That's exactly what it's like. You're being mentally pickpocketed. Yeah, man. And you're being like warped and manipulated. One of the insocial psychology, one of the weird problems of having a human brain is we remember information. We don't remember the source. So if I could just give you some bullshit information, you will forget. I told it to you in a hot tub. My eyes were dilated and I was just like rambling about something. You might accidentally remember that truth is truth because you forgot the source. And so your brain spits it out. It's like, yeah, this is reality. You don't know that that guy implanted into you by someone who wanted you to buy shit. You can't remember that. Sorry, man. I feel like I have those amazing. You have burgers. Not coming out of my nose. Can you see? No, no. Let's see anything. Okay. I'm just so excited about it. You don't want to like be rambling about fucking aliens and pharmaceutical companies. The nasty fucking just makes you more human, Duncan. I hope I am. It all, I feel like it's all like a real example of why we need regulation in that regard. Like you need a government oversight that is completely objective. That's not influenced by money. It decides what people can and can't say. Like what are the odds? Like let's just get crazy. If CNN is the news, what are the odds that CNN would publish an honest investigative discovery into vaccine injuries? It would be amazing if they did. I mean, if they could you imagine them being able to do that? I can see. I can see. Right. In a strategy meeting, is they're trying to like get the network back up to snuff somebody and they'd be like, what if we do this? And then there's money involved and then I could see suddenly like maybe it's some point. The money involved is from the ads. Right. It doesn't have to get the money from something. You have to go back to CNN plus we're reviving CNN plus. Dude, I love CNN plus. No. You don't ever. No, I just never said that. You like Brian Stelter is the best book club. CNN plus definitely like, you know, like at least like the whatever Fox is subsidiary was. I think that's still available and works. They showed Roseanne Barr's stand-up comedy special on Fox Nation. Yeah, Fox Nation. Is that what it is? It's a called Fox Nation. Yeah, Fox Nation. And I'll admit, man, I came close to press. It's driving only because like I like to watch lifetime movies. Do you ever watch lifetime movies? Did they don't have them on Fox? Hey, should please tell me this. Well, they don't have lifetime movies. But Fox Nation seemed like a lifetime movie because of like, they're like really veering towards like, you know, conservative hyper morelistic sort of like Christian values and it's like, but turning the volume up too high on that creates an inadvertent comedy. And so like, I was like, fuck man, I want to watch that. I got really funny to watch. That's a great thing to watch on mushrooms. The one's not on mushrooms. Oh my God. The book's so insane. It's, I mean, I just watch OAN. What's that? America's news network. Is that what it is? I never watched that. What was that one that they had? Was it OAN? Yeah, but you have a question. I don't know. I said it totally wrong. It's one American news. One American news. What is that? It's that it's that it's like turned up to 11's Trumpism turned up to 12. Yeah. Yeah. See? Like that would describe it. It's very much a right wing channel. Dude, I think you need to take dips in all the propaganda. You know, like. So far right pro-Trump cable news channel founded by Robert Herring Sr. Here's, here's the real problem with any of those things. It's hard to find a good anchor. Very hard. Finding someone that can tell you what's going on or you don't want to stab them. Yeah. It's hard. Really hard. Those things. It's hard to find a good anchor. Very hard. Finding someone that can tell you what's going on or you don't want to stab them. Yeah, it's hard. Really hard. Because all those people are fucking super annoying, like the way the communicator is annoying. Well dude, for, you know, they have to read a fucking teleprompter, right? So it's like, they're basically like automatons who are... And they're scared to lose their job. Of course. They just fired Don Lemon. They fucking... The smartest, most talented guy in all broadcasting, and he can't make it. We're all on the chopping block. Dude, let me tell you, man, the fucking day, the day they've cut can women. A quiver went through everyone at CNN like, Jesus fucking Christ, we're all in danger here. Check out Riddle Lemon. They plucked the lemon from the tree and they left this void. Now what? How do you replace lemon? Well, they don't have any stars anymore, right? Like, do they have blitzers? I was exciting about... Is this still on that? Wolf Blitzer. Blitzer. What a great name. Best name ever. Wolf Blitzer. Wolf Blitzer. That's a guy should be in a fucking 1940s World War Two movie. I know, dude. Wolf Blitzer. Wolf Blitzer. They're the pack leading America to victory. Come on, boys. Pain don't hurt. Yes, glen to blitzer. Like a Patrick's Wazy type character. Lazy Grandma, don't they go Russians? Best money we ever spent. Best money we ever spent. So there he's been there since I was in the next movie. Wolf B. What's up, baby? Look at the hair on that bastard. Lucky, just fucking devil. Yeah. Beautiful salt and pepper hair. Slick back. You know, I'm receding a little bit dignified. Dude, that's incredible hair. Blitzer has a great hair. Got a great beard. Look at his beard. That's good looking fella. Someone does that for a name. Wolf Blitzer. Oh, yeah. He's well-quaft. He's a star. He's been there since 1990. He's the blue and keep seeing in together. I don't mind Blitzer. I can't remember. Like, I feel like... I don't remember the last time I watched Blitzer, but like, there was something about him I liked when I was watching that shit. Well, he seemed a little... You know, he was questioning things. Yeah. When we talked to people, he seemed like he was actually doing a little bit of journalism there. Yeah. And really trying to get to that. So many times, you see people like, did you ever see the Biden-Dod Lemon conversation? No. It's bananas. Can we? Because it's Don Lemon. That try, and first of all, Don Lemon is a fairly caddy fellow. Right? Like, it seems very... Very. It seems like, if he didn't like that guy, if that was Donald Trump and he was talking that way, he would have jumped all over him. Right. But he's letting Joe Biden ramble and just go off and forget what he's talking about. And did you get the back scene? Yeah, it works. Yeah. And then I was telling people, like, it's a wild stream of consciousness. Like, Biden losing his place, you know, sometimes he loses his place. Yeah. He does it with Don Lemon. And Don Lemon is there just like, like a curator of a child that was just giving some psychoactive drugs and they're bouncing off the walls. He said to what? Dude, that's how I gave him a fucking stomach ulcer. I have to like... What's this? Yeah. To not be able to call it out. But also, it's like, if this was anybody else, so if you're a journalist, are you a journalist? Like, are you a human being that is the mouthpiece of America? Right? If you're a human being that is there observing some pretty strange behavior, and you'd want to expand on that, like, what are you saying? Like, why are you saying it that way? Like, what is happening to you? Yeah. Are you okay? Can you think clearly? If this was the opposition, see, this is the thing about having anchors that are so... Like, you're gonna have anchors that have opinions. Always. Everybody has opinions. But to have an anchor that's so clearly, so rigidly, one-sided. So watch this. Play this. Are you okay? I mean, you should even... No, it works. Or, you know, or the mom and dad, or the neighbor, or when you go to church, or when you're... No, I really mean it. There are trust-'t-in-in-the-lockers. Think of the people. If your kid wanted to find out, whether or not there were... There's a man on the moon, or whatever, you know, something, or, you know, or whether those aliens are here or not. You know, who were the people they talked to beyond the kids who loved talking about it? Talk to me, bitch. I got the answers. That guy sounds like us. He sounds like us after a couple of hits of laughing gas. Dude, no. Like, Joey's me. No, man. That's elder abuse, man. That's like, you know, that's kind of like, when that's happening, you're gonna go, okay, dad. Okay. Okay. No, sleep. Edibles. I like to think he's not Edibles. Dude, I don't know. Man, I think this whole thing is just so ridiculous to him. We can't believe his son, his fucking dropped his laptop off at a fucking repair shop filled with all sorts of evidence of crimes and dick porn, feet porn, chaos. Chaos. Chaos. Running a muck. Running a muck. Running a muck. His kid is just going wide. Going... Measuring Coke. Fresh off the CIA plane. I like how he measures it though. Smart. Even though he's like doing crack, he's like, let me make sure I don't overdose. Yeah, I mean, you've got to like a lot of money on here. Right. Yeah. I mean, my bad guys. It's very presidential the way he weighs crack. I mean, if my dad does, you're getting a good sum. It's like a succession thing. Yeah. Did you show a succession? Yeah. You watch it? I got into it and it was so intense, I stopped watching it. I was absorbed into it and then it was like, man, I can't do this every night. It's really good. It's so good. It's really good. It's a really, really good show. And it ends amazing. Bravo. Bravo to the end, I just want to say. There's the best ending of any series I've ever watched. There's the only, and even the Sopranos, I get what they were doing. But at the end, I'm like, really? Oh, I didn't finish the Sopranos either. The last episode of the Sopranos is kind of like, I get what he's doing. I get it. You can't fault them. The fucking show was just genius. They can't have a bad word to say about one episode that I didn't enjoy. The show was amazing. They literally made a psychopath a hero. Yeah. He was our guy. We wanted Tony Sopranos was the fucking man. He had enough moral fiber that we accepted him. Right. And it was attractive that he was that guy. He's his fat guy. He's banging hot chicks doing Coke, and he's running the mob. Yeah. It was great. I mean, that was what I thought. It's fucking great. And at the end, there are just sitting there, and this guy seems to be paying attention to him. Oh, really? Yeah. And the idea is that the guy killed him. No shit. Yeah. So we're all hanging out here. And that's the end. The car parks. Yeah. That's amazing. That's a cool ending. They're all eating onion rings. These people get out of the car and they start running. Unless the daughter she comes and sits down. That's right. Now, it's spinoffs. That's it. Don't stop. Bam to stops. Wow. He's looking at so much. So genius. That's so cool. Looking at someone about to get riddled by bullets. Wow. That's so cool. Man. Fuck. That's amazing. That life, you probably just waiting for the day with someone. Yeah. You killed so many people. Yeah. You done so many horrible things. Yeah. It's so fucked up, man. Just think about that. Take a like, not to get back to the Ukraine thing, but think like being fucking Putin. How fucked up that feels, man. Like every day, what a rotten fucking day you're having. I mean, this is the thing, man. It's like with Biden, with Putin, all these people. It's they're too old. Give them a like they need to, it's like they're sucked into something they can't get out of. They all have their various maladies and somehow we're letting that happen. Like globally, we're letting people who are clearly not okay up here, who are clearly like man, like if you saw, let's imagine you, you're you walking to a 7-Eleven and you see some old dude talking like Biden was talking to Don Lemon. You if you didn't stop and say, Hey, are you okay? Do you wear what's going on with you? You would be like an asshole like that that's someone you help. Not someone you like put into a fucking job that melts people half your age down. And like all the shit is not. Yeah. Where's the fucking compassion? It's crazy. It's old man who needs to be like enjoying the last years. I'm having this discussion while I'm wearing wolf. I do realize that I am too. But what are their options? That's the problem. What are their options? They have a vice president that seems like she's not the best at it. And then who is on the horizon? Like who's going to take that that spot? Who's going to take that leadership position? Dude, who's there that makes sense? The option is just start telling the truth. Like the moment. But that's not going to happen with them. So what they want to do is win and they want to stay in power and even they can even justify that by saying that we are going to do the overall good. We have like great ideas about social justice. We have great ideas about reshaping the economy and making things more fair. And you know, they've got some good points. There's just not like the liberals don't have things that I agree with. I agree with most of what they say. Well, most of the idea like the civil ideas. Like what? Most of the things about equality. Most of the things about like the idea that there's like real income inequality in this country. It's real. And it's kind of creeping. And there's a source and the source is opportunity. And if we don't create opportunity for these people that live in these horrible places, then we don't give a fuck about them. And then if we wonder why there's so much crime, we wonder why there's so much violence. And then you have to wonder is there an industry that's based around making sure that people stay criminals? Or there is. Prison industrial complex. It's a real thing. Right. They need prisoners. And then you find out that prison guards unions lobbied to keep marijuana illegal. Right. You're like, what? Because they want more people in their prison. Yeah. They want to lock people up so they can make money. Right. It's crazy. And prison. So the liberals are right on a lot of these. I just think they're wrong in the approach. I think the approach is not to just exonerate people and let people out of jail and let fucking chaos and sue and defund the police. I think the approach is to start dumping money into the cities, start figuring out how to set up community centers, start figuring out how to get people healthy food, start people, figuring out how to protect people from gang violence. In fact, maybe have more police so that the police can prevent people from getting shot and killed so they feel safe in their community. But you have to get better police. So you need more money for training, more money for funding, more money for salary and make them feel like a respected, appreciated part of the community and then have oversight over them. And make sure that the people that have oversight over them are good people. They're good people exist. Yeah. They're out there. We're mostly good. Human beings, I think, are mostly good. Fundamentally good. Fundamentally good. But we get covered up by defense mechanisms. That's the problem. That fundamental goodness is covered up in work by defense mechanisms and confused motivations. I mean, fuck. That's the saddest part is it's like, when you say they want to win, their idea of winning isn't even winning. It's just holding power. That's not winning. But that's winning. They think it's winning and that's what human beings do. We naturally play this game of winner and loser with almost everything. That's why neighborhoods, like people try to keep that's the expression and keep it up with the Joneses. They're trying to win. You're like, hey, my God, Corvette, fuck him. Yeah. You know, I'm going to get a Ferrari. Oh, my God, you like my Ferrari. Yeah, piece of shit. Right. You know, it's like classic comedy sitcom tropes. Right. Yeah, that to me is like, you're right. I think you're right. You want to win, man. People want to win and there's like, it's dangerous to have cops, pull people over. You know, there's something about that too. Like, you definitely should be pull people over because they're bad, but come from it. They want to fucking, they want to write tickets. They want to catch people. They want to bust people. They're supposed to bust people. It's the profit motive is fucking everything up. But, but it's like also what is creating some of the coolest shit ever. Yes. That's the problem. Like it's a double edged sword on one side. Competition creates insane innovation based on market pressure. It's incredible. On the other side of it, you get people who shouldn't be millionaires. You get people who somehow have overcome their desire to have the next Ferrari and realize, oh, the better thing to do is help. Like, I just want to help public cert. The idea was it's a public servant. Not someone who's like manipulating the fucking stock market or selling their shit. That's the problem. It's really insidious and it's like on one side, it's like, all right. So if we regulate it, well, now you've got like the hardcore socialism starts happening. Now you've got redistribution of wealth. Now you've got you're trying to like reset the game in the middle of the game. And lots of people like, no, fuck that. We're not resetting the game. Right. But then on the other side, if you don't do anything about it, then the game like takes over everything. It's like government is now no longer represented of government at all at all. At all. It's just a weird bag of greedy miscreants who are all getting various checks from various sometimes competitive industries and making laws based on that. And that's not a government. That's, I don't know what that is. That's a casino or something. That's just people who got to the high roller table. Yeah. Or no, it's like people who are like, I'm done gambling. I'm going to control the fucking casino. Well, that's what people are terrified about with generational wealth. That's why people are terrified of like very, very wealthy families that transfer this money down to their children. Like the children don't earn it. Yeah. Like that's the king. That's Joffrey. Right. Yeah. You know, everybody knows what that is. That's my success and it's such a good show because you can relate to it. Right. Like, yeah. Like what a, what fucking bizarre reality to the existence. Dude, I don't know, but I wish I'd experienced it. I look fucking fine, baby. Oh my God. Can you imagine bursting out of that womb into some illuminati fucking delivery chamber? That's blazing. Holy shit. It's the best. Oh my God. What a lie. Private jets from birth. Oh, fucking incredible. In access to the dream of chrome chambers. Like dream of chrome on the left on the left just ever. Ever choose your irises. They'll let you right in. Dude, I can't even, that, that is just so crazy to imagine what that's like. What is that like? You never know. You never know what it's like to like worry about being able to like, you know, if you ever like gone out to eat with people and you have to run your credit card, you know, please got let it go through. all over John as you know what I mean? Like, it's moments like, I'm about to get humiliated. You're part of my friends. You've never known that you've only known endless infinite opulence. You're giving, you have, your nannies have fucking nannies. You've got like, you're being educated by like some of the smartest people on the planet. Your diapers cost as much as like most people's like wardrobe for the year. You know, like world for sure. Yeah. That's a really cool incarnation man. I strange because it doesn't give you the adversity that you need as a young person. It doesn't give you the challenges to overcome. It doesn't give you the real possibility that you could be broke someday. The real possibility that you might not have enough food. I think there's a superpower in growing up poor. I really do. It never escapes me. Never. Growing up poor when I was a young boy, we were drinking like powdered milk and literally living off welfare food stamps. I remember that. I remember that clearly. I remember that clearly. I remember shame. I remember all of it. And so also I saw my parents build out of that and then move to a respectable middle-class suburb so that we could go to a good high school. So I saw what hard work and all the thinking that was involved in playing this out properly led to get out of that. Yeah. But we were in San Francisco in the 1970s and it was fucking weird. It was, I felt very vulnerable already. But then on top of that to be poor and then on top of that to be a latch key kid. So I was just like out wondering how I could just like leave and go anywhere. Right. Yeah man. That formed here. Yeah. That forms you. You grow up on private jets and if you grow up always knowing that you're going to have money, always knowing that you're going to be fine, always knowing that you're going to be a part of an empire at one point that has wealth, the likes of which no one will ever be able to explain where your children will be billionaires. You can divide it evenly amongst their children. They'll be entrepreneurs as well. It's nuts. It's a different. It's like a different universe. But those kind of people that grow up in that environment will never think like you do. They won't. They'll never think like I do. They won't. There's like extra gears that you have that you're born with when you live in poverty. I think that's what you look at all the great athletes. Almost all of them. Unless they grew up in households that were like very strong households with a father really encouraged athletics and was like really a great coach and the kid like grew up competing and really enjoyed it. That's possible too. But in fighting in particular, boy, it's a lot of people from fucking dire poverty. It's a lot of people. But don't you think it's possible as a parent? Because like, I mean, my kids aren't scraping by and I know your kids aren't. Isn't it possible as a parent if you're lucky enough to not have to worry about that shit? Our parents worried about to still create a childhood in a life that isn't. It's been imbalanced and has within it the possibility for failure and having to like figure out how to do shivers. Yes. Right. 100% it's possible. It's just a different challenge. Right. Like in life presenting you with challenges that you could have never predicted, you didn't ask for and they're right in front of you and you have to deal with them. People that go through that sort of a life, I think they have like way more defenses up, way more awareness of deception, way more awareness of people's ulterior motives and people who are creepy, people who aren't being genuine. And even I have both encountered plenty of people like that. Yes. Well, you'll pull me aside and go, hey man, I don't think this guy's cool. Right. Like something wrong with this guy. Yes. Yeah. And you know, I'm not going to get that necessarily from everybody. Some people are not going to see that. Right. They're not going to have been in danger of situations where they had to like realize the consequences of not recognizing these kind of people early. Yeah. Sure. Yeah. So you know, yeah, I mean, this is the again, it sucks because it's like, yeah, what do you get? Right. You get a flame fucking amygdala is what you get. You get like your fucking brain just loves to spray out cortisol. And so like that's what you get because you came up with that. You watch your fucking parents freak the fuck out for your and potentially your entire childhood. And so yeah, you're freaked out. You're you're living in like a weird battlefield that doesn't even exist anymore. That was your childhood where it's like, yeah, some people they don't they didn't have that. So they're, you know, they don't go they don't think about shit like that. They don't think about like, oh my God. This is person. Is this person okay or oh my God. They don't have that that we have. I think it's dude, honestly, man, I don't know. I do agree with you that adversity has has to be in a human life. And if you remove adversity from a life, you do an incredible disservice to that. The potential of that life to the potential of that life. Because it's it's just physics that it can be in anything. It could be in disciplines. It could be in games. They play. It could be in sports. It can be on a lot of things. But they have to do things like you got to do shit. That's a confront the learning curve. Yeah. So you got to learn how to get better at stuff. And then you got to be excited about that feeling that you get when you get better at stuff. Yes. That's a giant. That's a giant part. Dude, that's it. That's it. And you start connecting with that feeling is being actual success. That's actual success. Not like whatever else the world gives you is fantastic. Don't get me wrong. But if you never had that feeling in a lifetime and you were like sleeping on bags of fucking cash, it wouldn't mean anything. It wouldn't mean anything. But that's the weirdness of winning the lottery. That's the weirdness of all of a sudden becoming a part of this hyper wealthy elite. And that's the weirdness of anybody's life in North America. Like if you're in North America, first of all, you hit the fucking lottery. Right. If you're in the United States, oh shit. You don't even have to get vaccinated. Have you ever counted out? Canada used to be an awesome spot to live. until the lockdowns. And it was like, what is happening up there? Yeah, what is happening up there? Oh, and on. It's like all the places you would expect to have some encroaching fascism happening. Never. Never counted. I've never met my list of it's very odd. Like, you're doing under the guise of social justice and so creepy. But that is that is how you do that. Like if you want to do fascism, that's how you do it. Like you don't do fascism by saying like, hey, we're going to control the shit out of you motherfuckers. You do it by saying, hey, you better watch out because this thing is coming. And I'm the only one that can keep you from that thing coming. Fill in whatever that thing is. Throw in the lock people out of their bank accounts for protesting when they have the freedom convoy. They lock people out of their bank accounts. They lock people out of their bank accounts that donated. Not even that went there, that donated. You can't agree with them. You can't agree with them. We're going to take your money. That's spooky. That's crazy. That's so scary because it sends ripples of fear through everybody. And it should. It should. Just because you think you're doing it for the right reasons, that is there's a reason why we are so protective of the Bill of Rights. We're so protective of the Constitution. If you don't have something like that where it's written down, they just keep pushing the rules. Yes. They're making all these crazy new woke rules in Canada. You can't say shit about it. There's censorship of everything in the internet that they don't like. they can pull things down. They can do all kinds of wild shit. I don't know about the internet. I know it's about broadcasting. I know there's like, they've passed some new censorship legislation. I don't think it's the internet. I'm exaggerating. But what it is is spooky because that guy is like not being honest about what he did during COVID. He's saying they never forced anybody to get vaccinated. They can fucking kind of did. You ruined their life if they didn't. Censorship bill. The Bill of Rights changes the Canada's Broadcasting Act. legislation requires streaming services such as Netflix and Spotify to pace, to support Canadian media content like music and TV shows. It also requires a platform promote Canadian content. Is that it? It says regulate though. What else is in the regular? You could say that's the good positive spin on it. It's a nationalistic effort. We want to promote more Canadian content. Still we are. But I know they've had that in the past. So they had that for like radio and for television. They had rules up there. I remember that because somebody I knew was a DJ up there. The Bill makes changes to Canada's Broadcasting Act legislation requires streaming services such as Netflix and Spotify to pay the supply. It also requires platforms to promote Canadian context. Specifically, the bill says online undertakings show clearly promote and recommend Canadian programming in both official languages as well as indigenous languages. The changes give the Canadian radio, television and telecommunications commission Canada's broadcast regulator broad powers over digital media companies including the ability to impose financial penalties for violations of the Act. The government says legislation is necessary to impose the same regulations and requirements in place for traditional broadcasters on online media platforms. Right now broadcasters are required to spend at least 30% of their revenue on supporting Canadian content. Online streaming has changed how we create, discover and consume our culture and it's time we updated our system to reflect that. A government news release on the bill says. That's not good. None of that is good. Because them saying, are we are we are we not moving to a global entertainment world for the English language? Because it seems like it's kind of moving in that direction. I mean some of the best podcasts in the world like trigonometry comes out of the UK. There's a lot of stuff out of America that's very popular over there. Like who gives a shit if it's Canadian or if it's American like and you're going to regulate the internet. But to me that the real creepy thing is the state is saying what Canadian culture is. Like culture isn't supposed to be something that kind of spontaneously emerges from groups of people. But they're not exactly saying that. They're saying you have to say that you could look at it in an altruistic way. You could say this is a promoting Canadian content and it'll encourage more art to be created in Canada. That's more opportunities. That's fine. But you can't regulate that. You can't legislate that because you can't give those fuck heads power over creativity. You just can't do it. You can't do it. You'll ruin it all. You'll ruin the internet. You'll ruin it all. The bill's journey through Parliament has been difficult. Rodriguez, Talle, table, the legislation, the House of Commons on February 2022. Nearly a year later the Senate sent C-11 back to the House Commons with amendments. The House accepted most of the amendments but rejected others. So is it passed or not passed? One of the most contentious points of debate is whether C-11 would apply to user generated content such as podcasts and online videos. The government has insisted that the legislation is not intended to regulate independent content creators. Not intended is a rough thing. Not intended is not a good way. I don't like it. It's not intended but it could be used in that way. Right. So just they're just going to have more power to tell you what to do. And if you're a Canadian person who is broadcasting a podcast out of Vancouver and you have a narrative that doesn't fit with what Trudeau wants you to say. Yeah. You could run into trouble. You can't have them have any power over the Internet. You got to say no. Dude, this seems like they passed it. Here's the thing. I don't know. If you subscribe to whatever the particular modality of your government is in regards to censorship, controlling art, controlling public dialogue, right? You think this is what you think. Well, they have to because I'm in danger of this or that, whatever. Maybe they're good. They're good. So Trudeau's online censorship law. They'll see 11 passes parliament. But dude, the problem is, the problem is, you are thinking your government is going to stay controlled by the people whose ethics you believe in. But you look historically at the world. Coos happen. Oh yeah. Secret coos happen. And then all of a sudden, all these rights you gave away, you've given them to the people who you are fighting against. Guys. Dude, that's the problem. It doesn't. Governments don't last long enough to let them have that much power. A previous Senate amendment to exempt user generated content from the bill was rejected by senators on Wednesday evening. God damn. So that means user generated content like podcasts are now under the grip of the Canadian government. They got you. Congratulations. That's so scary, man. It's so dumb because it's an incremental push. Jordan Peterson has talked about this. This is how it works. They push you a little bit. You don't resist. They push you a little bit more. You don't resist. They push a little bit more. You don't resist. And then you realize how far you've gone from the initial point. And that's what's happening. And that's what just happened in Canada. Yeah. Just a very slow trajectory towards the economic control. It's the fucking internet. You can't like say that someone has to have 30% Canadian content on the internet. It's bonkers 30% of Netflix. Do you know how God damn insane. It's the fucking internet. You can't like say that someone has to have 30% Canadian content on the internet. That's bonkers 30% of Netflix Do you know how goddamn insane that is? That's a lot. I know what they're acquiring them to do that there's so much You got a what maybe they have to spend 30% of their budget to promote it. Yeah, Canada Fuck out of here dude. It's it's awful. I can't I can't believe it's happening. It's just so fucked up that people That we're a we allow this shit to have so why well like why would anybody even want that control? Why what's wrong with you? Well, what's wrong with you that you want to control the dispensing of information? You're lying Right like that's pretty much You need to control right people's ability to challenge whatever lie you're telling right It's in the more egregious the lie theoretically the more you have to like shut any kind of counter argument down I mean it's a conspiracy is that he's Castro's kid he does look like he looks a lot of Yeah, the problem is his dad looks like Castro dude Look it looks a lot like Castro though. I mean maybe that's just something that starts out What if that's what happens like the more More you did ruined her career you should do it too take a DNA test, bro I would if I was Justin you know I would do that just to like shame all the people who said I was Castro I would have it turns out he looks 72% Cuban You don't tell me He's probably gonna take that test and call this mom. What the fuck mom, you know son It was a lonely weekend Castro's a wonderful man kind of cooler though right like that like I like the fucking unless you're living under his grip Dude, of course, but if you're gonna go fascist put on a costume right? I don't like it. You know what I mean I like cashers like I'm wearing fucking camouflage You are not going to like mistake me for anything other than an authoritarian leader like look I'm look at what he stresses exactly the way they just a military exactly, but it's to me when fascism becomes Like insidious when it like learns to disguise itself as the Opposite of what it is. Oh dude that is so spooky, you know, that's where it gets really scary there They're you know wolf and sheep's clothing. Did you ever see the video where they're asking Trudeau? How his family is using recyclables and how what are they doing to stop did not see that it's he's talking about his family drinking water They've they've switched to bottles of water that are made out of paper Those box bottles of water You guys see this because this is this is the real person like forget all the speeches All right, this is the real person that they've allowed to be in control of their liberty. All right see if you find that having a conversation about box water being Yeah, yeah But put it put it back from the beginning Was it we have recently switched to drinking water bottles out of water out of when we have water bottles out of a Plastic sorry away from plastic towards Paper it's hard to watch but hard to look away the prime minister What the fuck yeah, that's their exceptional leader. I mean that's when you catch him answering a question Like drink box water bottles sort of things the prime Yeah drink box water bottles sort of things. Yeah. That's what he's done. That's the big contribution I'm sure there's more right. I'm sure he's done more sure he switched to solar I'm sure he eats organic whatever but the point is that's the guy That's the guy that's telling you we have to be able to regulate podcasts Right that's because if we regulate we don't regulate podcast someone can play this very clip like you and I are doing from the great state of Texas Yeah, man. We're a person could talk shit About someone who should be talk shit about in that regard if you want this to run in Canada You're gonna have to put a Canadian flag up or something. I don't think that's gonna be the issue I think it's gonna be the issue of this 30% thing like what does that mean? Does it mean? If it's not broadcasting Justin Canada 30% Canada only the spot if I can it only has to like Stuff itself with 30% Canadian content. I mean maybe they have enough Canadian content already a lot of great stuff comes from Canada I'm sure a lot of great podcasts come from Canada. Maybe they already have like what I mean What's the percentage of podcast right now that come from Canada? See we can find that just let's just go to Spotify to say Google what percentage of podcasts Come from Canada on Spotify. I wonder if it applies to porn Like porn sites. I'll have to have 30% Canadian porn. Yeah, they have to Rules are rule bro. It doesn't go for me. It's gonna force people to make more Canadian porn That's a problem with shit like that is it like it gets so absurd when you start when you start un-repackaging it and realize like all the weird Things that like and ps who determines what is Canadian content like let's say it was shot in the United States But Harlan Williams is a star. Yeah, it's Canadian. Yeah, and who is in control of saying This is Canadian content. This is not what if Americans go to Canada shoot something is that Canadian content? How about they just do 30% of their program is Tom Green. We're good. That would be incredible I can't seem to find that information I don't know how I would even do it because I'm trying and it's not Mmm, that way what percentage of podcasts come from Canada just try that I don't know that anyone is even tracking that information. They might anyone cares where they can see Let's give it a go. Yeah, man. I just it's so it's a good weird Google, but I think that is a weird We're good. I get a response Yeah, it's like seven years. Yeah, I love it. Well percentage of candidates listen to podcasts, which is not what I asked Oh, that's but that's what I typed in, but that's what Google thinks I'm looking You know, because it's a weird question How about what percentage of podcasts are created in Canada? Try that in Canada Maybe create a sense of the same problem. It's not it doesn't think of masking So maybe there's a chart out there of Podcasts by country so that's what I have but that list were number one So it's just listing the most popular the most popular candidate Podcasting Canada. Sorry. Oh Coming from there in within the past to someone in Canada was tracking all that information and everyone has to be honest about where the Uploading and you know fine first of all shout out to Canada for make me number one. That's cool Yeah, I was looking for a Canadian named podcast, but these all just seem like normal. Yeah, there's a normal and a call or daddy Huberman lab number three. Yeah, yeah, Jordan Peterson. Yeah, pretty so much. Yeah, unless so damn One of people have been on this one. That's cool. That must feel good. It's fucking weird. I'll tell you that But once more coffee Yes, thank you friend. Yeah, man. I don't know. I'm I try not to the other thing about it is The more you fixate on the shares or cheers my brother congratulations 2000 2000 episodes The more you fixate on the state the state is an agrogore There's another it's a thing that so the more people that fixate on the thing the more powerful it grows That's the other thing the more it gets it likes You know like people when you realize they are enjoying negative attention. Yes That's the state it doesn't care what flavor the attention is It just wants attention. Yeah, and the more it gets powerful it gets the more people believe in it and that's all it If you believe it's gonna hurt you or if you believe it's gonna help you You're still supporting it. You're still bringing it into increasing levels of power. Yeah So that's the other problem is like everyone gets all fixated on the government like that the news has many new stations have just turned into Endless conversation about the government endless convert nothing about like human interaction at the basic neighborhood level just about like I don't know how many people are running the show but not that many and it's Gives the impression that the state is God Even if it's reacting to it like we got to stop this You're still worshiping it but with fear instead of like praise You're still making it something incredibly powerful, which I'm not saying it's not how much of that power is just coming from a General belief in the agrogore Yeah, of whatever the fucking government as boy. I sure hope I'm using word agrogore right No But the chance we kind of had a great quote about that he said we're doing the man's work for the man That's it. That's a lot of it because really how are you able to do these? seminars where you're talking about things that are completely illegal You're talking about these experiences with great detail. You're traveling all over the world And he said first of all is I think to paraphrase them one of the things was you have to keep it small If you notice he does these things just you know hundred people there 200 people yeah, it's very small like informal gatherings of people that are like-minded and You know you keep a circle tight. Yeah, yeah, you don't tune in drop out all that shit where you're telling everybody to quit school and do As like hey hey hey hey hey That's kind of key yeah, that's kind of key easy and ten lyrics to Mary and those guys the Mary pranksters They were other fucking minds out of their minds and they were reformulating what society would be and here's the thing They're not wrong. They're not wrong. They weren't wrong. They weren't wrong like we want to think like oh what they did was wrong No, you live and you die. Okay, you live and you die and along the way You have experiences and you are free to go to Mary prankster route and my world My world you you can go ham just do no harm just do no harm don't fuck people over You should all be like the same ethical and moral consideration should be applied to all Civilizations. Yeah, but the idea that these people can't just like drop out and fucking sell grilled cheese sandwiches at a grateful dead concert Like says who so who so who fuck you? Like fuck you yeah, they should be able to do whatever they want And I think one of the things that I feel as come out of the internet There's this more of an understanding of the idea. This is not just one way to live your life There's not just one life does this idea of like everyone has to get up at the same time and drive to some place To sit in a room with a fucking computer in front of them entering information or dealing with whatever the fuck they're doing They're like this is the only way to live like no This is a life that we've somehow or another oddly structured and you can participate in it if you like But if you don't there's other ways to live life That's real and I'm not saying you should get in a fucking school bus and everybody does acid I am but if you want to I feel like you should be able to if you're informed if you really know what you're getting into If you really understand it what we're scared of as young people getting sucked into cults Because that's a great way to get control over people you tell them all to come with you You all do acid in the field and then you don't do acid and you tell these people that you're a god and You know you fucking freak them out and that's the fucking guy that owned the one world theater Right that's what he was doing. Yeah, but I think he was using acid. He was using hypnosis And just right through something there you could have but it was a lot of gullibility It was a lot of like really idealistic young people that just wanted to learn from a real guru We're scared of that because I think there's a natural part of the human brain that was exposed during covid That also works to get people into cults that human beings like look towards a light to follow We look towards a guiding light we look towards the Savior and we want to be right. We want to be correct My savior's the real savior. My Buddha's the real Buddha. My god is the real God. My Buddha is the real Buddha I'm sure I don't I think that it's really really important that we understand that this structure the way this is all set up It's all set up by people that didn't have happy lives They didn't enjoy it these people that are telling you have to do a certain thing and go in a certain way like look at them They look like Lindsey Graham. Yeah, so many of them look so unhealthy and so sad and so just confused Just to what this is all about and very few of them have had psychedelic experiences very few Because if they did they wouldn't be so sure They wouldn't be able to just like keep saying the things the way they're saying They wouldn't be able to talk the way they're talking. They would just be sick and buy it all Dude, I don't know that I think that's a pretty big assumption I think that that assumption which we've all had to have been a fit of a psychic elk You get fucking Lindsey Graham a nice whopping 500 microgram dose of LSD He's gonna come out the other side of that a new Lindsey Graham. I don't know. I don't know man I'm talking about a camp Okay, I'm talking about taking these motherfuckers to a camp in the jungle and dosing them up for like a year Fascist rehabilitation That's what I'm talking about. I'm not talking about like one. Okay. Hey man. I got you Well, I had one bad experience. I'll tell you right. I'm right back to the whiskey and I'm ready to kill Russia I got you. That's the best money I ever spent you can go right back to that you remember that joke I used to say about DMT It's like pressing control all delete for your brain when your brain reboots Your desktop is completely empty except for one folder and that folder is labeled my old bullshit Yeah, you can either decide to open up that folder and go into it and just fall back in your same patterns Oh, you can go Let's look at this thing for what it really is right instead of being caught in these patterns of momentum Yeah, of the past and of of bizarre group think for cleavities that I'm just listening to this Audio book. I'm always trying to listen like some audiobook on spirituality It's Pima Children's book newest book about dying Something like how we live is how we die. It's very good book. Yes, but In this book, they're sort of talking about What happens when you die before your next life now? Obviously you're gonna have to subscribe to the model of reincarnation for this But it's really interesting which is You're what you're talking about these proclivities or it's called some sorry. It's a loop these cycles Cycle of suffering the way that you know those people are like why do I always this always happens to be in a relationship? Or that the thing in your life that keeps repeating This is happening because of your proclivities It's happening because of your attraction to this type of person or this type of situation or this type of job and And if you look at proclivities They happen fast like in any given moment when you're making these decisions It's not like you're spending a lot of time generally thinking about them It's just spontaneous like the next word out of your mouth. You're not down there like what do I say next? Which is coming so these are your proclivities and then when you die Those proclivities or what inform your next birth so if you have not gotten past your your spontaneous decisions that cause Lack of harmony in your life In your good then that will be the momentum that carries you into your next birth Which is why in Buddhism like they you'll hear shit like meditation is like preparing for death or practice of death It's like you're you're trying to Make it so that when you die And if you die nothing happens and you're dead forever Congratulations. Fuck. Yeah, you're out. You did it. You're great But if you die and you keep going and it and that model is correct Then you don't want to be reactive In between lies because you will you will freak out number one that you're you're dead and you saw of consciousness That's very disturbing for some people who thought that you die forever now You're like oh fuck. I'm still here and then you don't like not having a body anymore You want to get back in a body in the same way So you fucking just you see you just dive into the next life as quick as you can Instead of like having a little bit of like consideration in between You know and not just that you're essentially your projections the proclivities They they become holograms basically so in that sense. Do you believe in old souls? I believe in momentum. I believe that we have one right now where am I right now is I think that Consciousness or awareness or awareness or what's called non-conditioned awareness Before the overlay. I think we all share that consciousness and We're like little ripples in that consciousness That's our that's our karma ripples in this consciousness that we all share So I think every soul is Is out it's transcends time like it's all outside of time space But how but I guess there could be the potential that certain people's like addiction to rippling that To being within the emptiness and having a body and a self and an identity Probably keeps them coming back here over and over and over again. That's what I would say again This is a cause this is a cosmology That is unquantifiable and I don't think it matters Necessarily if it's real and not at least for me I use it as a tool to help give me the motivation to be less of an asshole I mean and also when you're dying and You know whatever the next life may be viewer or nothing who gives a fuck It's like you reincarnate in a lifetime Like you have many incarnations in any given human lifetime You will go through so many different phases and the more you gain control of your ability to not react The more you will inform what you're growing into the more it is a mindful or intentional personal evolution versus a kind of chaotic like mutation Based on just you instantly doing everything your brain tells you to do exactly in the moment You know, I think that's very accurate That very much resonates with me What you're saying that I'm like, I see what you're saying Because you kind of are like reincarnated As you develop and grow as a human being Absolutely And you have to be Maybe that was like the analogy from the Bible. Maybe that was what that was about What like the reincarnation? Like who knows what the fuck they really meant when they wrote those things. It's so hard to tell But I mean I think unless you could go back and read if you're read anything that's like translated Like someone tweets something in Russian like there's a lot of MMA fighters. They'll tweet something in Russian and I'll translate it It's a little broken garbalt. Yeah, it doesn't make total sense because the structure The language is so different than ours That's the Bible, man. You get if you if you could translate First of all if you could go back to the old disversion they have which I think the oldest version is the Dead Sea Scrolls That's the oldest version of the stories that wound up in the Bible. It's not necessarily the Bible It's yeah some stuff in the Dead Sea Scrolls didn't make the cut For the like it didn't get in there, but a lot of the stories are kind of similar But there's a lot of wild shit in there. Oh my god a lot of wild shit in the Dead Sea Scrolls I know I mean there's a lot of wild shit in the standard Bible. They put in the tellerim drawers But just imagine that that's the origin, right? So that's these animal skins that they found in clay pots in kumran And they do DNA tests on the animal skins to make sure that they align the pieces because it's all fragmented and broken apart No idea they have to figure out how to do yeah, you have to have the same animal So it's like okay, well, this is the same animal skin because we're in a DNA test on it And so then they get all the it took forever it took forever for them to do this That's why that John Marco Allegro book is so fascinating Oh dude sacred mushroom in the cross. Yes, that's where that book is fascinating because that guy studied the Dead Sea Scrolls for 14 years and he was an ordained minister who became agnostic When he started studying theology. He was like hmm may hold on. Let me reserve judgment Yeah, and he was a straight scholar and it was his determination after all these years of studying the Dead Sea Scrolls The entire Christian religion was a misunderstanding that what we think of it as today What it really was was about the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms and fertility rituals And that it was all baked into the stories and that the stories like even like that apple Like the forbidden apple. I mean they're talking about the amideed mascara mushroom What it looked like an apple. Yeah, which is red and apparently even the translation of it and in some Some people are translated to red instead of like that apple the term That it's actually means red that that's what they're trying to say they're not even trying to say apple Yeah, we've just converted it to an apple because that's the the best you know that story that the way that story comes together That you don't listen to God you eat apple and then all fuck now you ruined everything Yeah, you know and that's kind of what he's saying about the whole idea of These psychedelic mushrooms that they're they're hiding these things from their conquerors They're hiding these things from the Romans right so they they imagine if you had access to God and you had a Morauding Intrusive army that's about to come into but you want to document all this. All right Have to come fucking document it in parables. Yeah hide it have to hide it in stories Draw fish in that sand to let people know. Yeah, you're a Christian. Yeah, yeah So cool the underground Christianity is so cool in the stories of the Christian saints getting fucking butchered and and ignited and then like Crying not because they're being emulated but for the people emulating them. Oh Shit that is so our core man and do to get back to your other thing. You know about like That folder on the desktop. Mm-hmm. This is if you want to understand it always confused me the whole born again thing That's what they're talking about is like you have to You have to like fucking get rid of that folder And you can also what's cool about it is you kid it's saying you can you don't have to like be that you don't have to like Continue on this like dark shitty neurotic sad depressed selfish greedy angry Shadowy life like in any second there is a way to enter the kingdom of heaven Which is apparently here like stepping into another universe What the nazics called noses to wake up to like real reality and not the reality of the demi urge Which is what I would say if you want to find like what the demi urges it is the hypnotic Zeitgeist that's being presented to us by hierarchical power structures that presents a universe of Suffering and sorrow and hell danger with no solution ever offered No one is safe. No one is safe and nothing can fix it No one will fix this some version of that and and what you do is you hypnotize people and now they worship you because they're Connecting to fear and and and so this is like the story of like you know You embody that force call it whatever you want Satan You embody that force and that Hitler Hitler embodies Satan. Yeah, just follow me imagine Hitler when he was what's that famous speech that he gave the one that's available You could actually watch it on YouTube I don't have was in front of this gigantic throng of pain. I mean he is the guy that's leading the Holocaust He is the guy that's trying and he's hopped up on meth. Hi as a kite. Hi as a kite on meth They're shooting testosterone in damn. He's out of his fucking mind. I asked it. They're giving him cocaine injections. Look how high he is You ain't hear some of this Now if you're a regular person and you see someone talking with this kind of power Bro you've seen him tweaking out the Olympics. Oh, dude. That's my favorite Hitler incredible Yes, I heard core tweaking see if you can find the Hitler tweaking but see that that speech is fascinating because you're seeing it from there. There's some speeches where you see like the size of the crowd that he was Rowing for the area is tweaking not fine now if you wanted to Bring Satan into the material world. You would do it through a guy like Hitler. That's essentially Satan in the material world He essentially was Satan He was like a pawn of Satan like if Satan is a real thing. Well, what is it? What is evil? Who's all your being silly? Something if it is evil it exists right? I even the Holocaust was evil what he did was evil so How do you know that's not Satan like this literally like the satanic ideas? Possessed embedded in a human being yeah, yeah, that's real. That's a real thing And you can call it evil you can call it corrupted by money you can call it corrupted by power You can come up with a bunch of names for it. Yes, just evil Dude, I thought they sped it up because the guy there guys moving really fast, too But I think cameras were kind of goofy back. Yeah, right? But he's just tweaking hard. No if ands or buts you he's tweaking It looks like he's getting like a rough back massage, but nobody's there looks like he's fucking Dude, he's about to pass out Bro, that guy And everybody's so scared of him. No one's like dude relax. Why are you fucking rocking like that like take some cvd Someone on a podcast had the story it might have been Dan Carlin But there was a story about when Hitler maybe it wasn't I'm not sure Hitler went to visit Mussolini and apparently he had just got back from a campaign He was exhausted and so they shot him up with testosterone and they shot him up with cocaine and Mussolini was gonna Try to get out of the war and Hitler just fucking cornered Mussolini and just talked at him for like six Loosely news, okay, okay, I guess we're in fuck. Yeah, dude Getting cornered by Hitler when you're on cocaine You're both on coke probably I bet everybody was on coke back then dude. Do you know the story of and I'm sorry to feel good Diya now that's a good story. Yeah, you know the story of Diogen Diogenes is I don't know pronounce it. There's a story. This is some great philosopher and Caesar Here's about this great philosopher apparently he was an ascetic. He's living by a Like a river he's eating out of like he's eating out of like a dog bowl But he's revered is this brilliant Brilliant mine and so Caesar goes to visit him With his like, you know, I don't chariot, you know the Imperial regalia because he wants to co-opt the philosopher That's what the state wants to do is to create a connection between the philosopher and the state so he goes there And he says to him, you know, I'll give you anything you want just What is it and he goes? Can you move a few steps to the right you're blocking the Sun? The ultimate take down of that bullshit You're just a fucking person Yeah, that's all you are whatever it is you've convinced other people to think you are You're just like me. There's really no difference and and you just are doing everything you can to steal the limelight from Nature from God from the light that's and it's it's so obvious There's nothing there. It's smoke and mirrors Wizard of Oz. It's when he comes out from behind the fucking curtain There's nothing there. There's especially nothing compared to when you take the mushrooms They didn't apparently inspire the Bible and you get the direct transmission Yeah, and the direct transmission really doesn't give a shit about people like that. It's almost oblivious in a weird way But here's the question Do you think that in order for significant cultural change? Sometimes people like that have to exist to elicit outrage and That's what wakes people up. That's what leads people to Understand that you just can't just let these feeble minds Run civilization you just can't you can't and you got to get involved because you don't get involved They stay in power right and the same fucking system corrupts your children their children Everyone's children in the future. Everyone's a prisoner of the Can't and you gotta get involved because you don't get involved they stay in power right and the same fucking system corrupts your children their children everyone's children in the future everyone's a prisoner of this fucking stupid thing That's it and it's not worth it. It's not worth it even for the people that are perpetuating it because you're not gonna live forever You're gonna live and you're gonna die and everybody's on the same fucking path We got to make it better for everybody and the only way to make it for better for everybody the only way to make it better for everybody You gotta remove money and influence from any of these decisions We got you can't you can't let people make money because you've made decisions to kill folks You can't let people make money because you've made decisions to imprison people right can't and any of that you can't reward it But you know I think there's a precursor step. I mean the first step is mushrooms Even before you take the mush stop being an idolater like in the fucking Bible I always was confused like what's this worshipping false idol shit because it just seemed odd I was like why the fuck does God give a shit about that? I created the universe So what they're like throwing flowers at a cow who fucking cares? But now my old age I get it because it's not it's obviously it's representing Don't let anybody trick you into thinking that they're God don't let anybody trick you into thinking that they are some Whatever the fuck it is don't let don't let a middleman Tell you that he's got a direct line to the divine that you don't have because whatever that may be whether it's literally God Whether it's some access to some world of scientific information that you're too dumb to understand whatever it may be Don't fall prey don't succumb to that level of manipulation and The best way to do that is to look for the truth and for me that's God That's aligning with what I would think of as a transcendent benevolent ever expanding Consciousness and then this is where the mushrooms come in and that at that point Once you get a taste of that then the Those tricks don't work anymore. They don't work as well. They can still work. It doesn't work as well It's like you're not gonna it's like you're if someone's giving you walk your steak and then like then so they're like hey Do you want to go you to wish to steak with me? Here or do should we just go to sizzler What are you gonna say? What are you gonna say it's so that's the idea? It's like those people are sizzler. It's not it doesn't you you you number one You don't care as much that you might die Because you've connected with something that seems to transcend death And so then once you've done that what power do they fucking have now? You're not afraid to die now. They're burning you alive and you're praying for them while you die What what a mine fuck what a mine fuck watching someone you're emulating cry and pray for you because they they they They do see how lost you are Mmm, that person is not sleeping anymore like you're not sleeping after that you It's so powerful But you got to anchor yourself in something other than the world or the world will drag your ass all over the place Well the world that we live in is the world of the animal We are animals and we're so connected to this biological existence that is fueled our evolution That's what we were a long time ago And we still have that DNA that DNA of the survival animal that is being Threatened that's encroached upon by it. It's just the competition of survival of the fittest amongst the breed I mean watch it and you watching that chimp empire show you watch the way chimp ends He's doing yeah, we're an accelerated version of it. That's it. That's just us and There's God be an understanding of that if we're gonna We've got to understand that we're susceptible to like someone running things right susceptible to a leader It's a natural built-in. It's not like we see this person like that person is so good at life They should probably run everything sure. It's not like that. It's like we just need someone Yeah, like who's my are you my daddy? You're not my daddy you're my daddy for four years But I'll tell you we're gonna vote you out daddy. We need a new daddy. We need the country needs a new daddy. Yeah, you know Grumpy we get grandpie grandpies got problems and we try to ignore it You know we try to pretend it doesn't exist, but you know everybody's like no And then every four years you get a new daddy and sometimes you hate daddy daddy sucks Daddy's a racist like your mom doesn't want Mexicans to get in here. Yeah, man. Yeah, right You know the whole yes, yeah, and the whole fucking thing is so dumb so dumb because you you you're What's really nuts is like you're spending at least I'm basing this on scanning Twitter apparently all of your day angry at the government or Angry at people who don't like the government and the whole time that that's happening your life is just Rodding and melting away your chance to like be in the world and experience actual reality where the daddy is the seasons and The daddy is gravity and the daddy You space space you miss all of that and so you like instead of like connecting to Skymine as it's is called sometimes you're connecting to like this one pixel in a In a tiny little fragmentary part of human history and you are generating Powerful emotions from the machinations of whoever this person may be it's very sad Just because you're missing out yeah on the bigger picture probably probably Like it's a bigger it's a bigger thing out. How exciting like even if you're the most profound atheist in the world To the experiment like do an experiment pray don't like just it doesn't matter how you pray pray like an asshole Pray Obuseively towards God like do any form of prayer at all You just have to be open-minded about what happens over the next few days just be open-minded throw in the mushrooms see what happens because Even if it's all bullshit and there's just something built into the DNA of humanity that when we invoke a deity it makes our lives better Your life is better. Yeah Even if it's some materialist explanation behind why the majority of people on the planet believe in prayer and it will claim that is made their life better Great you've figured out some like hack for your biology. You know, but what if it's real? Shit well, what if it's real because of the hack right? What if that's what it is? It's like you just have to get your mind to a state where heaven is real You get your mind to a state where there is a God. Yeah Yeah, you don't you just and it's not like you believe you have to believe it forever either But also if it's a God beyond your comprehension beyond the comprehension of the mere mortal brain to just even envision what that means Wouldn't it mean something that created the universe sure? Okay? Well something definitely created the universe So if there is a God it's left a giant fucking footprint Right it's letting you know it's done this a universe you might say well it doesn't exist because there's not really a man The clouds and there's not a guy with a beard some patriarchal asshole runs the world and doesn't like gays It's not what we're talking about That's the God of man, but whatever it is made the universe is a thing. Yeah, what is that thing? Is it just chance? Is it just chances? It just Adams colliding is just a bunch of chaos going on in in a fucking hyperspace form. Is that what it is? Okay, maybe that's God. Maybe that thing is God. Yeah, because it literally creates everything So whatever that is it one level it is that at another level it's a unified harmonious event now because this is the idea is a distinction absolute reality This is the sum total of all things. This is when you know you've taken the right dose of mushrooms where you are gone Unitive consciousness you are now part of the whole. Hmm. That's absolutely reality Relative reality is the chaos that you one does not Negate the other the two are working together in this beautiful dance that they do with each other and so so if you get lost in one Or the other you're gonna embarrass yourself like this is the thing It's like if you get too caught up in absolute reality Then you're not paying your credit car bills. This is when Jesus said offer unto Caesar what is Caesar's It's like you must acknowledge the material world because you're fucking in it and you got to pay bills Right doesn't it also mirror the free will argument the free will versus determinism? Like determinism states you have no free will right but clearly you do yeah You know you make choices absolutely we all make choices the idea that these choices are only made because of the contents of your existence kind of true But also you can you can learn and make better choices next time like there's something going on So both things I think are going on some it's any but people want to be very dogmatic about it They will argue to the death that it's only Determinism and people will argue with death to the death that free will is what really shapes the world Yeah, determinism is nonsense and there's been plenty of examples of people that came from horrific backgrounds It grew to become exemplary people. Yeah, it is the continuum runs from this kind of like uh I don't eternalism and nihilism. That's a continuum so You know when you get imbalanced in one or the other there's like it has a real effect. Yeah on your life but the the ideas You know for example like does God change what maybe the personality of God changes maybe the idea that that We that we aren't part of God that if God is the totality of all things in the sum total of all lives that have ever lived outside Outside and inside of time your part of God your part of the evolution of God You're part of the outgrowth or outflow of the divine consciousness like that is Who and what you are and so you change? So God changes in fact it appears that God loves change because things are constantly changing within that creation if you want to be in The universe. Yeah nothing is an astatic state right. Yeah, which is why it drives me crazy when people talk about controlling the climate and I'm like listen we should definitely stop polluting We should we should definitely stop releasing CO2 from admissions if we could do that We should definitely stop doing all those things. We should definitely figure out a way to fuck do something to stop the harm that Industrial agriculture is doing We definitely should figure that also This shit that's gonna happen you got no say and ice ages super volcanoes asteroid impacts nuclear war earthquakes Yeah, there's some shit that goes down and has gone down and that's what shaped the very mountains your vacationing and stupid like that's literally the earth being up heaves right bottom by molten lava Right the rise of the cross that creates these majestic peaks that you have to ski down you fucking ape yeah We have to protect nature like nature's not gonna protect you I'll tell you that it'll shake everything off and start again every fucking billion years if it wants to It's I think it's very Scary at first if you really acknowledge the reality of how finite you are and how the planet that you're on is Uncontrollable and and that we maybe we can make some shifts I'm obviously clearly carbon issue everything you said obviously first obviously Obviously everyone wants clean water Everyone wants clean air. We all want that stuff at stop pretending some part of your species is like Somebody dump some oil in that fucking ocean out there. I want some It's it's it's very condescending and I think it's like non productive if your goal is to get everyone on board Telling half of the people or whoever they're fucking idiots is not gonna get them to your alleys Like there needs to be a little more compassion towards towards those people But yeah, man to deal with the the real truth which is like no one's gonna remember you in about 200 years Yeah, no one will think about you no one's gonna remember you no one's gonna care about you No one will visit your grave. There will be no one dreaming of you because they're gonna be dead and they're you're gone And it doesn't matter you know if they do care about you because you're gone you're out you're out So he did a good job of informing the people of everything you learned around you and the hug is many people so they miss you But that's about it buddy. We're all on some weird infinite journey and I think some people have gotten a little confused into thinking that What they they don't understand that they're they're they're attempt to like quote save the planet which again, please do is Actually an attempt to keep themselves from dying Yeah, that's a hundred percent. That's what it is. It's also a righteous ideology to attach yourself to that elevator social standing That's a problem with all environmental movements There's a lot of people that run them that are douchebags and there's a lot of people that are run them that are beautiful Amazing people that really do just want to change the world and then and then there's people that attach themselves to movements Because if you attach yourself to a righteous movement you must be a righteous person and so they exonerate some of all their shitty personality Traits because they can say hey, man, I'm fucking doing this for the earth You know, they have all this shitty fucking energy that it's attached to a cause that you probably support yeah They like hey, man How about fuck you and then you don't even like the environment anymore now you want to use plastic straws fuck the turtles Yeah, man I just don't see how a strategy that has built into it condescending aggression It's going to create the massive changes that that you are Prescribing yes how the fuck is it even in a work? How's it possible? You are ignoring the entire human biome in the psychology of that biome. Yeah, I think what are you gonna do shame people And to like end it not using plastic are you gonna humiliate people? Yeah, what are you gonna do how does that work? It doesn't work. It's never gonna work Yeah, it does it all fucking a meme online that was amazing. It was a Paper straw in a plastic package Amazing looking at that like how ridiculous that is exactly how is that not in the Babylon beer something like this Is this real they really have a paper straw it's wrapped in a plastic package fucking crazy that's so nuts But it did it really all come out of that one sea turtle that got a straw up his nose that horrible That was the worst that was horrible. Yeah, I came because of that sea turtle. I bet it was coconut straw Some kind of like it'll anti-encoke. They could Joey Diaz actually said that Funny a paper straw on plastic wrapper the green movement in a single picture. I think I might have stolen that from Joey Joey Sorry, that's of still very funny joke. Yeah. I was just trying to figure out where I heard that I think it's Joey the It's like okay. Let's think about the language of it, right? Okay things are getting hot We got to calm down. Yes cool yourself down first because this is the the ideas you are part of the planet Yes, and you're like if you the energy that you are invoking every day is hot angry fiery Everyone around you and then it affects them as they affect other people so since you're part of the planet Aside from doing all the things that make sense regarding carbon emissions or whatever it is that you think is gonna fix things You have to do the something a lot harder than recycling. Yeah, you have to calm down Right and get real Peaceful because I think that's what you want in the world. That's what everybody wants in the world But it's just hard when you don't have it in yourself So if you don't have it in yourself you have to take control of your own biology and your own mind and help yourself first Once you help yourself and you put that energy out there You could defect the people around you they can affect the people around them. That's why some neighborhoods are better than you know Not just because of economics, but also because some areas are like filled with nicer people Yeah, you know, it's like you get a good neighborhood. You got a good neighbor. That's beautiful You got a great neighbor. Okay, buddy. What's up? Yeah, like you're cool with them the best. It's a nice It's it's actually fun. It's wonderful. You know, I had the best fucking neighbor in California. He's a nice guy and His fucking house caught on fire and my friend bud actually had his house fire put out Because he was friends with the firemen and he stayed in while they evacuated Wow happy that they saved this guy's house. It's so cool. Such a good dude That's just it's so nice. You need to like like people and you see him like there's a guy in my neighborhood in Every time I drive by he waves at me. Yeah, he says old fella and he's always like tending to his garden He's out there in the front and every time anybody drives by this guy waves and I wave to him And I look forward to it and I drive that way during the day because I know that he's gonna be out there because I want to I want to say hi Yeah, see that's It's so simple. It's like it's such a little love thing. We're just exchanging love Don't put your fucking condescending political sign in your yard You know what I mean like and it's like Intentionally cutting you off from your fucking neighbors Pre-supposing that whatever their particular political ideologies are their roots compared to you Right stop doing that you are creating the problem you're trying to fix Yeah, just via the the the Mechanism you're using to fix the world is condescending fucking patronizing signs designed to infuriate your fucking neighbors That is a weird one when you see those signs on people's lawns. That's like what are you doing? Yeah, how about you put I love you in your fucking yard What how about you do that or like come over if you're hungry do that that's badass I saw a dude in front of his house. He had a painted gigantic painted sign There's a honk if you love Trump That is really In front of his house this all day fucking fact Torturing for five more ease in there wearing that that that dude is not experiencing any piece No peace. No peace. No real peace cuz real peace. Also fuck you's a lot of fuck you's I'm sure people probably roll the window down. Y'all fuck you Fuck you. You worship the golden calf Silver calf it's a war of idolaters you worship the monkey of light you dummy Yeah, you fell for it you fell for it you sucker. Yeah, it does take a very true Yeah, exactly man that maggocult. Yeah, the whole time The real like reality is we're sharing a planet and we're all basically the same and that's the truth That's the truth. That's the truth. It's in some people are like confused and some people aren't and every the best thing to do is to like Help yeah, regardless. Help just help like your friend who put out the fucking fire. Yeah He wasn't like what wait. Who did you vote for again? Well, I guarantee you that guy voted Democrat my friend is not It's like altruism is is is is non political what should it used to be it used to be okay It used to be okay to have differing political views. Yes people used to have friends that were Republicans and friends that were Democrats And everybody was okay together now everybody's like isolated in a tribe after Trump Trump Because he's so bombastic and he's got so much ego and it's so crazy like I think even if he's good to get us away from the swamp He's bad for the way people interact with each other because they hated him so much There's never been a guy that like people openly hated like that that was running for president Name one that was president the people openly hated because even W after 9-11 people were on his side Yeah, after 9-11. I remember he made that speech. We will get all those people that did that were smoke them out of their holes Like we were like fuck. Yeah. Yeah, everybody was like fuck. Yeah the whole country had fucking American flags in their cars People that are young that don't remember those days maybe we're too young for it. It was a Fundamental shift in the way everybody thought about everybody people were letting people in they were letting people change lanes People were waving to people it was weird. It was weird Everybody had decided to chill the fuck out. Yeah, man and joined together We realized like we're all in this together. We're all Americans. Yeah, you can do it in that You know you can do that without war you can do that without war and you could do that The way you do like as above so below if we Regardless of whatever the fucking news is telling us that why we should hate this person and why we should like that person If we ignore that shit and we all just start finding ways to connect with each other at the very least just stop judging people as harshly as you are I think the government will follow I think like will wag the dog so to speak that the government is like a reflection of us and that the more we like just a Delete that folder of band in the fucking programming a band in the the the the way they've been separating us and is so many ridiculous Factions that are supposed to hate each other the more we could expect the government to shift and maybe that's naive It might not be my even it might be the only way and also the people that get into the government People that grow up with this message instead of being indoctrinated into that system they come in there with like an eye for change like a mind for change And it is possible Change is always possible Yeah, we are the living embodiment of the fact that change is possible right where the biggest Experiment in self government the world has ever known and right now there's there's factions of our world that are working to try to undermine The whole self government aspect of it. Well, yeah It's because the federal fucking government doesn't need to be that big I mean like we have this like gargantuan fucking massive federal government they could that needs to get patered down and But it wants to keep power and it wants to survive people in there There's a lot of people there that need to be paid like a lot of money flowing. We're supposed to be on the same team Yes, we're all supposed to be Americans and that brings me back to the aliens. Yes Because if there is anything that's gonna wake people the fuck up To to how weird this whole thing is. Yeah, as if all these people that are coming forward All these people that are talking about us having retrieved alien crafts the vargina incident in Brazil Yeah, that they documented in that film a moment of moment of contact which is amazing James Fox movie I don't know if you've seen it. It's fucking incredible They it seems to like there was a crashed UFO seems like there was a crashed UFO in vargina, Brazil in 1996 and it's like they have you go into the town They have a replica of it. That's at the center the beginning of the town. Yeah, it's like as you're entering into the town They have a fucking UFO Everyone who was alive back then has a story of seeing these things flying through the air Yeah, the people that made contact with these creatures one of them died of a horrible bacterial infection They there's record of them transporting it to three different hospitals. Oh, yeah, wild shit man Wild shit. They did an autopsy on its supposedly the Air Force supposedly flew into vargina, Brazil and came back with the wreckage Wow, yeah, why did Brazil give a like oh, you mean the Brazilian Air Force the United States Why they give away their UFO because they probably had to there's probably look Governments give countries a they do this they do that we work this we're protecting from that We'll do this to help you from that There's a lot of weird shit going on and if if there's one country that really does have both possession of crashed UFOs and has a whole division a secret division where they Find crashed UFOs and retrieve them And this is what this guy David Grushe saying yeah, he's saying they do have that and they are in possession of that And then they're lying to Congress They're not showing Congress this and they're not showing the American people this But if they did if we knew how much of I mean This is the Ronald Reagan speech to the United Nations. Do you ever heard that speech? Yeah, sure It's an amazing speech. Yeah, yeah, because it made all the people the UFO doors go Right, it's real, but there was nothing forever nothing you have to be a UFO fanatic from like 1980 to like 2017 you had to be a moron I was more on look I was one of those guys, but you had there was not much you weren't getting much you occasionally get a book I remember I mean Roswell Yeah, it was well you did have Roswell, but you also had some weird stuff and one of the weird things we had was the The abduction phenomenon That was very weird That the guy from Harvard John Mac who did those all those hypnotic regression Sessions with people that claimed to have been abducted and they were eerily similar Yeah, eerily similar But apparently people have like questioned his methodology and people have questioned like the leading nature of Whether or not he led people into these thoughts You know like by questioning and them asking them. Okay. What have you experienced? Have you been experiencing? Have you been countering UFOs as an alien? I don't know what he what he asked You know what it's called swamp gassing that you know what that term swamp gassing No, it's not oh you yeah, yeah, yeah, you attribute. Yeah You you so people are having legitimate experiences all around the fucking planet and then people are like they're cool They're all crazy right or they were all tricked into saying something What are the criticisms of John see if you can find Google criticisms of John Mac? abduction hypnotherapy man, I got it. He's gonna. That's right. This is the problem with these things like we have a zipper on the back Yeah, I got it Should we end this we're at like four hours four hours. Yeah, it's been four hours. Dude We can't it on the yellow middle of a UFO thing. We got to finish out the eye will hold okay I will piss in my fucking hurry outfit. Well, we don't have to we could just end no, let's no I mean I like to that's something I got it. I don't want that something meow meow does what you got the John Mac thing I remember talking John Mac thing. Yeah, that's right. How are you doing? You're right over there with your p p It's hard right? It's hard to concentrate meow likes to be on himself. No, meow meow don't do it Are he's there? He's done that are he's pissing here a half a dozen times in the old one He's to like piss and kombucha bottles Yeah, so he interviewed all those children in Zimbabwe that had a mass sighting and that one's great Compelling very very very compelling because all these kids have the same story and he talks to them independently And they all have the same story Look look man if these fucking whistle blows are telling the truth We have been visited. Yeah, and these kids are telling the truth which makes way more sense than they're all just lying and they all have the same story Yeah, doesn't make sense. It's gonna be so fun to go back through every single like one of these events that we have like rolled our eyes at From the perspective that we have UFOs. He plays some of this Jamie's Yeah, this is what I remember reading about this though that I would just want to add this in I read that this is be An antithetical to what he's saying or what we're hearing right now He spoke to all these kids in like a big room. There's like 60 kids and you talk them all once and As it was like leading them on questions Did you see this? Did you see that and a couple of them did and then when they're in this environment? We're just talking to them one on one. They're kind of all remembering what they talked about in that room Interesting don't know if that's exactly what happened, but that's what I read to be like, but let's let's hear the kids talk Where was the pointy party was the pointy part in here was the pointy part thing up there and What was the back up back it up Jamie's second here with what he's talking about here? Like I went to right now. No, did you see the eyes? Yeah, here it is I'm very Where was the pointy part it was the pointy part in here was the pointy part thing up there and What was the feeling when you look the eyes? It was And what scary why what made it scary? Evil and what was evil about it say what you mean by evil? It looked you because I was just feeling at me With what the staring at you is if what is it to do? I looked at you because I was just feeling at me. With what? The staring at you is if what? Is if to do what? Is if I wanted to come and take us? Is if it wanted to come and take you? That was the feeling you got? Did it wanted you to go with it? Did you feel like you wanted to go with it? No. Did you feel? What was the effect on you when you felt you wanted to have you go with it? I just moved to the nice daughter crying. They came running up here in such a panic and I mean even if we had staged that they could not have run altogether like that even if we practiced it a lot in how many times. They came up here like a living snake and they just came we were in a stealth meeting and we just heard them screaming screaming out and they were like yeah you know and child can't make that up. That was very skeptical in the beginning as well. I believe that they'd seen something but I wasn't prepared to accept that it was anything supernatural or anything like that. So if we know now that they actually do visit and that there actually has been some sort of contact and when that guy was describing you have physical bodies who's saying if you have a crashed vehicle sometimes you have a dead pilot that was his way of describing it. Holy shit man. That means they come and there's an actual alien. So imagine you're in Zimbabwe and you're a kid just hanging out at school and a fucking actual UFO lands and aliens get out and you think they're thinking about taking you? Yeah. And that was kind of planted in her head by hand I felt like. Right. I felt like that was kind of leading. Like he led her to say that. I feel like there's a way that you could have talked to her. First of all you'd have to calm her down first. My strategy would be to get her very relaxed talking first. I don't know if they did that. But ask her a bunch of questions. Yeah. What do you like to do? What's your favorite part of school? What's your favorite subject? You play any sports? Do you have any games you like? Yeah. Just talk about it. Kids love to talk about things they like to talk about. Right. And then go, I'm really sorry this happened to you. But can you tell me what happened? Yeah. And then just let them talk. Let them talk. And then you don't say, did you feel like it was trying to take you? Right. Like don't you don't plant my thing? I think you, yeah I think with a little kid you have to say so why was it evil? Was it evil because you couldn't see their eyeball? Because their eyes were different. Right. You know like what felt evil? Because like if you look into a fucking eagle's eyes, they look evil. Sure. Eagles look evil. Their eyes are looking at you like this. They're glaring. The eagle is as big as you. It would be fucking terrible. Dude that would be the worst. But you could saddle him. But do you know they used to have a bird like that? It was called a terror bird. It was like an enormous bird that lived in North America. It was like, I think it was way bigger than like a human being. They were fucking huge. Huge predatory birds that didn't fly. You ever heard of these things? Terror birds. Terror birds. Yeah. Google terror birds. There was these ancient birds that lived. Oh fuck I don't know how long ago man. But they were fucking enormous. Look there's some images of like what one looked like next. Yeah the up top where it looked like no no no up top. Up top. That's the that's that's how big they were. So you could have heard one of these. Oh yeah fucking for sure if it didn't eat your dick immediately. It would. It would. You would swallow your whole. You ever see like a fucking pelican swallow a seagull hole. Dude that would be what it would be doing to a human. It would just go up you down. That was a real animal dude. That is how I would dress if I wrote that. Imagine if you could fucking get one of those things to follow your lead. Look he's got a bite in it. That thing in its mouth a bridal. But the reality was I think they were way before people. Like when do these things exist? Terror bird. What an exist here. Size of these motherfares bird. What an awesome name for a bird to cool. They range from three meters to ten feet. What is it saying? They sent cut it out there. 66. They range from one to three meters. So three to ten feet. So big one was ten feet tall. So 53 to wow. 100,000 years ago. So they lived alongside human beings. Oh my god. Oh my god. No wonder why they're dead. We probably fucking slayed those. They got rid of them. There's even a slightly smaller version dating to 18,000 and 96,000 years. Oh my gosh. Dude imagine what those talons could do to you. Click on that one. The relatively small one. How big is that? Relatively small. Look at that dagger beak. What is that? 2.6 feet. 8.20 pounds. You've seen that shoe bill. You've seen that fucking creepy thing that lives in the Congo. No man. I come here from all my biology because you show me. Dude shoe bills. Oh yeah. That's seen that. There's a huge two. shoe bills are like four feet tall. His giant ass bird. And they clack their teeth together. They clack their bills. They're like. He never heard it. No, good get a. Fuck that. Get out of my heart. Yeah. That's how they let you know. Look at those eyes. If you're a little kid and you see that? I get out of a spaceship. You'd be like, what the fuck man. Look at that thing. Look at that motherfucker. And they fuck. Fisch up. They fuck fish up. There's a crazy video of a shoe bill. There it is. It's eaten a snake head fish. So those snake head fishes, those fish get out of the water and they walk on land to try to find more water. So you have this fucking dinosaur fish getting eaten by this dinosaur bird. You finally make it out of your lake and that fucking thing. Dude, we're so lucky we got born as humans. and you're walking like this. Like Jesus Christ, get me to the water. Give me the fuck what? Nope. No clamps of death. Look at those. Look at those. Look at those. Look at those. Look at those. You showed up. You've been promoting these birds. That's so meta. Two thousand episodes. It's been happening. It's been happening. It's been happening. It's been happening. It's been happening. I love you too Joe. You're the best. Thank you so much. I do on this show. Thank you for dumping trust family hour. That's my favorite podcast. Oh my friend. I listen to your podcast all the time. No, you don't tell me that. You have the best ads of all time. Thank you. And when I need something fun, interesting, I go to your podcast all the time. It's amazing. Man. All the different episodes that we've done in all the different outfits. I think my favorite was when we were dressed up like clowns and they quoted us on Fox News. One of the greatest moments of my life. Well, they'll probably do that with this one with furries. Joe, can I plug one show? Yeah, please do. Coming up, Dania Beach improv. You can find the ticket links at www.trucksl.com. You, dude, you're the fucking man. I love you to death. I'm so glad you're out here too. Oh, thanks for luring us all out here, man. Like, we love Austin. Thank you. I love you too. There it is. Dania Beach Flurry. No, it's so shit. Oh my God. Oh, that's so weird too. God, that's nuts. That's nuts. How is that possible? I don't know, man, because I generated that with an AI. Goodbye.