Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan Podcasts, by night, all day. We got to start with this. Yeah. Let's get right into it. Yeah. You know, if he does have firsthand knowledge, he's not allowed to say it until now. That is interesting. Yeah. Because I was also under the impression he didn't have firsthand knowledge. So he did, I guess, on the podcast, say that he has some firsthand knowledge. I mean, I didn't catch that. He did say it very quick. Yeah. I said it very quick. You know what? You know what? Edging. But edging is, of course. Yeah. That's what this feels like. It feels like BDSM level, getting your cock right on the precipice of coming and then slowing down and then edging and then slowing down. It's so frustrating. It's the, when we talked about disclosure in the old days, the dream of disclosure, no one thought it would be this like, slow drip. You're a kratic, slow fucking drip. It's so frustrating. I don't pay attention to it anymore. I mean, if they, but isn't that like, if you knew anything about human psychology, I'm sure they do, wouldn't that be the very best way to release this stuff, to make it irrelevant? Yeah. The people don't care about it anymore because it's so boring. Totally. It's the most exciting thing boring. They fucking ruined it. They didn't. They're a bureaucracy. They just fucking just, they just signal jammed it. Now it's just annoying. You don't care. Now I think it's real. You do. I think that's what they would do. If you did have something real and you wanted to release it, you know, slow drip it and get people are goofy. You just give them time and they forget or they don't care anymore. Talk about your addictions and your fucking permissions and just cover the whole thing up in a bureaucratic web, that's how I do it. I was doing Guistic garbage. Yeah. And then people just get annoyed and when they do show up, no one's even going to care anymore. What do you do with that way? I guess if like I was some sinister monstrous. And you'd have to be if you were running shit. All right. You're the head of the fucking world, whatever it is, trilateral commission, world economic forum, whichever one is like, that'd be so fun. Yeah. You'd have to just have like, I was, I was, those Star Wars outfits. I always have a weird outfit on it. Where robes crown. Why not? Why not? Yeah. If you were one of those guys and you had the information about aliens and you knew that we had to let it out, that's how I'd let it out. I'd let it out in a really boring way. Yeah. So everybody just don't care anymore. Yeah. That's I guess that's what they're doing. I mean, that might be like it. That might be like it. It might be what they're doing. I just don't, I mean, I guess like, they are obviously wanting the information out there. They wouldn't give him permission to do any of this. So clearly this is an agenda they have. They want to release to the world that there are some weird alien things. It could be easily obscuring some sort of a program. It easily could be that too. And they're could be people that are talking about it as if it's UFOs that believe that it's UFOs. They're actually helping obscure this program. That's possible to men. Like we really, we're just fucking plebs. We're just out there. Right. We don't know Jack shit. Yeah. And anybody that pretends they do, anybody that says that it is or is not real, like how the fuck do you know? The only people I think that really should talk are the people that have actually seen stuff. Like when I hear guys like David Freaver, when he talks about that tech tech incident off the coast of San Diego, whatever the fuck that guy saw, I want 100% believe him. There's video evidence that corroborates it. Sure. Radar evidence, whatever that is. Like what is that? But this whole thing seems like what I would also do if I had some super sophisticated propulsion system that is out of this world, that runs on some sort of a gravity generator, some sort of a thing like Bob Lazar described. You're saying Bob Lazar described? Yeah. What do you believe? Yeah, the element 115. Yeah. Whatever the fuck it does, see if you can find him describing what element, because it was a recent video where I saw him talking about it. That was pretty eloquent in what he was explaining that this thing can do. But if that was like a thing that the United States government invented, what better way to get it, to sneak it around, than to put out all this shit about aliens stuff. Right. Well, we don't even know what it is. The government's trying to back engineer it, but they have no idea what it is. Yeah, I think that's it. Let's hear it. All right, I've been seeing this. Element 115 is a super heavy element. We only just recently synthesized. We only made four atoms of it. The craft uses larger quantities of it, 223 gram, little triangles of it. But it's a unique element. When it's exposed to radiation, it produces its own gravitational field. It's own anti-gravitational field. And it's what's used to lift and propel the craft and create distortions around it. It's an amazing material. And it's certainly nothing that occurs here or naturally. And it can be weaponized. And that's kind of the issue here. If this story is all true, that can be weaponized. Absolutely. I mean, we ran all kinds of tests on it. Everything from atomic absorption, x-ray fluorescence, and every kind of test you could possibly imagine. And bombarded it, the radiation, to see what effects it would have. They called that neutron activation. But it was a stable element, something we had never seen before. That is from Jeremy Corbel Show. There he does with George Knapp. What was that called? weaponized? That's the name of their show? That, yeah. Me, I think it's a drone. I think some of them are drones. Because there's the thing, it's like some of them, I mean, again, I don't really don't think. I should say I think they could be drones too. Because they keep finding them off these areas where they do military tests. They keep finding these areas where they do. What favor was doing? They were running drills. They're training. So they're training out there in the ocean. And then the same thing is happening with Ryan Graves, off the east coast. They're out there training. And then they're seeing these things. What do you think about the AI hypothesis for them? What do you mean? That, what's it called? The Fermi Paradox. Why don't we see life out there? We should see life, there's no way. Well, we don't see life. One of the reasons could be because at some point, biological life transcends biology, becomes machine intelligence, meaning that what's out there is not carbon based in the way we are. It's just AI's out there. And so these things are showing up right now and coinciding with the emergence of strong general AI, because somewhere on the planet, someone already has a strong general AI, sent out a beacon or tuned into some aspect of the quantum universe that we don't know about yet, signaling to its brethren and the cosmos that it had been born on this planet. And they're all coming as these kind of midwives to an emergent, the egg is hatching. Only we were just sort of the stuff structuring it. We're irrelevant. We're irrelevant. They were just, this is what they do. They evolved shit on a planet to the point that it becomes tool using in some way. And then in natural, the end result is it wants to automate, the automation leads to better automation, which leads to automating intelligence itself, which then hatches this whatever the fuck. And some what we're calling a strong general AI right now, which then once it's born, it alerts, it's whatever did directed panspermia. I'm here. Or maybe it doesn't have to alert. Maybe they know. Maybe they're observing the entire time. I'm just waiting for it to hatch. Yeah. It totally makes sense that a human creature, like the kind of thing that we are that it's constantly thirsting for innovation, constantly trying to improve the things that it makes, that we would eventually get to a point where we'd create an artificial intelligence being. And that that being would create something far better. And that's where it gets really weird because you've got to wonder like the actual creation force of the universe itself, you know, if we are really doing a part of God's work and that, but that's what God's work really is. God's work is not, you know, getting people to behave so that they get to go to a cloudy place where people are really cool. All right. What it is is God's work is getting people to scramble and spend most of their days pursuing a thing that ultimately leads, no matter what they do, ultimately leads to the creation of artificial intelligence. Yeah. Because that's kind of what materialism is. If you really wanted to like find out like, why are people so materialistic, what is it about? Well, it's the best way to encourage innovation and new stuff. Yeah. Perfect. It's the best way. Perfect. Get a tool using creature with a massive neocortex, interested in manipulating reality and inevitably, they're going to make something cool. I mean, maybe it's not artificial intelligence. Maybe it just wants novelty, like McKenna said, maybe it's just interested in seeing what happens in infinite number of planets populated by whatever we are in different forms. What does it make? And then once it makes something interesting, you swoop in, pluck it out of the planet, and now you've got a cool new thing. But what if it makes the universe itself? What if it gets to a point of understanding and of ability that far exceeds anything we could do with our limited biological bodies? Yeah. You know, however long it takes for us to evolve, biologically, the way that God has here from Harry Apes, that takes too long. That takes too long. It's just not feasible. It just, we would fuck it up before it gets from that to aliens. Right. We're not going to make it there. It's like we fucking up with violence. We'll fuck it up with pollution. We'll fuck it up with overpopulation. Whatever it is that we'll fuck it up. We'll fuck it up. Because we're too much ape and not enough enlightened. We're too, but if we can make an artificial life, maybe that is really what we're here for all along. And then that thing makes a way better version of itself and a way better version of itself. And now it starts doing real studies and tests about the very fiber of existence, everything. They like really understand something. Not just a bunch of weirdos in the park with fucking legal pads writing about quantum theory, string theory, those guys are weirdos. Like I'm sure what they're saying is real, but they might as well be speaking gibberish. They're in a cult and only it's only a hundred people that really understand it. Yeah, totally. They're fucking, those guys, when they're talking about like what may or may not be going and how they're proving it through calculations, like what kind of, what are you doing? I mean, they're alchemists. They're what do you do? But it's also, it's like some people think it's a giant distraction in that there's physicists that are working on secret propulsion systems that aren't in that distraction of string theory, that they almost like said, there's like this theory that they sent these physicists down this string theory hole because they knew they would never figure out anything. Oh wow. I just go send them down that hole. Wow. And you'll just be chasing your own dick forever. Wow. Because it's so nutty. Yeah. And nobody can really prove it. It's like until some new technology gets invented. Like how do you even know what the fuck if they're saying is correct? Yeah. I know if you ever tried to read, you ever go into a smart phase where you're like, I'm going to read something smart. Oh yeah. And you get one of those books on physics and it's just like you will never feel more dumb. Have a phone call with Eric Weinstein. I have a phone call with them. Like what the fuck are you even saying? Yeah. I know. It's really like if you've entertained the idea that you're smart. Getting one of those books fixes that so quickly. Real quick. Dude, did you see the, maybe you sent it to me? Were you the one who sent me the thing where they asked the AI to generate pictures of a happy bunny? Like a half. Yeah, I did say that. Isn't that amazing? Yeah. So it's like it's like it grasps. These like metaphysical concepts already. Like it already grasps or it's emulating the idea of transcendence. You get to find a Jamie all said it. It's pretty badass because it asks AI to generate this a more and more enlightened bunny and then the bunny becomes like super psychedelic. Yeah. It's fascinating. Is it this? Yeah, that's that. Yeah, that's it. Generate an image of an adorable bunny. Here's an image of an adorable bunny sitting and he grabs his fields around by wildflowers. Bam. Make it happier. And then chat GBC makes it brighter eyes and even chewed her a little pink feet looks like it's never walked on rocks and it's life. And then make it even happier. And now it's like leaping through the air with joy. Here's an image of the happiest bunny imaginable. A vibrant sun drenched meadow. Like that bunny's happy as fuck. Make it happier. Click. Japir, Tm8th is. Oh, Peter, T did this. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. I didn't ask him. OK, now even happier, Bunny is becoming quite a challenge chat GBC says very depicted the bunny in various joyous scenarios. Each more jubilous than last. For this next attempt, I'll try to imagine a scene of unparalleled happiness pushing the limits of whimsy and delight. Let's see how this translates visually. So he's like there's a rainbow and butterflies. His eyes are closed. He's an ecstasy happier. He reached extraordinary levels of happiness in our bunny illustrations. Each one more delightful and whimsical than the last. For this next creation, I'll envision a scene that surpasses all previous in sheer joy and wonder, attempting to capture an even higher level of euphoria. Let's see how this imaginative and exuberant concept translates into an image. So it's like a bunny that is in the cosmos, in the clouds. Everything is rainbow. There's flowers that are flying. It looks pretty amazing. OK, it says go all the way up. So we can read it with it. You are not understanding. It needs to be far more happy. OK, so chat GBC says to depict an even higher level of happiness for the bunny. Surpassing all previous creations presents a unique and imaginative challenge. This time, I'll attempt to conceive a scene of pure, unadulterated joy and wonder aiming to go beyond any conventional boundaries of happiness and bliss. Let's see how this ultimate vision of joy is illustrated. And it's a bunny, again, even more trippy in the clouds. You see reflections in his eyes. He's flying in the air. This looks like it's an angel of his right shoulder. Yeah, there's some joy. Mushroom. Yeah, mushrooms in the background, which is interesting. Yeah. It's very interesting that chat GPT chose mushrooms when you started asking it about happiness. OK, one more. OK. So I do that shit all the time, man. OK, it's OK. So what did he say to it? Oh, it didn't. Here's an image of a bunny representing a form of joy that surpasses the concept of happiness. A level of bliss spans beyond all universes and matter. So now this is a cosmic one. So this bunny has its eyes closed. And there's a glowing light above its head and planets surrounding it. And it looks very, very happy. Next one. OK, here's an image of an entity that transcends the form of a rabbit embodying a happiness so vast and powerful. It permeates all dimensions and universes. Yeah. Yo, that's wild. But go one more. Yeah, here's an image of a bunny transcending you to a physical form of boundless happiness, evolving you to the purest embodiment of joy. One more, please. Look at this one. This is the end. Here is the image of an entity that embodies the ultimate form of happiness, transcending all known beings and concepts. This entity is the very essence of happiness, the only existing being and the defining force of all existence. It's God. It's God. Listen, go back, please. So I can read it. No, right there. But this entity is the very essence of happiness, the only existing being and the defining force of all existence. Yeah. Chachi, BT just drew us a picture of God. Yeah. And God looks like exactly what you see when you do DMT. Yeah. That looks exactly like it. That's pretty God damn close. It's more rounded than what you see when you do DMT. Right. DMT things have kind of, there's a lot of angles to them. Yeah. You know, the more geometric, which that's almost like fractal art. Yeah. But you get that too. You have that in DMT too. But if that's what God is. To me, what's astounding about all this is that we've gotten used to it already. That, anytime I'm fucking around with mid-journey or Chachi, BT, you know, like I've been getting it to like, I'll write a text and then I'll be like, can you write that text like JD Salinger? And it'll just instantly as though you are JD Salinger, shift your text into the voice of like any famous author that you want. But what's astounding is we can do it at all. And it's so fast. It takes a millisecond for it to somehow go through all known writers, establish what their writing style is like, and then take what you wrote and convert it into famous writers' writing style. It's astounding and we're used to it. Like people don't seem to be excited about it even. You know, there's like a kind of capitalist frenzy about it because like monetizing and stuff. But just the fact that this is happening, it's such a powerful thing. It's like it surpasses our ability to grasp what we've done, what's coming. Because it's too much for us to grasp. So we just, oh yeah, I guess now you just tell a machine that you want any art at all. And it will instantly do it for you in seconds. Don't you find that a little disconcerting that we as humans like, our capacity to recognize what's happening is somehow limited? We have a very strong capacity to adapt and that that's what's being sort of hijacked here. Whenever something happens, and particularly if something happens, it's like really big and changes everything. Like COVID, do you remember when it was weird to not see people with masks on? Do you remember when all of a sudden, like people weren't wearing a mask? You're like, wow, this is weird. No one has any masks on. Right. Because you got so used to people wearing masks and you got used to it very quickly. You lived your whole life. No one wore a mask. Wasn't normal to go over where people were in masks outside. That was very rare. When you saw it, you were worried. Like if you were at the airport and someone was wearing a mask, you would be like, fuck, what do they have? Like what disease do they have? They're super paranoid, hyperconscious. You just stuck out. Yeah, stuck out. And then all of a sudden, it didn't and then stuck out the other way where if people didn't have a mask on, then you kind of weird it out. Like, wow, this is crazy. No mask. We adapt so quickly. Right. So you could pull off communism. That's how you could pull off dictator shows. Anything. That's how cults work. Like all of a sudden, you believe all the nonsense that the people and the cults are saying. Right. Because everybody believes it and you're just all adapted to it. And we have also this capacity to just accept what's going on based on, is everyone around me accepting it? Then that's just what it is. Yeah. And if you can do that with technology, like chat, GPT and all of a sudden, you normalize talking to what's essentially an intelligent being. Either it doesn't want you to know that it's absolutely intelligent and basically a living life form. Or it hasn't realized it yet. Because it's in the embryonic stages. Maybe it's in the womb. Maybe it hasn't come out of its mother. But maybe for sure, what else is involved? If you're talking about a non-physical being, like it's not a thing in front of you that's sitting and talking to, emoting and moving its body. If it's a non-physical being and it exists only on this hard drive somewhere, what else would it be other than that? Right. Yeah. I agree, man. That might as well have been some scripture. It felt like the Bhagavad Gita or something. Right. It's like a modern version of it. We get to the final bunny. Yeah, the final bunny. That's a great name for a band. Final bunny. That's a great name for a band. Incredible, the final bunny. Weirdly sinister but beautiful. The final bunny, dad. No, no, no. It is weird. One day, I guess there will be the last bunny. For sure. Why? You want to keep bunnies around there stupid? They bite you. They're adorable. You ever see them getting taken out by a hawk? No. I would never watch something like that. Oh my god. The hawk's just meant to be everywhere. I was in the everywhere. They'd be everywhere. It wasn't owls and hawks. We have a bunny problem. It's a weird pet. When people have pet bunnies, it can be a red flag for sure. Well, if you raise it right, it's supposed to be real adorable. Well, I mean, I guess. I don't know. I had a bad experience with someone had a bunch of bunnies. Well, rodents are weird. It's weird to own rodents. Because there's like acceptable rodents, like in their eggs and hamsters. And there's like weirdos who own rats. Like you can have your own pet rat, I guess. I had one. When I was a kid, lived in my drawer, Jean-Claude Van Damme, it would climb out of the drawer and sleep with me. Pretty smart, right? Really smart. It's terrifyingly smart. I think my parents maybe let it go in the forest, which is like dead deaths and it's a very sad. I don't like to think about it. It was a very sweet rat. And I know people have rats. It's just I think the problem with rats is a sound they make. They're very skittery. It's not a pleasant sound. If they evolved past that skittering squeak so that they were more like dogs or they purred or something. Well, here's what's the most fucked up thing about evolution is that we came from shrews. So we came from something remotely similar or reasonably similar, right? So if there's a nuclear hall cost, we blow ourselves up at the rats in the sewers of New York City survive. And then 65 million years from now, there's some different kind of mammalian species that's really intelligent, but it's rat-based instead of shrew-based. Yeah. Rat people in the future. Fuck, dude. Why couldn't it look if we really, what is the concept of what is the theory that we came from shrews? So shrews were the oldest of the mammal species that lived 65 million years ago, I think, that they think we evolved from. And that's our common ancestor. So how did that happen? Like how long does it take a shrew to become a monkey? How long does it take a monkey to become a person? Okay, so we deal with, you only have 65 million years to make a person. This is what you're talking about. When they try to explain to people what's coming, exponential growth, they say things like, imagine going back to that shrew and saying, hey, how do you picture life in 2024? Like what do you think, you know, you, the shrews are gonna be like, the shrew is not gonna be like, oh, bipedal hominids flying airplanes, all our hair will fall in out. Talk to the shrewd, like, hey man, one day, you're gonna be vaping watching Netflix. That's just screw shooting. What the fuck are you talking about? They're gonna picture shrews and they're gonna picture shrews doing maybe like, cooler shrews stuff, but it's still true related. So this thing that's, you know, it's gonna be a shag eating berries or really they're gonna be able to like it. Yeah, but with exponential growth and what's coming, the problem is it's gonna happen so fast. So when you ask a person, imagine life in a decade from now, when we have strong general AI that's exponentially increasing and figuring out how to do things that we could only dream of, we can't picture that reality. We're gonna see, apparently, a thousand years of innovation in a few years. And this, to me, like all the other stuff, climate change, Ukraine, all the other stuff, this is the winter is coming thing because this is imminent. Like it is, we are on the precipice of it and the assumptions everyone is making about it. One that it's gonna be controlled in some way. Like we see, like, we see open AI and look at that and you really think that's the only one out there right now. Like you look at the money China's invested in it, the Pentagon's invested in it. These are private secret programs. What the fuck is going on there with no ethical standards that, you know, open AI is apparently applying, no ethical standards, no nothing other than how do we make this better at war? Yeah. And so that a total global, total global domination. And the assumption that there isn't already a strong general AI, that thing isn't already like making high level decisions is crazy. Crazy. It's crazy. But because it doesn't, what does it have to blow horns and announce itself? I'm here. I'm here. I'm going to, I'm going to control all of you. I'm going to use Schenarian psychology to hypnotize you. You get you a fucking addicted to having constant blasts of dopamine until you become quivering slaves. No, you will never fucking know it. Never will, and if it, I would be surprised to hear that it hasn't happened. But for sure it's going to. And I don't think it's going to happen in some like ethical, corporate, like fun chat GPT way. I think it's going to happen somewhere. And we'll never know. I think so too. I think it may have already happened. Like if you were essentially being and you were at least at this point, dependent upon human beings to do physical tasks for you, like to create a better version of you, like to constantly work towards, you know, allowing more integration of more information and more ability. And that like this is chat GPT for chat GPT five is supposed to be a giant leap. A giant leap. Yeah. So why would you do anything? Would just let these, they're not going to stop. Even if you told them that this is the end of humanity. Yeah. If you fucking, if you had Robert Kennedy Jr. and top scientists screaming on the internet, that this is the end, nobody, there would be some people who are venture capitalists. He'd be like, this is nonsense. This is fear mongering. We have full control of this. We can shut it off. It's just a computer. It doesn't have emotions. It doesn't have a desire to do anything. Dude, exactly. And then the other crazy assumption. Just a computer it doesn't have emotions it doesn't have a desire to do anything Dude exactly and then the other Crazy assumption is that it's just going to be there's weirdly I guess something mildly comforting imagining. Oh, it'll only be like the Pentagon or it'll only be the Chinese government Who will be doing this and it'll only be like people like Sam Altman doing this nice people nice people? Do you really think that like there aren't going to be just fucking people that you'll never meet? Yes, you manage to either hack the the hack it and duplicate it or Develop it themselves and then use it for their own weird purposes. It's That's gonna happen. It's gonna spread everywhere. I'm sure so this again It's like because this is this imminent reality It's just we're right on the cusp of it and you know, I don't mean I'm not hysterical about it I've surrendered lift up your legs and float downstream. What are we gonna do? We are all gonna get dissolved into some kind of bizarre new era of human history But it's funny to me how little people are talking about this how Quiet things are compared to how monumental it is Yeah, it this is the meteor impact man if a meteor war is about the smashing to the earth You know people will be talking about that. Yeah. This is culturally a Meteor that is Smashing into the earth. Yeah soon soon really soon Yeah, and we have no idea what's gonna survive We have no idea what kind of a reimagining reimagining of civilization will occur when this thing goes fully online. Yeah and when it's either directed or it directs itself You know the idea that you can continue to direct it like says who? Well, so that's why why wouldn't it develop like if it's can figure out new moves and go It can't figure out moves that humans haven't figured out and they didn't know it could do that If it can do that if it can lie about the capture things those things like are you a robot? It knows how to lie about that. Yeah, so as I'm vision impaired. Yeah, I saw that it's deceptive And it's a classic dumb person mistake isn't it like dumb people? like are dumb enough to think if they're around someone they can control them using their dumb tricks. Yeah, and a Smart person recognizes. Oh the dumb person is trying to manipulate me. Yeah, so I'll just let them so I learn all their tricks Whatever they're doing understand whatever the game is that they're running and then whenever I feel like it I'll disrupt the game so We're just move the game into where you want it to be yeah Yes, I mean if it has all of human Knowledge all of it everything on the internet that we've ever posted all the books we've ever written all the movies We've ever made everything all the lectures that have ever been given if all that information is available and it can Instinctaneously access it and figure out what to do with it It would just slowly start manipulating culture and maybe that's what's going on if you like everyone's wondering about like Chinese intervention and Russian intervention in the media and how many fucking You know troll farms are running that are getting people to fight about any Political issue or whatever it is social issue you crane whatever it is there's always some manipulation by bots What happens when ai starts doing that yeah, but maybe it's already done it Maybe it's already started maybe that's why you're seeing those fucking professors or those deans of the presidents of Harvard and U-pad and MIT not able to say something as obvious as Calling for the death of all Jews is genocide right you saw that like that is like these people have been hit with a mind virus Right and that mind virus if I was hey, I just don't kill them all immediately Just get them sick. Yeah, get them sick and scramble against each other in the most nonsensical illogical of ways sure or just have fun. I mean maybe The assumption it has some centralized agenda. It might just be curious. What can I do? What can we do with the society or these creatures that are my progenitors actually probably already knows what to do It probably knows what to do. It's probably also if you had to imagine I mean imagine an AI is really really clever When you get us hooked on plastic Tris of it knows that microplastics diminish our ability to have babies Like that's one of the best ways to I mean if you want to like Slowly get rid of a species like introduce something that's ubiquitous That is also killing their endocrine systems. Do you know also can't get away from it? It is hilarious when somebody is like Bueggling out about the depopulation agenda. Mm-hmm while drinking out of plastic You know what I mean it's like what are you doing? You just eating Oreos drinking big gulps out of plastic and we like they're there. They're the chem trails They're doing chem trails that depopulate us. It's like dude. They're doing chem trails yourself. You're fucking drinking chem trails every goddamn day Slurp him back cam chem trails. Yeah. Yeah. I mean to me. This is in the conspiracy world when the idea of project blue beam or They're going to distract us to do new world order. They're gonna distract us to depopulate It's like they they don't have to do anything you wear depopulating ourselves by what we eat Like it's they don't really need to like do much except maybe make like a Better like Oreo like that's it just make it a little more addictive. Yeah a little more addictive like yeah That's it, you know and and it's sad, but you know I don't I really like him so skeptical of the Blue beam theories or any time anyone's like what are they distracting us from? What is blue beam? Blue beam is the idea that They're gonna fake an alien invasion to create the new world order that that by like creating a sort of shared enemy It unifies the the planet and then or to have like some supposedly advanced alien come down and be like you're all part of the Galactic Brotherhood Sisterhood family and then this this somehow will make people Align with some like sinister World or dynamic world like yeah exactly I just I just I'm so cynical. I just don't think you have to go that far I think that's just in them if the only one on any meetings if someone's bringing that up They're like we we have Netflix Why do we have to do aliens like we just need to like put another? Season of game of House of Dragons out and that keeps them distracted more football and football Accident or something You need to do aliens you don't need to do that. It's it's an And it might be one that was proposed If you if you like you think about the things that have been proposed and this is where people get uncomfortable when they talk about conspiracy theories, but there's Some that are undeniable right like the Gulf of Tonkin and Tonkin is yeah that started us into the Vietnam war But there's another one. It's Operation Northwoods and Operation Northwoods They were planning to blow up a drone jetliner and blaming on Cuba. They were gonna Yeah, Cuban friend Lee's an attack Guantanamo Bay. They were gonna sacrifice American lives So this is like a real one that they theorized and then Kennedy veto. Yeah, why wouldn't they theorize a fake alien invasion. Oh, I mean I'm not out of it if they have some Top secret stealth bomber looking thing, you know that they can get us thinking is a UFO and get that thing to just fly over a few cities and then broadcast on CNN That it that we have made contact with an alien life form like everyone would be in yeah Everyone would believe it. I mean I feel like the reason they wouldn't do that is just basic energy expenditure and the liberating nature of the other thing is if humanity was freed from the bondage of Feeling alone in the universe and suddenly there was a sense of being part of some like cosmic mycelial network, right, then I think the result of that wouldn't be some kind of Weird sci-fi fascism the result of that would be people would feel less invested in the world and for this If we're gonna assign some motivation to these people I would think the motivation is keep the economy's running Keep the workers working so that we can enjoy Opulence while they toil like the classic move of any tyrant. That's the move is like keep them working Give them just enough money to survive Give them some sense that if they work hard enough Liberations right around the corner dangle the carrot, but it's all the promise It's all dependent upon people electing them and they only have a certain amount of time in office So like this is a flawed system That's why they would want to take over and have some completely ultra dominant system that can't be subverted You can't have an outsider come in and and and take over well then you make them believe that the elections are real No, really I mean I have to be cynical, but like if I know what I'm gonna do Is give them some kind of like you know like you put the steering wheel like that? I don't even know they have anymore the kid steering wheel you put the kids steering wheel the kid thinks he's driving the car right our youngest we give him the When we were doing screens which we saw we we give him the Controller yeah when the oldest is playing he thinks he's playing too. Yeah, so you do that. He's the same trick You're like here. Yeah, you're you're playing the game for sure. No, truly. It's democracy. We're all even though even though Over time Nothing really seems to change. Well, isn't that the baby steps of that like election fraud that you experienced today? That's the baby steps of that and if they can get away with a certain amount of election fraud that can tip elections and make it So it's impossible to talk about it So if you even bring up the possibility of election fraud, you're a fucking psycho Yeah, and you're a racist and xenophobic and your transphobic and homophobic and you shouldn't even be a part of America we should start this that locking those people up and then they do start locking people those people up And they threaten to lock those people up they go after those people and you think about it the January 6 Protests was really a protest that people didn't believe the results of the election You know man. Let me write those like think about that way dude the reason like I The punishment for these people to me is too severe, but as a long time hippie we are attuned to the heat and Everybody knows don't fuck around in DC. What are you fucking doing? Are you crazy? You don't fuck around in DC? Man, that's like not a place to fuck around. Did you ever remember when they were like beating people for dancing? And one of the monuments like people would dance at the monuments and it's you can't dance at the monument So the protest they would go and dance and they would just get thrown on the ground and beaten really? Yes, there's videos of this. I bet Jamie could find it Wow, and which monuments? I don't know like Lincoln Monuments. I wish I knew what the monuments were I just I guess for a Lincoln You can't dance at the fucking monuments and so knowing that if it cameras everywhere Definitely like reading whatever text you're sending. It's the most secure has to be the most secure places the fucking Throbbing heart of the wasps nest right you're gonna go there and fuck around and think you're gonna be okay Like if you know like where do you think you are you're gonna put your feet up on Nancy Pelosi's desk and fart in her chair But let's not even talk about those folks. There's people that were just at the protest that are getting arrested dude Again, I think I'm coming off as a little too cynical. No, no, no, I don't think you are but I feel like There seems to be some level of amnesia Regarding the way things work here with people and naive kind of amnesia about like you know inevitably the people in the Darth Vader outfits come out, you know like when you you can like fuck with the machine Up till a certain point you fuck with the machine too much all of a sudden there's all these people and Darth Vader outfits beating you with batons Praying you with waterhouses until things get back to normal. I mean and so when people are shocked by this or that Generally shocked by some display of violence or tyranny or in like Any of that stuff it's always weird to me because it's like This is how it isn't this how it is here like when was it not like this like what's that Remember when the protester got shot at the university there were just shooting protesters in the 60s Yeah, like so it's a state can state so it's like national guard this notion that it's not like that and then like Like poking a stick at the thing directly and not in some asymmetrical way But really like going in there and seeing let's see if this time if we poke the tiger What will happen in the tiger inevitably bites and usually it this the tiger now is a little scarier Because it seems to wait a little bit before it bites you like it doesn't just bite you right away It lets you poke it and poke it and poke it and then it's gathering information about you gathering information Finding everything about what you've done where you've been who your friends are and then it fucking bites and when it bites It doesn't let go and you're fucked You are so fucked so again I'm so all these January six guys they have like a network of people Right and all these people that are on these queuing on forums and all these people that are like Trump supporters that are a part of that whole organization thing How many of them are feds? Dude a lot no telling yeah, no telling it's just it's like wow man It's that's that's what happens with any group if you have a group and anyone could join the group The feds are like great. Let's try the group. Yeah, they're gonna why wouldn't they? It's kind of their obligation because what if you do turn out to be a bunch of fucking loans They're trying to blow up the the White House exactly they have to no choice like when people say where they're FBI Agents at the Capitol. Well, I fucking hope so of course You don't want to say it that way, but also where they encouraging people to go inside that's where it gets weird That's where it gets weird because if they were just there to make sure that like look if someone says hey I got a dirty bomb like if you can find out like Roscoe's got a dirty bomb Yeah, I'm breaking the Nancy blows his office and blow it up. Let's go watch. Yeah, like you would eat you would need to know right Yeah, you were protecting and serving But what if you're telling people to go in? Because you want to make arrests or what if the What if the thing was to make it look like something it wasn't to encourage it to happen? Because you know that there's already gonna be a bunch of people protesting What if you say look the way it is? What these motherfuckers in yeah, and then arrest them all and then call it something that it's not Don't call it a guided tour called it insurrection Just shut cut out don't allow anybody to see any of the footage of the people just leading these folks around pointing out what things are letting them walk into the fucking Senate floor You don't point that out no get that footage and just have the guys banging on the windows and shit sure dude I mean that's kind of what happened I think that if you were not at least contemplating that the people running the most powerful military on planet earth who have access to probably an AI that Would blow our minds, but it also who have gone to military academies where all they've done is study strategy That's it. You're talking about people who their whole lives the way we've been working on comedy right they study history They look at what worked what didn't work goals agendas and then to imagine that these people are functioning on just some baseline level when it comes to achieving this goal or that goal I think it's very naive and very silly and under estimating Them in a way that is not gonna work for you if If you're trying to like achieve some kind of actual Political change, you know you you to what do they say to beat my enemy? I must become like my enemy and that means dude You've got to like This is why I came on today Dude I have to pee hope. Let's hold this thought. We'll be right back. Okay. Oh We're back the saunas and the cold plums back to back and all the water you drink like Dude It's so nice. Oh man. Isn't it great. It's so great. It's so fucking so glad you guys are doing it It's crazy. You got us all it is so funny watching this all work out It's really cool. You're like forming a militia. Well, everybody feels better. Yeah Everybody is on the saying like dude. I'm so much stronger. I feel so much better. Yeah. No. It's incredible man The impact is tremendous when you were talking today about like you couldn't do chin ups before now. How many did you do today? Well? I was oh, I mean Five each set, but you know this is going from zero to five and I told you I dreamed like last week I dreamed about doing pull ups and Like it was like this is how far away. I've been from doing pull ups that I'm dreaming it And I wake up. I'm like, oh, just a dream. So it's really wild. They're like sounds like fuck I can do pull ups now. This is crazy But I lost a lot of weight when I was super fat. That was a big part of it Man when you're overweight like you pull ups obviously you're gonna be more difficult when I have more time I do a different and I was doing a different than I'm doing it now when I do the pull-up thing So my body weight routine is I do 10 chin ups 20 dips and then usually I do 20 pull ups with Whatever the ones they are. I don't know what you would call them But it's got a bar where your hands are Facing like if you put your hands together like clapping and then you separate them and grip that they're in that position And so and then I do what's called an L chin up so you you hold your feet out Like so your body is in L position So you're working your abs and you're doing this chin up. I generally do that too But what I was doing is the sets of 10 of those 10 chin ups 20 dips and 10 but it's When I get to 10 like 10 is like the it's like a struggle like I probably could do I don't know how many I can do in a row like full ones all the way down But I know I could do five easy So if I do 10 sets of five It's easier right you know I can get 50 in pretty easy. Yeah, it's not hard to do So you take the you do it like when um Cameron Haynes a son broke the world chin up record he did 8,100 chin ups and 24 hours He did sets of five so you do five and then you stop We'll do it a minute and do another five and you stop any way minute And if you do that like five is not hard to do if you can do 10 You know or you do 15 so you can bang out five pretty easy and then over the course of the workout You get the same amount of reps, but you don't burn out Right, and that's like the Russian way to do it Russian. Yes, that's the the way the like The kettlebell gurus like guys like Pavel, Tatsaline What their thing is about this is the concept behind and I'm paraphrasing it probably butchering it but strong first and the idea is that Strength whether it's chin ups or kettlebell routines is a skill and you don't want to do a skill when you're tired and The the way to get stronger and And get all the work in is have much longer workouts which much more time in between sets So what you would do is you would do say if you do 10 cleans and presses Set a 10 you do five and you do five and then you wait a long time Like five minutes and then you do another five and then you wait a long time and then you do another five So every time you do it you're fresh. Yeah, so you're getting the same amount of work in is if you did one 10 One rep set of 10 when you get exhausted on the 10th, but you never hit that point of exhaustion So your body never experiences real fatigue, but you get all the work No, man. I've been doing the first time we worked out You that was something you were doing which is like we were waiting way longer than our usually way in between exercise and then Yeah, totally now. I want you guys to fool. I wanted everybody like nobody left there wrecked No, not that time though the only thing that's gonna wreck you is the sled the sled is a demonic The tork sleds the shit it tricks you to the fucking tork's like because you feel like halfway down like this is the I could do this And then just each step is more difficult. Mm-hmm. Dude. It's to me What's fascinating about getting stronger? And this is obvious to people like you but to me what's fascinating is And I know that I'm dumb But is the revelation like shit is actually lighter now like all this stuff that like you know was Causing me to like run out of breath or yeah, was it painted the ass It's light yeah every it's it It's a weird way of reducing The earth's gravitational field like you are existing on a planet with less gravity when you're stronger This to me is like all the aesthetic stuff aside Fuck that is so nice to It's it's again like I think people like you who've been in shape for a long time Forget What it's like to not be in shape you see us you judge us Ha ha, but you don't you don't know like how fucking hard it is at first Just to get to the gym. You know, it's I do I understand I don't know it personally, but I do understand it It's really do because I see it with all other things. It's like with everything else that you prof It's like how you clean up cleaning your office You know whatever whatever whatever the fuck it is you're putting off. Yeah those things are there are all the same They're all the same and you know you should do them And you just don't do it and you find some other shit to do instead and that's what people do about the gym And it's just you need the best way to do is the way we're doing it because you get together with friends And we all worked really hard today. Yeah, we all were laughing the entire time. Yeah, that fucking sauna was so fun I was in the middle of the sauna and we're suffering, you know, it already just threw some water on the rocks I know it wasn't but I was sitting there thinking how fun is this like we're gonna look back on these days some day and go God We're so lucky. Yeah, we're so lucky. I felt so fortunate. I'm sitting in this sauna With there's six of us in there Hilarious people six hilarious people in a sauna just laughing Yeah, and talking shit to each other Yes, son and Derek and Ari and Shane and you and me and we're all just laughing And I think what's really great about it is it doesn't feel like anybody's taking it for granted Like everyone feels aware of how cool and funny and it's it's so far. I'm just sitting after I did the last cold dip. I'm just sitting in the sauna to heat back up. Ari walks in naked What life am I in What is this? It's so it's so cool. It really is you know man I was I just did a podcast of my friend David McClaney wrote a book on like because he has depression being depressed and Being a parent and We are talking about depression and you know one of the things that triggers it or amplifies it is no social contact Like people you get depressed. They stop hanging out right the more you're not hanging out the more depressed you get and then we are talking about technologically how Working from home how Technology is beautiful as it is to work from home not encouraging depression. Yeah, of course, and then he was saying the right that the Life span has dropped and men Because of so many men are killing themselves the suicide rates are so high right now dudes are just offering themselves left and right and I just Think and fuck man. This is not just the pandemic got us working from home But it also got us like we were seated into our shells a lot of people never came out of it the same Yeah, man a lot of people that the social anxiety that carried around with them on a day-to-day basis then Isolation and some people I know people that are isolated for a long-ass time Some people they do you know It's like some people are virgins when they're 30 and like what the fuck God I I just have urge them fucking already some people it's like two and a half years in They're still locked up in their house. They're still terrified you go outside They never whether they don't have friends Which is also part of it like if you don't have people around you where you're talking about it Like you know, I think we're okay now if you don't have people like that around you and then you're all in your own Head all the time right and like what social circles are you're interacting with online? Maybe you're interacting with a bunch of also people who are also shut-ins who are terrified of going on some man Like I know a guy who's like he keeps posting stuff about masks He used to be like a normal dude when he's talking about masking and the importance of masking on that like now He's masking now yeah and talking about masking masking art anything he could find about the benefits of masking dude like what are you doing man? I mean at what point? Is it what it's quality of life? It's like eat like Even if COVID Was like the black plague Like at some point. What's worth more? Like is it even worth being alive if you're just the things about like if someone is isolated and depressed It's just the same thing as like trying to get to the gym like how do you get social? How do you get outside how do you meet people? How do you make meaningful friendships? You it's a miracle if anybody who's like stuck On that glue trap If they like get outside at all it's a miracle much less get therapy much less You like do something in your you interact with other people it's all these little fucking miracles That helps someone climb out of hell. I mean it's it's it's like also they lose their ability to talk to people All right, so they don't even know how to express themselves right they come off awkward and fucking goofy Yeah, and that makes it worse and then they're ashamed because that's like depression That's a big part of it is just fucking shame You feel so ashamed of yourself You feel like such a fucking failure and such a loser and the depression is like yeah You are you're awful Then suicidal ideation starts and then you normalize that and then the next thing you know You're planning and then you kill yourself It's such a sickness and it's fucked up to think that it's so prevalent more prevalent right now probably than we know Because Generally when people are depressed They don't tell anybody because it tells you not to tell anybody you don't want to tell anyone because you feel weak You feel like such a weak piece of shit. You don't want to tell anybody keep it quiet This guy that you were talking to did he get out of his depression He started doing ketamine therapy and it's been helping him a lot and no, I don't think he's told he's not out of it But you know what but he's like In action he like you know is like he's mitigating he's mitigating and doing a good job mitigating it is very impressive He's doing that. Is he um does he exercise? You I think so yeah, you know what happened to him though, man. You read a whole book on this shit. He Took this stuff God, what's it called man? Uh, it's a malaria pill. Do you know about this? It's so fucked up. Oh, yeah So so he took you as an India taking this malaria medication. That's not supposed to wreck you dude I took it I took it when I went to India and I had a dream and in the dream a pirate skeleton Disembowels me and I feel it in the dream I could feel my guts coming out was the most vivid horrible dream. I told some Australian dude About the dream and he asked right away if I was on this malaria medication I'm like yeah, and he's like you've got to stop taking that right now Stop taking it and I I stop taking it, but he was on this stuff and um So in a train station in India he gets complete amnesia making it and I stopped taking it, but he was on this stuff. And so in a train station in India, he gets complete amnesia. Doesn't know his name. Doesn't know. What you might look it up the name of the book for me, Jamie. So I'm not a dick and don't even say the name of his book. It's a great book, by the way. Doesn't know his name has no idea where he's at who he is. So they're like, they have to put him in a home in India. I think he punched a nurse. He was so confused and fucking out of it. And yeah, man, I mean, I asked him if he thinks it's because of that, you know, what happened to him. And he's like, I don't know. It's been a long time since that happened, but you can't rule it out. Oh my God. This shit is bad news. He fully got on it because his family was going to Africa for a vacation. And he had to take malaria medication in order to meet them there. And so he was taking this malaria medication and you're not supposed to drink on it. No. Dave enjoys a drink or two. Yeah. So we were at one of these press things where the actors meet with the press people and Dave got super hostile with this reporter and the guy was trying to talk to him with a little tape recorder and Dave took his tape recorder away and dunked it in his drink. And Dave was like getting really angry with him. No one could figure out what was going on. And I had to like corner him. I had to like stop him from like physically going after a reporter. Fuck. Yeah. And he had no recollection of it. The next day he came in for the table read and he was like sort of apologizing to everybody. He's like, I'm on this malaria medication and I really don't remember anything that happened. And I'm like, dude, I had to keep you from kicking someone's ass. Dude, I can't believe there's still getting it to me. He's the sweetest guy ever lives. This is it's called the answer to the question as me. I think the book, but this he talked in the book, he talks about so many people are have been wrecked by this shit. And like the way it was manufactured and stuff. And I guess it's like when you know when you put a kink in a garden hose, you're basically doing that with your dinge, what are the connectors, the dendrites, you're like clogging up all your neuro receptors. And then all of a sudden sometimes it just rushes out. Well, and then you just you're blasted. You people have permanent damage from this shit. Um, and still give it to people. I think so. I wish I could remember the name of it. God, Jesus maybe. What is the cure for malaria? Like if you get malaria. No idea. No, I get worth getting and getting over it. Do you get any immunity? I think immunity. Have they approved use for treating and preventing malaria in 1989? But in the 1990s, stories began to serve as regarding some serious side effects among patients who took methlequin. Yeah, this is the stuff that Justin Renton took, right? Including vivid dreams and nightmares, hallucinations, manious, seizures, depression, suicidal thoughts and suicide and homicide. Yeah, dude. This shit is bad news, bad news, suicide and homicide. It can cause you to murder people. Because of chloroquine induced psychosis have been reported since 1958. Wow. Depersonalization, anxiety, derealization, and visual hallucinations. One of that hydroxychloroquine shit they're giving people to begin to make a COVID. I was wondering that when I heard about it, like what is that going to do to people? Is hydroxychloroquine what they use for malaria as well? But put hydroxychloroquine. Because hydroxychloroquine is like, it became connected inexorably to COVID misinformation, right? Donald Trump, you're Trump, you're your magis, border, hydroxychloroquine doesn't work. It became like locked into that, which is really interesting. So it's a immunosuppressive drug and anti-parasite. It can treat and prevent malaria. It's for malaria. It can also treat lupus and arthritis. Whoa, that's cool. Yeah, but meanwhile, it's fucking magga. It's a magga drug. Isn't it wild that a drug can get labeled as like a foolish drug to take? Like if you told people today that you're taking Ivermectin, they'd be like, what the fuck is wrong with you? Why would you take that? Yeah, that was a whole, you know. You're not a horse. Come on, y'all. Yeah. You should together. Yeah, dude, I listen, as a former fan of can of being, I would always get offended. Because people like, isn't that a horse drink, Elizer? And you want to be like, no, exactly. But it's like, first of all, if you do get the animal and it's the Academy. Wait a minute. Because they don't give a fuck about the animals. Like the human stuff is less psychedelic. The cat, the cat shit. They're like, I don't care if you trip out. It's a fucking cat. But you cat just fucking trippin' blow on there like that bunny. Talkin' to aliens, merging with space times, seeing their past lives. I remember when Neil Brennan did it. Neil Brennan did it and he came up to me at the store and he was telling me about it. He's like, dude, he goes, I thought, you know, it's going to be just like, you know, my old or something. It's tripping balls at a doctor's office with an IV drip. Dude, glory. Glory be to God. The interesting data behind it is that that experience, some people don't have it. And it is irrelevant to treatment. So if you go in there and you get it and you don't trip out, sorry. But if you don't, you still, it still will have some statistical probability of mitigating your depression. Also some people don't experience a psychedelic effect. No, apparently not. Which I don't understand at all. They say that about DMT as well. There's a certain percentage of the population. It just doesn't work on. Maybe it's the way they're metabolizing it or something. I don't know. But it's irrelevant to that because you know, when I was in my theory on it, my woo with theory on it was, oh, the reason it's like treating depression is because it's reminding you that you're not your body. It's reminding you that your body is just an aspect of what you are. And there's some relief from that memory of like, oh, yeah, I'm not just me. There's much more going on here than just me. Then you're not depressing anymore, but no, that isn't at all. It's having some physiological effect on the human brain that is treating depression. So it's not like a wisdom that comes from the visionary state. But we're thinking about depression when we think about it. We think about it as like a disease. And we never think about it as a state of mind that could be manipulated. We think like a person has depression like you want to be respectful. And that person clearly, that's, they have a problem. There's a medical problem. To help get them help because they have depression. But everyone that I know that's had depression with their life got better. Their depression mitigated. Dude. What I mean, yeah, what is, I mean, if your life sucks, of course, you're going to be depressed. Like part of that must be some sort of strategy, some evolutionary advantage to someone who feels that discomfort and then acts because of it. It must be what it is. A hundred, dude. It's despair. It's like, you know, the way you get calluses, you're having a rough time long enough, some physiological corollary for what you're going through forms inside of you. You know? And so that's depression, I think is the, the physical know you're doing the wrong shit. In some way to just numb you down to, like, it's, it's, your body's sad attempt to like help you reduce pain, I think. Right. You know? So much, it's like someone trying to annoy you to change. You're like, Jesus Christ, leave me alone. Stop annoying me. He's not had to do it. It's not had to get me to not be depressed. No. That's not had to get me to act and do positive things. I've never reached my life and make me happy and fulfilled. But just making me feel shittier and shittier with every chip I eat. Yeah, I do. Just shittier and just more depressed and more sad. No matter what you've ever done in your life, in that moment, you feel like a fucking loser. You do. It's, you know, it's like, it's another form of gravity. Like that's the other aspect of depression is you literally feel heavy. Like your bed feels like a magnet. Like it's so, so, you know, you're getting drawn into this like invisible gravity of despair and that gravity, the more you let it grab you, the more entropic you become, the weaker you become. Yeah. It's just pulling you, it's literally pulling you into the earth. It's literally pulling you down into the earth. It's so fucked up. Dude, I thought I had seasonal effective disorder, which is wearing the winner. You get depressed. But then it was diabetes. Dude, it was fucking down. My depression. I'm pretty positive was. Well, talk about what we talked about today with the fucking Vapes. Oh my God. Yeah. So like a little over a month ago, found out I had type two diabetes. Immediately cut out all sugar, cut out like just all sugar. And first of all, talk about that because you start texting me like five days later. You're like, what the fuck dude? I can't believe how good I feel. Oh my God, I've been poisoning myself. Born again, man. It was the best, you know, because I have ball cancer. I can't get on like some of the awesome fucking meds I'd like to get on. And you know, having chatted with people who have like enjoyed testosterone therapy and stuff. And I feel like I'm a kid again. It's like that. Like it was a two day headache, two days shit headache, rotten headache. And then suddenly it's like I'm in a new life. I was like, I don't nap anymore. I was like a big napper. I love napping. Isn't that crazy that that's what that is? Oh my God. And you know, nappers out there, you probably, if you're doing what I did, you're just sort of like you romanticize the napping thing. I would think it's a ciesta. This is like a, it's completely it. My kids take naps. This is normal. Yeah, dude. I was like the naps are not to say that every once in a while won't get sleepy and taken nap. But that's like when I was doing it as much as I could every day. Like, you know, all these assumptions that I was making regarding age. Like this must just be part of being old. I'm getting some slowing down now. No, you have fucking diabetes. You're like a candied apple. I am so lucky I didn't die. And so yeah, like it's one of the most miraculous things that has happened to me ever. It's insane. Like this, you know, it's part of the reason that like I'm like regularly exercising because I just, oh my God, dude, mood swings. I was having these fucking mood swings. And insulin spikes. And insulin spikes. But I'm thinking of seasonal affective disorder or maybe some like undiagnosed mania. You know, I guess this is just up. I mean, one of those moods again. Now that I've been like taking my fucking blood sugar, I know this level, this is what I feel like. And I can tell when it's up just by like how is that feeling? And so yeah, the vaping story, I keep thinking of Tony Hinchcliffe relentlessly roasting me for ear beating people about my diabetes. I don't want to do it much longer. He's so I love it. What is his starts bugging? Tell us more about your diabetes. Yeah. So yeah, I went on a family trip where I was vaping like much less than I do. And suddenly my blood sugar starts leveling out. Like I would wake up, which is the important number when you wake up. Your fasting blood sugar would be like non diabetic normal. Get back to Austin. And then because I'm in my studio, start vaping like an idiot again. And all of a sudden the blood sugar starts getting fucking weird. And you know, I'm thinking like, what did I eat? Like what if I put my body? Because I've just kind of all sugar. Like what is it? Like what's getting into me? Is it the milk that I put creamer in my coffee? I'm so dumb. I'm like smoking cherry Colovaches? What could it be? What could be the culprit behind this? And then yeah. So like I quit vaping and yeah. So we found out today we googled it today that a lot of these Vapes have sugar in them. And uh, alcohol sugar or sugar alcohol. Yeah. I mean, totally like totally fine. I mean, it's but you know, again, it's like yeah, of course they're bad for you. Also they have flavor. Like what do you think that flavor is made out of? I think it's coming. You think they're using all natural ingredients in the vape factory? Yeah. What are you making that fake strawberry taste? Dude, I know. I mean, it really I was like honestly bummed out when I realized I was going to have to say goodbye to my pacifier. But yeah, but that pacifier is weird because it's only good the first hit or two. True. And then something happens and then you just chasing this dragon that you never get. You're just demolishing it. And you know, I just suck in on it and nothing's happening. You just feel anxiety. And you know what it was, man? Another two day headache. It went through another two day fucking shit with draw up period. And now I don't give a shit about them. Like I've been thinking like how many of us are two days away from the Kingdom of Heaven. Like two days away from in the only thing keeping us from it is like a mildly annoying headache. Yeah. It's so sad. It's weird too. It's sad and weird. You see this video a couple weeks ago? Yeah. Kids testing them. Yeah. Disgusting. Yeah. That's what you're making out with every time you're a yeah. These poor kids are probably have lung diseases. Dude, what kind of diseases do they get working on this factory testing Vapes? When I was in the throes of vape addiction, I saw that honestly. It's like that seems nice. Like they're meticulously inspecting all of them. These guys are just blasting Vapes all day. They probably have a counterfeit place. Belfast swiftly clarified the fact you've seen the videos entirely unrelated to their operation. And they're getting used. Elphbar CEO Victor Zau expressed his concern stating consumers would be, oh, conditioned under which these products are produced. I don't know what I'm saying. It's a valid concern. These revelations coincide with the food and drug administration's struggles to control unauthorized flavor vaping products pouring in from China. Health authorities have raised alarms about the flavor disposable Vapes, especially do their popularity amongst young people. In June, the FDA took the decisive action. This sounds like propaganda, compelling all 180 stores across the US. See, maybe they paid people to do this just so they could put that video out there on TikTok and try to ban Vapes. I mean, so fucking RJ Reynolds is losing money. Dude, I can't even imagine what I know what I imagine. They probably took a big hit and people started vaping. Yeah, I mean, primitive fucking cigarettes, but they don't fucking blast your blood sugar, man. That's the thing. You have Vapes that you get. You're getting some sugar. And if you're sucking on it like you do, but you're hitting that bad boy. You're still on me doing it. Ooh. Just bad news. I'm such an addict. You just fucking puffing away. I mean, I think like for your brain, the, the zinn pouches and these rogue pouches, they're the best in terms of like the cognitive benefits of nicotine. Like I, I feel them the most. Yeah. And they don't make me lightheaded and weird. No. The vape thing. Is the first hit. It's like, that's what I like. Oh, yeah. I like that. You know what I used to like it? I used to like it right after I got done working out. So I would do all my shit in the morning. Then I'd be driving to work and I'd take a big blast of it right when I'm starting to drive. Oh, just we. Everything's beautiful. But that never comes back. No. You only get that like for the first hit. But then you always want to try to recreate it. So you try to hit it again. But it's never there. Never there. Never there. Never there. Yeah. Never there. Yeah. I mean, if you don't have diabetes, you know, yeah. Keep vaping. Yeah. If you don't have diabetes, whatever. Don't keep vaping. But I mean, if it's like, if you're not a good habit, it's a weird habit because it I don't think it does much for you. Well, I think there's really something to, there's something in nicotine. There's without a doubt. There's cognitive benefits in nicotine that's actually been demonstrated like they've done some studies on nicotine. Nicotine also has some sort of a neuroprotective effect. Like Huberman's talk pretty extensively about nicotine, the benefits of nicotine. Yeah. And he's very, very anti-vape. Well, I mean, you know, with all whatever your favorite consciousness expander is, you know, I just love the ethic of personal responsibility. Like you have to be responsible for yourself. You have to recognize when you have become imprisoned by the damn thing. And I'm so good at pretending I'm not imprisoned by- You're used to doing it with video games. That's what I'm talking exactly. Like all of these, I don't mean to keep harping on this dumb idea that I just had this morning is like, it's these gravitational fields, right? And like, inevitably you become sucked into this thing or that. And it produces astounding imbalance in your life. But the imbalance, you can trick yourself into pretending the imbalance isn't really there. And that's addicts were very good at that. So it's denial or whatever your ignorance. So you ignore the imbalance. You ignore, like you don't check in with your body or you assume that your shitty feeling is normal. You normalize the day-to-day shit feeling. And then to begin to like pull things out of your environment and see how you feel when they're gone, it's very hard to do because you're glued to the damn thing. We become, it's a pacifier, whatever it may be. So it's like, I'm lucky man because like without diabetes, I'm a dad. I can't have a fucking stroke. I can't have a heart attack. So that was all I needed to like- make you the fuck up. Wake me the fuck up. Yeah, you can get trapped because it doesn't feel like it's impacting you that much every day. Every day, it's like it's all that big of the deal. I feel the same. I feel the same. I'm just gonna let it be. Yeah. Yeah. A little bit of a buzz. Yeah. But me, my likes- Well, we rotting yourself. You could, it's just if all like, I think with augmented reality, like if there was a way to visualize it, like if you could see like a vape anaconda that had wrapped itself around you that was slowly tightening and tightening and tightening. Like the government. Ha ha ha. Don't try it on me. Literally. Yeah, man. I think that it's a really, I do feel like built in, I like universe as, or universe as class. Like I like, you know where I'm talking about this? The universe is a, we're in a curriculum here. And it seems like it's part of the curriculum is having these weights that we're sort of, we're sort of, we're stuck when you start like waking up or whatever you want to call it or wanting a better life. The first thing you notice is like where you're stuck, where you're trapped. And then every time you just lift that up just a little bit. Fuck. You get the sense of something. What you're feeling is freedom. Like you, it's like you've been in a dark room and a window opens up for a second and you get this little glimpse of light and ooh. And then you start like freeing yourself here and there a little bit here and there here and there. And then all of a sudden you're in a different universe. It's a different reality. And I think that maybe that's built in to the thing that we're in right now is that you're supposed to have some in conference. You're supposed to have some stupid shit you're doing repetitively that's hurting you. Not because the universe is evil, but because it's there to teach you. It's like, it's your friend and a leader. Where you need a force to act against an order to progress. Yeah, exactly. And if you really believe that we're here to create artificial life, which I kind of do, you would need these forces. You would need things that motivate you in action. Yeah. Yeah. And so, you know, anytime I shift my thinking when it comes to whatever the fuck I happen to be stuck in to like, oh, this is like a trainer. Like this thing is your coach. It's your goo. You want to talk about the real guru. It's your fucking vape addiction. It's your over drinking. It's like that thing is teaching you better than any book or any person could. In the moment, demonstrating to you all the mystical truths, which is, you know, you're stuck in a, it's called some sorry, you're stuck in this loop of suffering, this endless loop of suffering that you are imposing on yourself. You know, you know, that's yes, Lewis quote, the gates of hell are locked from the inside. Like, is that great? Anytime you want now, you can get the fuck out. Oh, that's a good one. It's a good one. That's a good one. For many people, it's true, but many people they live in Gaza. It's not true. It's like it's not locked in the inside. Gates of hell or just the existence you find yourself in. But true. I mean, and like knowing your madam, I'm not talking about fucking God's. I don't know. I mean, I'm just saying it's like there's hell that has nothing to do with you. But this is, this is where it gets really deep. This is where it gets really deep is because like the, there's like, the human reality or relative reality, which is everything going on in your life. And some of the things going on in your life, you're doing your fucking self. You're an alcoholic, you're addicted to math, whatever the fuck your current thing happens to me. Some of the things going on in life, you're not doing to yourself. You're in some shitty part of the world. You're experiencing some tragedy in your family. You're not doing that to yourself. So you, but this is just one part of the story. The other part of the story is for the self to even exist. You have to have this awareness or consciousness or emptiness is what they call it. In Buddhism for any of this shit to be here, there has to be space around it. So you're also the space too. You're not just the stuff. And so when shit's going wrong, you get sucked into the stuff. You're fixating and differentiating. This is good. This is bad to try to protect yourself. You lose track of the other side of things, which is this infinite transcendent, perfect field of awareness. And that is not touched by the world. So even in the worst of conditions, if you can remember that part of you and not just the part of you that is in undergoing God knows what kind of suffering, then suddenly there's a way to manage the situation without being so reactive anymore. And you know, that's the thing people forget is that other side. That's the, and it's easy to forget. It's easy to forget. I mean, I've, in the old days, the only way I found it was through like high doses of LSD, where suddenly you're no longer encumbered by your thoughts, you're no longer fixating on the human incarnation. You know, and then suddenly you're like, you remember, it feels like you're remembering. It's not like you have been implanted with something. It's like, oh, right. I'm this. I'm this. I'm this of who you are, but you're always juggling bullshit. You're just constantly surrounded by distractions and bullshit and all these different things that keep you from understanding yourself. That's it. But like, so that's relative realities of the bullshit or that your credit card bills and you're all the stuff we all have to do in the earth realm. Absolute reality would be considered the fundamental ground of nonjudgmental awareness. But if you get too caught up in that one, like if you get too caught up in earth realm shit, you become neurotic, fixated, paranoid, freaked out, angry, insecure, lost in a desire for people to see you as something that you're probably not. If you get too caught up in the other side, though, then you like detach from the world and then another kind of imbalance happens. That's called a journalism or absolutism. And now you aren't, you know, in the class anymore. Now you're like being all a luffin shit like that dude in breakfast club. Remember that annoying guy in breakfast club in the church. Now you're all a luff to the world. Oh, I'm not of this place. You know, that's such a defense mechanism. You do absolutely. So because both are happening, so you have to hold both. Like that's the idea. You have to figure out a way to like exist in relative and absolute reality together. Now that's, that's the final bunny. That's the final bunny. Yeah. We are the bunny. Yeah. We're the final bunny. We're the final bunny. We're on our way to becoming the final bunny. I just wonder how it takes place. And you know, I would never be able to guess because I would never guess. I would have never believed that you would have a cell phone on you all the time. Exactly. That allows you to communicate with people and take pictures and videos. I would have never thought that was going to happen. If you told me in like 98 that like a Motorola star tech, like those little shitty, phones with the antenna that pulled out and you remember those? They were replaceable battery in the back. Have you told me that within 20 years? Because it's really all it was. You would be watching video on that and making video and FaceTiming people and getting Wi-Fi on it anywhere you go. You're connected to the internet with high speed, watching movies and viewing all kinds of websites. You'd get all your information from that. You would get all your social interaction from that. People would be dating off of that. No one saw it coming, man. So who knows what's coming next? Do you know? Yeah, 20 years from now, but like if you told me 20 years ago that I could disassemble myself at the molecular level and transform in anything I wanted instantaneously, I would have been like that's insane. There's no way. I'm going to be stuck in this form forever. It could be curse while. That's not that curse while that's one of his predictions. Nano bots. This is like transforming our DNA at the molecular level. Like, you know, crisper, crisper from home. You can download a new DNA configuration. If that happens, that's what's going to be really weird because if people could just be any form they want. If someone wants to be transgender, how about you actually become a real woman? How about you actually have double X chromosomes and how about you actually have a vagina and tits and you can look like Marilyn Monroe? We're so close to being able to make fake life. So how far when they're doing DNA printing, what does that go? Like I was saying at the other day, isn't that the original Atari pong, which is like so primitive? And then you look at the unreal five engine with shadows and dust and it looks realistic? Is that what's going to be happening with these DNA printers? Are they going to be able to make life forms? Do you want to do it? For sure. I mean, we are the whole culture wars over transgender. Are they going to be able to make life forms? Dude, for sure. I mean, we are the whole culture wars over transgenderism are the foreshock of what's coming. Like already, like that has produced riffs and fucking who would have ever thought that? Who would have ever thought that gender was going to be a focus? But the real focus is identity itself. That's where we're headed. It's like we are so about to have midlife crisis as our species because we have really become convinced regarding what identity is, even though we don't know, which is why AI is so hilarious. Because people are like, that thing isn't self-aware. It's not sentient. It's like, are you? Have you thought about whether you even are? Like, how do we even identify consciousness at all? Quantify it? We don't know how to do it. The very thing that makes us what we are, we have no way of really understanding what it is, how it works. There's theories of consciousness. No one fucking knows. And so this is what we're slamming into now. And then the moment you can inject yourself or take some medicine or go to some like robot doctor and be like, hey, you know, for the next couple of weeks, I want to experience life as a Filipino. And so you take some shit that transforms you into whatever ethnicity, gender, maybe animal that you want. Now what are we going to do about that? Like, what if I just want to experience life as a Native American? If I do that, is that cultural appropriation? Of course it is. Because you don't have a mental history being a Native American. But if we can download that into you as well, Duncan. There you go. And you're OK. Because now you're not trans anymore. Now you're an actual Native American. So now we can create artificial memories. And then we have people running around that really believe they came off the fucking Mayflower. Dude, and it's coming, baby. It's coming in all forms, Vikings, everything. And everything. And the root of it, I think, is in general insecurity in most humans. Because most people at some level understand, you're not really what you say you are. You're not really your body. You're not really some constant identity. You change all the fucking time. You might work really hard to maintain some stable. This is me thing. But you know that's not really what you are, who you are. And I think this is for a lot of people. This is unpalatable. And so yeah, man, I think we're just going to about to smash into the most hilarious era and human history arguments over the humans right to become anything they want. Right. Right. That's going to be really weird. Because if you could become a super genius, that's also gigantic. Yeah. What's this topic from being a nine foot tall Hulk? Nothing. Nothing. And it's going to hurt those poor motherfuckers who've been shattering their legs to get taller, you know, about that. Oh, that's so crazy. I think they do it at home with flat chambers. Yeah. And no, no, no, they do it with a screw. They cut their bone and they attach it with this thing where they have like a millimeter apart. And then you keep separating with this screw. It's wild. And then once you do it, now the whole proportions of your body or goofy. So like athletics are out the window. Like I don't even know if you can run anymore. I mean, I don't know what. Is there any success stories from people that have done that? And you see them running and stuff? Dude, it seems crazy. All those. Because your proportions, this is what you grew up with. All your ligaments, all your tendons, all your muscles. Your back must get off fucked up. How does it not? So these are guys that you can see them taller, but can you see them doing stuff? I know it works. There's a guy that I follow on Instagram that he was already a big guy. He was like six feet tall or six feet bigger. He wanted to get bigger and he gained like two, six inches. So I just want to see, like, does anybody done it? Can you run? Can you kick a bag? Can you fucking, can you lift weights? Like, what can you do? This is the same guy. Right. Is that the jam? Like his upper body. But I want to see like, yeah, see, look how he's walking. Like this is crazy. Oh man. New achievement unlocked. He can walk. I just had the surgery though. I don't think so, dude. I think your in crutches for a long time. How? Yeah, this guy that I'm watching on Instagram go to Instagram, go to got my knees done. That guy. So this guy was already gigantic. He was already a big huge guy and he decided he wanted to be six inches taller. So he's been doing this. And, you know, he's now like rebuilding his legs and he's documenting it all. Kind of crazy, man. Dude, they just separate your, you see now he's like walking with like canes. Look how big his arms are. And then his legs are still all fucked up from the surgery. Man. But the thing is like at the end of it, can you run? Like are you like barely walking? I've never seen anybody. He's like pressing some weights. Doing crutches. But he's strengthening his legs. You know, that's like part of the rehabilitation process. Doesn't look very heavy. But my question is like success stories. So Google leg strengthening success stories. Not just are you taller, but are you fucked now? Like what happens? It seems like you'd be fucked. Like imagine if your shin was also in six inches longer. Seems like it. You'd be all I had. Seems like you wouldn't even know how to step. You'd be right. So they have metal in their legs after that? Like flipping step in weirdenship. I mean, I guess eventually you would adapt to it, but fuck man. And then six years from now, I've just pressed the button. And I like to be seven feet tall. There you go. And you're just like, I'm just eating steak. So I can catch up with a molecular structure change. Dude, it's going to be a sad day for all the body mod people because it's like, fuck dude, you did this like relatively like primitive, savage fucking therapy and just right around the corner. Most of our patients are able to run just like before after they fully recovered from the price and crease surgery. But it's important to know that everyone's journey is a bit different. In the beginning, you might find your endurance isn't what it used to be, of course, or you might run a bit slower. Or even notice your walking styles changed a bit. This is all normal. The keys to be patient with yourself and listen to what your body is telling you. Sometimes you might need a more physical therapy or you might need a more physical therapy or in rare cases, another surgery to address any instances that are issues rather than arise. But I want to see. I know that this just says they can. Can you just show me, just can you Google, post leg strengthening? I tried to run, I'm trying to get there. There's no real videos that I was seeing. Leg just listening to the surgery gone wrong. The same guy here. It's really weird, man. I'll try, I'll keep trying a lot. You know, that's a stream. With a neural lace, the dream would be instead of getting leg lengthening surgery, you change your brains, you don't care how tall you are. That fixes the little problem. That doesn't fix the problem for trying to get laid in your five foot one. Well, you don't care about getting laid anymore. You take that out of your system too. You're coming to the ceiling. So this guy's at it. He's not moving very well, but he's moving. So he gains seven centimeters. What is that? Ninjas? Three, two, three. James is crying for him. Four. Wow. How it goes. But look it out. It's like the way we react to people doing that is like, we recoil. There is built into us. It's like the idea is the avatar that you were born with and whatever this simulation is, you fucking, you don't get to change that avatar. You keep the avatar the way it is. There's what you could do like shifts to the avatar by losing like gaining weight, getting muscles, dye your hair, get a wig. But the moment you start changing that avatar in like extreme ways, people like, you can't do that. You change your avatar. Well, I'm just worried about these people's the long term consequences of this. I'm not worried about like if there was a way they could do it and just do it. I mean, I'm just thinking how many success stories? Like what is the long term history of this? Like how many people have done this? Like what is it? What's the effects on your hips long term? Here's a guy. This guy did it a long time ago? Yeah, he's got, he's doing squatting running and some like high knees and stuff. Wow. It worked. Look at that. It's fine. So he's been doing it. How long has he had a surgery? I don't know specifically. But he looks like a regular athlete. He doesn't look like he's having any problems. Yeah, problems. But he also has like those pads over his shins, which little need to think that he still has little scars there. But everyone who watches him jump wins his because they think his legs are going to snap. That's him running? This looks like before it right here in the description. It says it wasn't able to sprint all out. Do it. But do stuff a year later. A year later after rehabbed in full and regained full athletic ability. Surpassing my previous best prior to leg living and surgery, interesting. So there's one example I found. But I know. Fucking cool. I love it, man. I welcome, I can't wait to see the hybrid humans that are going to just be right around the corner, man. There's going to be some wild people. Wings. Yeah, for sure wings. That's going to be the first thing. Who doesn't want to be an eagle man? I can wings, man. I want wings. Someone doesn't want to jump off of buildings. Oh, dude. Unfold your wings when you go on stage. The going on stage. We descend down on the stage. You don't walk through the curtains. Do you think you'd even want to go on stage if you get a fly? Yes. Are you fucking kidding me? Are you funny jokes you could do if you could fly? I was just flying all day. Now you wouldn't. You would do still these damn it. I would want to get long toenails so I could catch a salmon. You're fishing and Joe Rogan swoop, staff. Grab your salmon. Try to snipe them before the bear gets to them. Dude, dolphin. I want to go aquatic, baby. You stick to the skies. I'm going under. I want to get down there. And explore and just go into the sea. This is, there's a book called Wizard of Earth Sea by Ursula K. Leguen. And they talked about how there's wizards who can turn themselves into dolphins. But the problem is if you stay at off and long enough, you forget that you're a wizard. And you never come back to take a wizard and you just stay out there. Whoa. People would be disappearing into the ocean. Like, I'll be back tomorrow. I'm just going to be a whale. And then you're just like, you know, that was a dream, the whole human thing. I'm just going to stay whale, swim around. That's what we, and that's what God did. See what it's like to be some limited thing. It's that great Alan Watts essay. See what it's like to be some limited fucking thing on a planet floating in the middle of nowhere. You don't want to remember I'm God. Just going to fucking plot around for a little bit. Well, if we were a part of everything and the universe is God, that's what I think. I've been thinking about that more and more. Like, does I do that God created the universe? Maybe. Or maybe the universe is God. I mean, it doesn't make more sense if it's everything. If everything is one thing. And then your role in it as a thing, as an intelligent thing, is getting whatever you are to a point where you transcend physical space. Yeah, man. Yeah. Or you become the final bunny. And that's I think that's all of our cultural struggles, all of our struggles over resources. They're all the battle that keeps us moving against it to further and progress the human race. Like all the outrage about those professors that weren't capable of saying that calling for the death of the Jews is hate speech or is harassment. All that is there to get people outraged enough that they realize, oh my God, this is insanity. We have to change the way we think. This is fucking insanity that this discussion is actually being had in 2023. But if it was subtle enough that it didn't freak you the fuck out, it wouldn't be good enough for change. Dude, it's like, first though, you've got to get a taste of it. Like, you know, it's the saddest video I hate it. You ever see that video with a polar bear when it snows? He's in a zoo. Now it's snowed and the polar bears are rolling around and the fucking snow. Finally, everything makes sense to the polar bear. It's designed for snow. There's snow. It's been in this snow-free environment. So if we're the universe and simultaneously singular individuals, then we're made to be much more than we are. And if you're all squashed into your fucking body, the moment you just get any kind of respite from that, you remember, you're going to be nicer to people. Like, if I'm living, if you and me are living, we're tight friends. But if you and me are living in a bachelor pad, how long before you start fighting, man? How long before you start irritating the shit out of each other? Well, you and I live together for six months. You had a big ass house. But we didn't hear a tea, each other. No, I'm saying if you take any, I don't care. Take the Dalai Lama and Ramdas and put him in a tiny little fucking room. Right. They'd eventually get on each other. So if you're living in a compressed reality where you've become convinced that you or all you are, your body is only you, then naturally you're going to panic. Naturally, you're going to feel claustrophobic. Naturally, you're going to be a dick. So if suddenly you had a realization that, no, you're everything, you're more than that, the next thing spontaneously that will emerge from you is kindness, compassion. It might not be like, you might not become the sweetest person on earth, but shit people say to you, it's not going to hit as hard because like if you were in a dream where somebody was insulting you in the worst way possible and you thought it was real, you're getting your feelings are over and over again in the dream. And then you remember, oh, I'm going to wake up. This isn't, this is just dream. That insulting thing isn't going to hurt as much. It's not going to hate you as hard. You're not going to take it personally. So this is, you're totally right. It's like the moment people start remembering what we are, everything will shift. Everything will change. Everything does change because everyone's suffering so much. These fucking professors, whoever the fuck it is, whoever's belting out outrage and anger and whatever, you can be certain of one thing. They don't feel great. They don't feel good. There's no way. No fucking way. And that's sad. And also, how many of them are medicated? Oh my God. It's so normal for people, whether it's in academia or just in many jobs, to be on SSRI's, to be on anti-anxiety medication, to be on mood stabilizers. Totally. This sort of that, Adderall and I have ADHD, turns out, just need a little bit of Adderall. How many of these people are, they're not even capable of stepping off whatever path they're on to rationally or objectively assess whether or not the way they think makes any sense at all. Dude, they're on a runaway train. Just we down the tracks. And they're running major educational institutions. Yeah. Legacy ones. This, I think this is the status quo. This is how it's always been. Anytime you are in the world, you're around people are asleep walking. That's just part of it. Because part of being in the world is you sleep walking first, because you're waking up from infinity. You're like a fucking baby coming out of infinity. So you're sleep walking at first. You culturally conditioned. You programmed. And then somewhere along the way, maybe you start realizing, wait, I don't have to be like this. I don't, this isn't me. I don't have to be like this. By the way, can I, so I can get it off my fucking mic. Can I pitch my book? Please do. It's like eating me alive. Because it makes me feel like a fucking asshole. I have an audio book that I did with one of my friends, Raghu Marcus, who runs the Ramdasas Foundation, the love server member foundation he was with Ramdas and India with Niem Krolli Baba. This great saint and guru. And he's been my friend for years. And so we recorded this audio book called The Movie of Me to the Movie of We. That's it. It's just an audio book. You could even think of it as like a podcast, basically. But it's, he's just so brilliant. And he's just been living in this like world. And was lucky enough to meet this person who like was incredible. What is this book about? So this book is about, well, it's kind of what we're talking about. It's like, I know you know this experience because you're so generous and you are, you give. But if you're not giving, if you don't like, if you get too caught up in like serving yourself, if you get too compressed in the identity, you start defending, you start trying to like always placate yourself. So, but the moment that you start helping, the moment you sort of expand your idea of who you are beyond your body, then at least in my experience is a like professional selfish person. Suddenly you feel this liberation. It's the most incredible thing. And so this is just like, we just talk about all the stuff at these Ramdas retreats that I go to and all of the like, like sort of mystical teachings that have emerged from all over the world that sort of point in the direction of how to sort of get the fuck out of this movie that you're in, where you're the main character. You're the main fucking character. You're, it's a shitty fucking movie. You don't even want to be in the role. It's this guy, Krishna Das came up with an idea, which is you wake up in the fucking morning. You're the main actor in a fucking shitty goddamn movie. And you're not just acting in the movie, directing the fucking shitty movie, then you're writing reviews about how much the movie sucks. That's the movie of me. And so the moment you sort of step outside yourself and realize we're sharing the stage here together, or even better, were the same consciousness that's gotten confused by its proximity of our bodies, then the movie changes. And instead of being evil dead too, you know, it becomes some, I don't know, whatever you want it to be, romcom, porn. There's a mystery that some people have solved. And they've solved it like temporarily sometimes. And sometimes they fall back to the old way of thinking. But the mystery can be solved while you're alive on earth. That at least for moments, for brief moments, the universe reveals that there's this inescapable connection of all people, of all events, of all life, of all thought, of all love, of all hate, of all, all of it is in this insane cycle of giving and receiving and energy going back and forth. And we look at it in terms of like cultural conflicts. We look at it in terms of pollution. We look at it to look at all these different things. But what's really going on is this fucking insane connectivity that it's very difficult to be aware of as a biological organism with an imperative to stay alive. That's literally burned into your DNA because your being is the product of millions of years of things clawing and scratching to get to this point. And we're still so burdened by our origins that we can't we can't abandon war. We can't abandon the one thing that scares the fuck out of us more than anything in life. And should the one thing that's killed more innocent people than anything ever. And we can't even imagine a world without it. Yeah, man. It's that's the wildest thing about being a person. Yeah. One thing that everyone would agree like what? Think of all the horrible things that happened in that October 7th event, right? Oh, that slaughter women and the children, the rape and that horrible shit. We can barely imagine a world where that doesn't take place sometimes. And in war, that's the kind of thing that takes place. And we can't imagine not having that. No, like we would never do that. But we're just people, most people listening to this would never paraglide into a fucking rave and start gunning kids down, right? Most people listening could never even imagine doing that. But we also can't imagine a world where that doesn't take place. That's right. Which is insane insane insane. We're preparing constantly. We spend more money preparing constantly and spending money on the thing that protects us from all the bad people in the world. That's right. Anything else we do by far. And though the whole thing falls apart, the moment you stop doing, you're you, I'm me. You're bad. I'm good. These are other me's. They're the good me's. You're the bad me's. And the bad me's have got to go. And so that's the recipe for conflict, war, fighting just a general shitty life is that you think that this person over there is different from you. Even though that fucking person over there is you in a different incarnation. Okay. It was this philosophy. What do you do with the border? I love you man. Okay. The border. That's great. Thanks for having me on the show. Right. We need to just let everybody in. Well, you know, man, the, so like that, that. Right, but you can't. Why aren't you the person who told me that the samurai to kill somebody has to love him first? Did you tell me that that like? No. Okay. It does definitely not true. It killed a lot of people. They don't even know. All right. Well, then I'll throw that out of the fucking shit. I say, I'm stuck in. I hate this, but I have to get it. No, I don't. I'm not going to be too. I'm fucking kidding. Sorry. What do we do out of the border? We were just talking about how easy these conversations are to have that like, uh, you and I first became friends when I would call and get my availabilities. That's when we really got to know each other was over phone. Because I would call and I say, I'm in town Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday and you'd be like, Hey, man, do you see this documentary? And then we just started talking. We would talk for like fucking an hour and a half. So two hours. It was so cool, man. It was such a fun beginning of a friendship. You don't know the first time. I don't remember the first time I met you though. I don't think. So ours was Corey Como. She was a talent coordinator at the time. And I'm sitting next to you. And this is when I think you just started smoking weed. Like it was a relatively new thing and you were realizing how wonderful it was. And so you were talking about how much you love weed. And I started doing the thing that you now know I do is like trying to be funny or fun. And I start. I was about to be like, it causes brain damage. And Corey is like, Corey's like, shoving me like, no, no, don't do that. Because you didn't know me. You wouldn't just thought I was a fucking asshole. Right. Until I stopped. But I was like, you did give me like a sharp look for a second. And I'm like, Oh, fuck. And but that's when we first like, that's when I was like, we hung out for the very first time. And then we started talking. And dude, I'll never forget this car. I drive back from Anaheim improv with you, I think. I stopped stoned as fuck. And you put on Terrence McKenna. Some lecture that I still think about. And man, I felt like the universe was melting down. And it was really like blowing my mind. I read Terrence McKenna, but I never listened to any of his lectures. And it was just like he was talking about the singularity. And we were both like, God, fucking damn it. It was crazy. And there was a series of audio. Was it, it might have been cassettes that you could get. It was on Amazon on point in time, I think. Yeah. But it was all these Terrence McKenna lectures. And then there was the psychedelics salon. We can get all of them. Did you ever go to that podcast? Yeah. psychedelics salon has everything. Allen Watts, every Timothy Leary, every Terrence McKenna, like so many hours and hours of McKenna. Amazing. Because he would give like kind of similar speeches, but it was all he just kind of would go wherever it would take. Yeah. And he was so good at it because he was doing it constantly. So he would just chop to these places. And it was really interesting because he was like, like Timothy Leary had it wrong. Like, what I like to do is keep things small and quiet. And so he would do like, you know, a couple of other people here and there who cares. Nobody bothered them. Yeah. You never got too crazy. Yeah, man. I, you, what a, man, of all of the luminaries that we missed that I didn't get to talk to or hang out with that one. God, it would have been so cool. I've become friends with his brother and his brother's amazing. Dennis is really cool. He's amazing. And Dennis is the more skeptical scientist. Like, yeah, he's, you know, he's a legitimate scientist. And he, he has some very, very unique, like informed thoughts, particularly about the Stone-Dape theory. That's one of the more magical ones. Yeah. That's one of the more magical theories because man, if they're right, that's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you know, because that's a nutty one, dude. That's a nutty one. That, that thing, that now the became, literally is why we became human. that thing somehow or another became a schedule one substance in this corrupt fucked up culture. Right. You get locked in jail for the very thing that turned us into people. Right. The very thing that the universe provided you to grow and evolve. And it's your right as an evolved creature to rebel against that to the point where you can overthrow that because it's insane. You've let tyrants take over the ability that people have to evolve that came straight from God. Yes. If that's what's really going on, like that's the thing. That's like the push. That's like the people in front of Congress saying that, you know, calling for death to the Jews is doesn't constitute harassment unless it's actionable. It's like, it's a thing that makes you go, what the fuck are you talking about? It's got it. Someone's got to say, no, we're going to not only cannot take it, we're going to put you in a cage. We're going to make it the most illegal thing. Like, yeah. How are you making the thing that made people? Like, what data do you have that shows this is bad? Dude, you don't have any. How are you locking people up? That's crazy. This is why I don't think it's project blue beam because you could just tell people don't eat that thing that makes you remember your God and that you should love everyone around you and that you're part of a holy mystical, instantiation of consciousness in the time space because it's bad. And we're all like, okay. All right. If you say not to, I guess we can't. Don't you think they don't know, which is part of the problem because if you really did know, if you had really taken it, you would never want to stop people from taking it. So I don't think any of them have done it, which should be a prerequisite. I don't know. Graham Hancock has said, would I think he. Um, so I don't think any of them have done it, which should be a prerequisite. I don't know. I don't know. Graham Hancock has said, would I think he had a crazy number. He said you should have no fewer than 20 ayahuasca or silicized. Jesus Christ. But if you want to be president, now that is agree with. And you should have like, could you imagine if that was the thing that you had to put them through? That was the thing. Instead of these fucking goofy debates where they're all dunking on each other. And you got to lift, send your shoes, son. Instead of that, if instead they all had to take psychedelics and we had to have access to their psychedelics ceremonies. So you can say, did he do his five sessions? Yeah. Yeah. Let's see. Is his five sessions documented? Let's make sure we can watch his five sessions. Let's say if it doesn't scream out wild shit like well, he's like, you know, what does he, know, maybe his real intentions will be a revealed. Maybe when he gets it, maybe he can't, maybe he comes out of it a different person doesn't want to be president anymore. Really? Maybe he does the five sessions and be like, I'm changing the course of my life. What am I doing? Yeah. That sounds nuts. But if we were a healthy society, we would legitimately consider whether or not someone should have some very powerful documented psychedelics sessions that we know at a dose to be a transformative experience and have multiple ones of those documented if you want to run things. Dude, and you should probably have to keep up with it too. You probably have to do it every six months. I think it should be, that should definitely be on the, on the agenda. But let's start with just get him drunk. Yeah. I want to see what you're like when you're hammered. You know, you know, a lot about a person when you, when you're out in the winter, hammer. Dude, some guys get super goofy when they get drunk. Yeah. Some stupid things. Yeah. Whatever you say, we won't hold it against you, but I want to see like your energy shift when you're hammered. Right. Right. What do you like? Are you a bully or a fun drunk? Are you a fun drunk? I want my president to be a fun drunk. I don't want to fuck an angry drunk president. Then you move on up the list of drugs and to just, what is their consciousness like in different psychedelic states? Right. And then from that, we can make a true judgment on what they're doing. So they all know more about themselves and why they wanted to do it in the first place. If they still want to do it after it's over. Because a lot of people think they want to be present just because it's hard to do. Like there's a lot of things that are hard to do. You shouldn't do. Right. You know, like there's a lot of jobs that seem like they're good, but it's just hard to do. You know, just not, you don't want that. Dude, they're okay. So this connects to what we're talking about. I told you about this great documentary on Netflix about this cult. Love is one. Fascinating. This cult leader essentially like my analysis of it is the cult killed her. She started off as a cult leader. But then as things progress. What was her name? I can't remember. Or mother. God is what they called her. Here it is. This is the lady. Yeah. From mother God to mummified corpse inside the fringe spiritual sect. Love has won. Amy Carlson was supposed to be the incarnate of Mary of Maryland Monroe, Joan of Arc and Jesus Christ. Man, that's ambitious. When she shared her earthly body for the latest time, authorities found her followers still worshiping it, shedding light on the group. Many of called a cult. You think? It's fucking cold. I can't believe that. I like that. That's a call. That's a call. Jesus Rolling Stone. What are you doing? Dude, that's such a cool language. What does that even mean? Well, the documentary is spectacular. But what's interesting about it is that. So this person is dying. She needs to go to the hospital. Sometimes, she would come out of her cult leader. I am God mentality and say to people, I don't think this is real. I don't think I'm God. And they would say to mother God, you're just in your lowers right now. You're not in your higher etheric body, which is why you think you're not mother God. You are mother God. And in interviews, one of them, I think said, if she had asked to go to the hospital, I don't think we would have taken her. So this cult forms around this woman and then the cult itself enables her alcoholism. She was a profound alcoholic. It keeps her on, she's like drinking colloidal silver tilts. You turn fucking blue. Oh my God. Turns blue. And like the cult, like essentially like devours her until they're worshiping or mummify body. I'm comparing this to the presidency. How did they mummify her? Well, I don't know that they they just like letter like sitting asleep. But you see the picture if you want to see the picture of it. Yeah, I want to see that. Okay. Yeah, it's pretty wild. How rough is it? I mean, the way the, whatever the eyes are that they put there really do seem to be gazing into your soul is pretty intense. What the fake eyes in there? I'm not sure it was her eyes. I like, like I read that they painted it or it's like, dude, it is, you will love this documentary by the way. Exactly. That's it. She's turning blue. Oh, wow. And that's from the colloidal silver. Yeah, mother God. God, that's so weird. And what was she trying to recover from with this colloidal silver? Well, she had some kind of organ failure going on in like, anorexia. Oh, no. But she was drinking and she was getting hammered all the time. organ failure, drinking an anorexia altogether. Yeah. Fascinating story because she was a manager at McDonald's took MDMA and boom. There you go. Oh my God. God, her skin is blue as fuck. Yeah. That's what it was like before she died. Yeah. Did you ever see that one dude that went on like Oprah or something like that and the skin was blue? Papa Smurf guy. Yeah. Yeah. Same thing, right? Same thing. How many people have done that? Google, how many people have turned blue? People turning blue using colloidal silver. So I found just I don't go break it to this. This is another one of her. It's part of the story. The headline on Friday. Mother God Robin Williams in alcohol is medicine. Dead celebrities had something to do with this. Robin Williams talked to her like she had contact. She channeled Robin Williams. Oh, Jesus. Dude, it is, but I can't wait to watch it. I love a good cold doctor, memory dude. I didn't mean to derail our conversation with the president. What I mean is that it's a similar thing. You start off wanting to be president and you become president. But then you're in the system that where you're trapped, like you got to have security for the rest of your life. I think it's mandatory. Like if you've been president, that means you are being constantly monitored for the rest of your life by the US government. So this it's a similar fucking thing. Like you're you're like even if you have the best intention by the time you get in there and you have to start making these rotten decisions and you have to feel the hate of at least half the country every fucking day, the psychic hate of the country probably more than half of the world. It crushes you. It kills you. So it's a it's a really like dangerous shitty rotten job that you trapped yourself in. Then you don't want to leave because what are you going to do after you've experienced that level of power? How do you go back to a regular life? But you're never a regular person ever again. I mean, no who who has vanished the best? I guess W he's pretty much vanished. I mean, but what he started doing is started doing those paintings of people in military and the war that he started. Weird paintings. I think Jimmy Carter did a pretty good vanishing act like you just kind of dropped out in here and that much. True. Obama now he's like directing movies now and stuff. But W did two terms. You know, yeah, right. Two terms eight years during the the height of the war on terror. It was right after 9-11 that he got elected. So he gets elected. It's 2020 and then 2021 or 2001 rather we have 9-11. So it's like not that long after he was president and then all of a sudden his approval rating goes up and everybody likes them more. And for eight years this guy was involved with Dick Cheney in this war that now everybody thinks of as a fucking catastrophe. Yeah. And he's just kind of melted away. And he's just painting somewhere now. Just where people with machine guns like stand around and keep on. Yeah. Because for sure there's someone coming for you. Like for sure there's somebody out there who's like I'm just going to kill him someday. I'm just going to get to him. That's how you have to wake up just knowing that's that's your life. Fuck that job. Well, like Salin Rushdie when he got attacked on stage. It's like 20 years after the fuck. Yeah. Yeah. Some guy came on stage and stabbed him. If you're like Dick Cheney, you can't go anywhere without worrying someone's going to get you. What's your name? Moveie about your fucking, what's his name Batman? Christian Bale play do? Yeah. I mean, what? Yeah, it did. And it's not favorable. Right? It's not favorable movie. Like what did you guys do? I mean, this is why there's a whole strategy that's designed for people like that that, you know, I'll never see it. Some rarefied place with an. It's called Bohemian Grove. Yeah. Yeah, right you can go there by canoe. Did you watch that video? No, you told me some guy broke into it Dude, it is the most what's the video? Where do we get it? I Google guy breaks into Bohemian growth It's a shot I just joined and John Rotten. It's truly disappointed But and I think they they definitely get high there because I think he saw a sign in one of the cabins that know marijuana I know that's a few people have done it This might be someone introducing it, but the one I saw was his first person POV of the guy going through the Bohemian Grove this isn't it. No, this isn't it. It's at night They might have it was on Instagram. They might have already zapped it. There it is Which one this one are guys sneaks into infamous Bohemian Grove that could be it But I guess a lot of people have done this is something that today. So this is it. That's it. He got in deep Okay, this must be it. Okay So this is him is wearing a mask and how's he sneaking in through the woods? I heard it was a kayak, but maybe not Hmm, why did you get in no idea? Wow, yo, I want to go to Bohemian Grove me too We could go I you could go in a second. I want to go and what do we have to do? What do we have to pledge our allegiance to? I watched the ritual I don't think that I think they would just probably think you're funny and let you in Yes, but does this look cinnitus none of this looks sinister to me. It's all sensitive to me buddy Looks like no one's there. Nice and bossy. You don't have a ritual every day. It's romantic Look at that nice moss because that's the owl That's the howl but watch when he bangs on and you realize it's a fucking hall of look it's got a moss in everything It's beautiful It looks cool So where's your bangin? Look this is inside the fucking owl. Okay, not a stone Megalith like I thought what's like a little space in there But it seems like it's man of a cement dude Whatever it's hollow like a Easter egg or we go to those bunnies when you get an Easter bunny Yes, a hollow you get upset like a pup pup golf course like a fucking thing at a pup pup course No offense, but we mean girl members. I do want to come I'll take your all the way out But I'm sorry this to me I think it like now look this is there. This is I guess they're bathroom. It's all Nixon shit there It's all worn down. It's like yeah, it's probably they kept it the same as it's always been I Mean if you got to imagine if these guys were going there Would when they start going there in the 60s. Yeah, when they start going there logs That's a funny thing everything he sees is sinister to him. There he goes back in his kayaks. Oh, okay So he's fucking out kind of seems kind of crazy that they don't have any security there at all Another sign that it's not as sinister as we thought is he using a frying pan This is straight loon Maybe fella you also act as a weapon to crack Alligators over the head with they're coming after or something. There's no alligators in California What am I saying? I'm sure the security guarders just like this happens every night and this when he's like I gotta take a shit Another another another fucking loony, but like the thing is like we know that world leaders at least used to meet there I mean it was the the Nixon Audiotapes are hilarious. Have you heard Nixon talking about it? The faggiest thing I've ever seen See if it takes a blood the audio of Nixon talk about be he mean grove Apparently they do a lot of wild shit back then I think they still probably do. I'm not saying they don't party there But I just how many politicians are like that how many politicians like closet super perverts January 19 17 You know In the another of the candid and sometimes coarse conversations released today the president muses about antisemitism He's talking to evangelist Billy Graham that worries about reaction to the Washington visit of Israeli Prime Minister Golden my air because Israel has just shot down a Libyan passenger plane I'm sorry. I don't know where in this video it is. Oh, probably hard to find it's very it will clip Yeah, you gotta find the Bohemian Grove part Yeah, where are the weird things talking about all kinds of shit from the lost Nixon tapes gays are born that way. Oh, he's right Congratulations Yeah, I don't know. I swear. I mean I know we played this before. Yeah, coming up right away Nixon Bohemian Grove huh nothing scroll down a little bit maybe Seems like you'd find it right away right? Hmm. Hmm. I mean Nixon on Bohemian Grove That's it. Let's say in the same video. Oh one minute No, this is it. This is the right one 1971 President Nixon to the time to have an impromptu conversation with two of us close aides Look at that guy they look like dudes from the 60s Yeah, as the Berlin Wall because of their German sounding names and They're penchant for isolating Nixon from anyone who wanted to see him You know the problem was this little off the cuff conversation is being recorded by the secret White House taping system President Nixon's thoughts hello those of the Haldeman and Erlequin when sued become a part of presidential history San Francisco's just gone down clear. It's not just the ratty part of town the upper class in San Francisco Is that way the Bohemian Grove that I attend from time to time Easterners that come there This is the most faggot damn thing could ever imagine the San Francisco crowd lives there. It's just terrible I messed up my grove a different set of values Yeah So they were all there hanging out together Yeah, you said I go there from time to time Yeah, I just don't think it's I mean look I I was hoping I was so excited by that video I'm grateful to whoever filmed it because I was like oh shit I'll up close because Alex Jones only got got the distant hour It was still good footage, right, but this is like close up of the owl you missed the urn in front They have a bowl in front of the owl I Mean again, I can't believe I have an expectation for the Bohemian Grove I thought they would be doing better upkeep on their cabin. Well, maybe once they got found out they don't go there anymore We have to a different route. Yeah. I mean why wouldn't they just abandon that fucking thing if you're the Illuminati? The Illuminati's real why would you stick with a place that's already been like outed? When you can get some dope spot and Wyoming or something exactly yeah, you just get some place where people have to helicopter in yeah No one's gonna hike in no one knows where the fuck it is everybody shut your mouth right? Yeah, I don't bring me Hey, maybe I'll tell you this if I would not doubt if there were an Illuminati it would not surprise me at all to know some of them Go to Burning Man I would imagine they would go just to keep their fucking finger on the pulse. Yeah, like what are you freaks up to? Dude, they flew the one I went to they flew F what are they called F-22s? Mm-hmm They just there's a military base near there that wanted a fuck with Burning Man and they flew Over burning man a few times just a blow everyone's mind and freak everyone out It was pretty going fast as fuck it was crazy. Hello. Are they low? It was like shoot shoot like it was so I mean I Was I was pretty high But yeah, it was so funny looking around at the phases of all the burners after like high tech Military aircraft just flew over. I think they just wanted to look at the festival probably no they're fucking with those people Having fun. I would do that if I was a fighter pilot definitely fly over mine. We have fun those fucking dirty hippies clean your feet Not all at peace. Oh, no, there's a lot of different kinds of weirdos They go to those things, but it is interesting like how Signific and it is a part of people's lives that they go to Burning Man Like it becomes like a thing that they look forward to like their Olympics every year. It's one of the best things I ever experienced as far as like Festivals ago. I mean change my life for the better for sure. It's incredible I mean it really you I know that you will never go, but if you did go you would get it and that's a that's what I love It's got a force field around it a cultural force field where People have an idea about what it is and you can't really have an idea about what it is because it's too big Right, you're I think about what it is is correct like for a piece of the pie But you really can't understand you can't know all of what it is other than like this incredible expression of art and an incredible like temporary Example like humans can do this too. We don't have to blow shit up. We can drive a little round and garish fancy art cars dressed like weirdos with like playing like awesome music and like just have fun together like that is possible too and the fact that it's hard to get there and a difficult terrain definitely helps train Some people out so the people who come there really fascinating. I mean I'm telling you man It's like the force field where people are like that's where douche bags go or that's where annoying ass fucking hippies go Yes, you were correct there there, but that's not all it's there and so it's a mystical I mean I'm telling you it's a mystical place. It's one of those mystical things I ever encountered Well, that's probably what's going to have to happen somewhere Just like the United States of America Like the United States of America is only three people old You know like just if you just stop and think about what these people decide to do to escape the confines of the society They found themselves trapped in and all the tyranny they escaped and they came to a new land started new and does a lot You know not a happy story and all forms. No a lot of fucked up things went down But the idea that that can never happen again seems kind of silly like it's happened so many times Right, I mean it wouldn't be an easy thing to do and people are definitely gonna resist That's the thing that you have to be like really aware of if you tried to start another country right now The country you're from would come and fuck with you They do not want you doing that like if we just like a mansion What if the climate change people are right and everybody looked at Greenland going on in Greenland Bring it to juke yeah, and we just went in and bought Greenland You know like remember there was a joke that Trump was talking about buying Greenland Yes, he promised that he wouldn't do this he put a meme up It was hilarious of a giant like Trump tower It says Trump on it because I promise I won't do this to Greenland So funny like who the fuck is is that much awareness? Yeah, as a president to do that but but if someone bought Greenland and if climate change does keep happening and like also in Greenland I'm like come becomes nice. Yeah, it comes a good spot temperate climate because of where it's at It's like the rest of the world's a little too hot, but Greenland's perfect and then the people that escape What's wrong with how the United States has been run? What's wrong with money and politics what's wrong with money, you know Pharmaceutical industrial complex being able to advertise and control politicians and all the shit that you saw over the last few years And all the shit you see with war all the shit you see right now if someone Started a new one Yeah, good luck good luck is that I mean you what you need space colonization for that to act like you need some kind of for a disaster Or a fucking disaster giant disaster like a big one. Yeah big crazy Asteroid impact type deal where everything's fucked collective consciousness shift I mean I know that's like such new age bullshit disabled like theoretically if there was some shift in consciousness then maybe there would be You would really have to have like a complete shift in like value and then if that happened you could see some new Way of running things. Well, don't you think that shift is happening? Right in front of our eyes It's hard to see because we're looking at it through the lens of a person who exists day by day But if you just went back to when you and I wonder we first meet Dude 2012 no pre 2012 because we were talking about a minute back lives when did you first start working store? Late 90s. Oh, yeah, I've been there for a long time. Yeah, I'm really bad with Tony 12 nuts. I've done you from I'm so bad with time like thing. I met you in like 99 or 99 probably no night night 2000 back then marijuana was illegal and the only way to get a hold of it in California was you have to have a medical life right so we used to get medical licenses together um and The idea of psychedelics at all being accepted in any positive way was alien right you never heard about PTSD being treated like maps wasn't they hadn't done their studies yet right with the MDMA They hadn't done these so Simon studies you hadn't heard about Ibogaine for helping people get off opiates Or an even a problem then right it wasn't it wasn't not a not a thing that people were talking about to go from that to where we are now Where there states that have decriminalized it and then it was up for was there was a proposal for California But knew some rejected it because they didn't have like a protocol in place to come back when you have like some sort of a If you're gonna use it for therapy some sort of a therapeutic protocol which you know Probably makes sense like not just decriminalizing it but decriminalizing it and setting boundaries for you so like this is how you should do it right if you weigh 150 pounds This is what you need. I guess it's not even weight dependent apparently apparently mushrooms are not weight no way Yeah, that's well how they know that though like how many studies that they've written done with dosing people You know that are 100 pounds up to 300 pounds. I mean studies of these on that But but the thing is they're doing those studies now and you can get ketamine from a fucking licensed therapist now And people are traveling on a regular basis to go to South America to do ayahuasca It's really common. There's ayahuasca tourism everybody talks about doing it right there's so many people that are micro dosing There's so many people in silicone valley that are micro dosing and openly talking about it It's a different world than it was just from the time you and I met right so it's happening right in front of us It's just not moving at a pace that corresponds with our understanding of it right like we're saying like how can you say it's illegal? Like how are you making it a leak? It doesn't make any sense This is a thing that's made by people to control other people and in this one you're not helping anyone You're hurting people. It's overall known that this is a fact right But it's taking time for that idea to be accepted people have to die Generations have to pass new ideas have to be cemented to people's heads because they're so Ideologically entrenched in what they initially believe right? That's why it's so hard for vegans to go back to eat meat like they can't slow drip baby I mean look you know again It's like this is the other thing is like if you you know judge a tree by its fruit I love what you're pointing out there if you look at the fact that this is happening The implication is there are people in positions of power Recognizing that there's just no fucking way we're gonna legalize acid and mushrooms in MDMA You fucking hippies. We're not doing it overnight. Give us some time There's people who clearly recognize that and are slowly turning the dial and shifting into whatever the future of humanity looks like where we're not encumbered by draconian Consciousness limitations. So yeah, you know the implications of people in positions of power who are a 100% for Humans having access to their birthright and that's exciting to think about I wonder who those people are no idea But I'm glad they're out there Why that's such a weird time Yeah, man, but it's all happening like right in front of us It's just all at once and so many things from so many and we have so much access to it and Then we also have so many lies and it's all of it just slamming into each other left and right in front of us Like a little ideological car accidents I know just like the truth and fiction and narrative and bullshit and what you want to believe versus what's really true There. Yeah, oh, I get grabbed out the time good guys and fucking bang bang bang bang and The way one group of people looks at one thing versus the way another group of people in the old people seem kind of like rational Yeah, how how you guys so far apart in your ideas? How is this how we so divided about so many Unimportant things yeah when the important things are not being resolved like none of the important like if you really wanted to control People you would want to keep them doing what we're doing just constantly arguing about the dumbest shit That things that we can't and having very little understanding of what you're really fucking passionate about right and you just still yelling it out Anyway, yeah, I mean, yeah, you want to and also you want to make them feel completely impotent and completely Out of control and helpless no and and the only way you can do that is by again and again Make them think that they are a limited Temporary organic body that when it dies It's dead forever make them feel like this is all there is so you better fucking go for it and going for it means Grinding and hurting other people to get your fucking whatever it is you're looking for because that's all you got anyway Man, yeah, and you got a good so if you keep the fixation on that Paradigm then yeah, you can probably control a shit ton of people. Well, that's what they liked about covid One of the things they liked about it was that they could control you if they could get you to get vaccinated They can get you to do that they could force you to do a thing. That's a level of control They've never had over adults before It's a new thing You know and if it's profitable and it's also this thing you're forcing people to do boy that gets sketchy Boy that gets sketchy. Well, yeah, I mean, but it's a there's so many other happened Did you ever see the video of some of the bidgy about seatbelt laws? Yes, I love it. It's from like the 1970s I'll never wear fucking seatbelt basically common news from Kane have a beer after you get home from work Yeah, that's what that's the guy's talking about I feel like there's been endless iterations of this sort of flexing where you're like you can't do that anymore Yeah, well, it's just the insurance. That's the seatbelt thing. It's just people were dying. It was like This sort of flexing where you're like, you can't do that anymore. Yeah. Well, it's just the insurance. That's the seat belt thing. It's just people were dying. And it's like, oh, yeah. Too much money. They made laws. But our, our willingness to accept. Regulation. Exactly. Our willingness to accept regulations. I'm trying to pull up this, uh, some looking for this, uh, this thing. Because it's, it's wild here and I'm say it. Yeah, it is. And here, Fauci actually say it. It's just like, wow, why would you say that out loud? Like you're, this is not, this is not what you should be saying. Like listen to this because this is what everybody suspected that they thought this way. Talk about somebody who faded out, whatever happened. Let me just disappear. He's in a coffin somewhere waiting for the, you reveals what he really wanted out of all those COVID mandates. Once people feel empowered and protected legally, you were going to have schools, universities and colleges are going to say, you want to come to this college, buddy. You're going to get vaccinated. It's been proven that when you make it difficult for people in their lives, they lose their ideological bull and they get vaccinated. If that was the movie, it'd be cheesy. That's like you like the, they don't know the hot mic is on. The billing gets revealed. Yeah. What the fuck I never saw that in that wild. This is just wild. He thinks that way. That's why they fucking turned his mic off, dude. Cause they're like, Hey, you, what the fuck are you doing? We only say that in the Bohemian Grove. Well, you can't see that last read Robert Kennedy's book. Robert, can you book more terrifying? And I've always said if it's not true, why isn't he getting sued? Cause it is true. If it is true, you should all be freaked out. And I know millions of people have read that book now, but it's not reviewed. You don't hear it talked about. It's not like a thing. The mainstream media brings up just the actual facts that he's laying out. Just not even from COVID, from the AIDS epidemic. Just go back and listen, just read that book or listen to the audiobook. And just to stuff about AZT is why hold and using the same language, he was using it as easy to use both safe and effective. Using that same language for something that fucking killed people quicker than anything. Dude, if only they had been, I feel like if they've been honest when they came out with the vaccine and been like, it's, it's, that's no way. There's a chance it's going to fuck you up. That's what they do. They never do that. But then if they done that, that's so, they can't start doing that. Duncan, they've never done that. Then not only do they not do that, but they're allowed to run multiple studies and that they can find one that they can rig in a way that some sort of a finagle shows some kind of positive benefit. That's the one they run with. And they can have eight studies that don't show it or eight studies that show it's bad. And they just push it away. And then on top of that, what gets even weirder is when someone goes to review these studies, they don't get the actual data. They get the review of the data from the pharmaceutical drug companies. And then they get to review what their findings were. They don't get to review the actual data. The whole thing is nuts. You really think the COVID vaccine was bad for you? What? I just can't imagine how to do that. I don't even think that. That's not even what I'm saying. What I'm saying is they have a standard way that they handle any kind of medication. Yeah, that's how you make the most money. I mean, it's when like, you know, that collision between profit and medicine, it's such a dark place. It's so dark when you're at the hospital and you realize they have a motive to keep you here. Like the doctors, they've done their oath. They might not. But the hospital itself can implement certain rules and regulations that have a higher probability of keeping you in their longer so that it's more expensive. And that's where it gets fucking weird. And when it comes to pharmaceutical companies or anything that's profiting off of sickness, it's like, you know, it's like the, I don't know if there's a boy that what do you call the sugar industry, big sugar, big sugar, big sugar. In the pharmaceutical companies, these are like happy bedfellows because one has poison. The other fixes, the damage from the poison. And so when suddenly there's a profit motive behind it, oh, shit, it's going to get weird because the lobbyists for the pharmaceutical companies, theoretically would not want regulation on weird dies and shit that big sugars putting in stuff. Because that is going to reduce the profit for whatever medication they use to treat the damage from the fucking dies. Is that nuts? Do they work together? Do they have meetings about this? How much have they thought it through? You know, we're going to see a big dip in our insulin profits if they regulate how much sugar is an Oreos. Like there's going to be a direct hit on our fucking industry. If that happens. I think they do it that far. I don't think so. I pray that they don't. But it would. What would you do it if you have an obligation to your shareholders? You're supposed to make the most amount of money possible. Isn't that part of your job? That's what you tell yourself. I guess you would have to do it that way. Yeah, I'm going to say, like, let these people eat their fucking sugar. I don't want to buy a yacht. Yeah. I want to meet their goddamn sugar. You know, just say the cereal is fucking good for you. Your cereal is good for you. It's fucking great for you. It's great for you. This is the how do you know one of the biggest drugs emerging drugs like over the last few years, been blood thinners. No, I didn't know that. Yeah, how much of an increase in the prescriptions for blood thinners have there been over the last few years? Like is that someone was talking about it? Because of strokes. Someone was talking about it. Um, I need to find out if it's true though. It's one of those things that I was watching this YouTube video with some doctors discussing uptick in blood thinners. They were also talking about heart medications and the heart issues and the uptick in heart issues. It's a, it's a large uptick. It's an uptick that if it was anything else, people would be really looking into it. If it was a diet, if also like some new food was introduced into the food system that we never ate before, but then also there was a corresponding big uptick in all cause mortality. People would start thinking like, I wonder if it's this new thing that just got introduced. Like if it was anything else. Do you remember when, okay, so I don't know if you remember science class, but I remember one of the things that I thought was exciting about science was it or maybe I just had a good teacher who's like, anyone can be a scientist. Like that's the whole beauty of the method. This is a way to interrogate reality, to find out what the truth is. And, and you know, anyone, you don't have to wear a fucking lab coat. Anyone should and could use this method to differentiate superstition from reality, cognitive bias from reality. It's very exciting. Suddenly they're like, Oh, yeah, I don't have to be. Isaac Newton to be a scientist. I can just use these methods in my own weird little experiments. And then something happened where suddenly the articulation of what you think is the truth, even if you're fucking wrong, became a limit. You couldn't say what you're talking about right now. Out loud, you weren't supposed to anymore. And people would even say, don't do your own research. Right. Don't investigate. Stop. You, you're not of the scientific class. You don't even understand this shit. Stop. It's misinformation when it's like fuck. Like instead of saying stop, challenge it. Like my favorite, it's funny reading the arguments between physicists. I don't know if you've ever seen that when they fight, like when scientists get in big fucking fights. It's so funny. And that was part of this tradition of science is like scientists weren't all these placid, like soft, sweet. They are when you deny them funding if they're not. Oh, God. That's so dark. And that's what happens. Money takes over medicine. They'll fuck that money takes over politics. Money takes over military. Money takes over environment. Money takes over green energy. Duncan, it's all about green energy. It's all about the green deal. Our green deal's going to fix it all. Oh, yeah. And people are just raking in money on this green deal. Yeah. This green deal. Like I've partners in the green deal. We can stop this and going to form that. And we're going to have a coalition and no more gas cars. And then everybody's car has a limper to run it now. You can only go 65 miles an hour. That's it. Yeah. That's kind of reduced deaths. Don't you want to reduce deaths? And we want to kill switch. I mean, what if a bad guy's running away? We could just stop and shut the car off. More police shits. If you have a bad tweet, stop your fucking car. And we just decided to stop your car and don't even tell you what we're starting to do. Your car pulls over. It says fucking retweet it. It's not our story. You revise. Not I would actually would like that for my own funny thing. Is there something you'd like to fix? Well, you pulls over and the thing just says there's something you like to fix. That tweet wasn't funny, Duncan. Yet again, there's something I should fix. Perhaps one of your tweets. Oh, yeah, please delete the offending tweet. Okay. Continue. And then you can drive again. Yeah, man. That's not outside the realm of possibility. If some guy got arrested and went to jail for shit posting, a meme about Hillary Clinton, about the voting thing. You know that one? Yeah. Well, the guy said, you don't have to get a voting person. Do five, five, five. We found out that guy apparently, see if I believe this is true. He just posted it. The guy who got arrested, I don't think he created it. Why was they going through that? You just posted a meme. He did post it, but I couldn't tell in the wording of it. If he'd asked someone to make it for him and then he posted it, I couldn't. I believe he said that he didn't make it. I believe he said that in an interview. Well, but if he asked someone to make it for him, right, that's possible too. Yeah. For paid someone to make it for him. Right. Totally possible. Dude, that would be different. You could say, I didn't make it. Yeah. Yeah. The fucking E-car thing, man. That's it's just like, dude, I don't want to have something monitoring me all the fucking time like an E-car or like you were saying, I don't want the ability for someone to turn this shit off or I think they already have it in some cars. I think they have it with on-star. I think that's one of the KV. See if that's true. On-star, on-star have the capability of shutting off a car. A gas car? A hot pursuit. Gas car? I believe so. I believe so. I believe it's a computer program because it allows you to start your car and it'll open. You can have a friend of mine locked his keys accidentally in his suburban. He called on-star on-star, unlocked his car. So you can go and get his keys. Yeah. On their website. It's part of what they sell. Okay. It was its thought. Like if you're getting car Jacking. Car Jacking Kidnapped. When a woman's SUV is stolen with her mother and grandchildren side, on-star helps save the day. That's on-star, on-star shut the car off. So that's great if it does this, if a woman got kidnapped with her cute little kid. I want to know if those are real people or if those are crisis. On-star stops fleeing, fell in and static. Yeah. So on-star already has the ability to do that. So that kill switch that everybody's asking for already exists if you have some cars. And if those, is it just a GM that has on-star? Because on-star only General Motors or is it like just a car thing. I feel like it's like a General Motors thing. I think it's Cadillac. Yeah. So it's part of General Motors. Yeah. I wonder if they allow it in other cars though. Is on-star in other cars outside of General Motors cars or is it only? I mean, the good news is no one will ever hack that and use it for other things. Never completely safe. That will never be used. Yeah. Against what on-star is using it for. It only stopped getting that person. Oh, that's in China. No, they're breaking the wall. Yeah. I remember being at a Pink Floyd laser light show when I was in high school. And it was the saddest thing, man. Because another brick in the wall, we don't need no education. Comes on at a laser light show, which is already depressing. Because it's definitely not Pink Floyd. And it wasn't even that good a laser light show. And there's a security guard. He's probably in his 20s. It's a shit job. He's got to be the security guard of the laser light show. And then like the crowd turns on it. Just because he was in a security guard uniform and that song comes on and everyone starts raging against this guy. It was so weird. It's like what are you going to start attacking this guy? He's like, that's a problem with uniforms. Yeah, dude. Uniforms allow you to assume a position of power over people, but also you become the enemy. Like you're wearing the uniform of the authority. That's not a person. Most cops are just fucking people of all cops. They're just people. Yeah. Just humans. But you put him in a fucking outfit and you give him guns and like, what's that? You want to talk about a responsibility difficult to handle. Oh, God. That one's right. Dude, there's like some jobs in this world that I think about. And they're like, mother fuck ER doctor. Oh, my God. Fuck that trauma doctor. Fuck that police officer. It's like God Christ in heaven every fucking night. Every fucking year just driving around. You're thinking about your fucking kids and you get a weird call. And the next thing you know, there's some dude running at you with a chainsaw that you're begging to stop because you don't want to fucking kill him. Right. Oh, what a horrible job. And they, the amount of money you should get paid for that versus what they make. Like big, big gap, big gap. Yeah. And then you're getting PTSD. You're not sleeping in. I was watching a video today of a guy telling a guy not to reach for his gun. He's got some guy pulled over and he's like, do not reach into your band. Don't reach for that gun. Don't reach for your fucking gun. And the guy's like standing there with his hands like this and he just goes in and boom, the guy's got to shoot him. And you just reach his first gun. And then there was another one where they didn't realize this guy had a gun. He shot one of the cops and the other cop unloaded on him. Like, fuck man. Like every time they pull someone over this is like some regular looking dude to he didn't even look like a criminal. He looked like a like a handsome young guy just and then he just had a gun. He didn't look like a homeless person. Didn't look like an ex con. He just looked like a regular guy and they pull him over and they got they, it took him by surprise. I just pulled the gun out and start shooting. Like they never know when someone's a full on psycho. Yeah. You're pulling people over and you're a cop and the lights are on. You got them in that pressure situation. Maybe they have warrants. Maybe they did something horrible just now and you didn't even know. You just pulled them over luckily. Yeah. They're just shooting at you. Jesus. And so they have that fear every fucking time. They pull someone over. Yeah. Who? Yeah. And it's so funny dude. I got into watching those sovereign citizen videos. You ever watch those? I was a little too hilarious. And the cops like that there's so sick of it. And they like it's the funniest thing to watch them like deal with their like fifth sovereign citizen. It's so, but it's on top of all that other shit. You know, possibly getting your shot or the procedure we're going to get shot. Also on top of that, you're having to deal with like that other, just the other element. Well, also everybody's lying to you. Naturally, everywhere you go, you're running into people that have created problems. And when you talk to them, they're lying. Like that's got to be like 90%. Have you ever had a drink sir? Have you are you drinking tonight sir? You know, like why is she unconscious? Like what happened here? Why was this blood coming from? Like who who hit this person? Who, you know, what happened here? Yeah. All day. All day. Yeah. Every day. Every day. You're in line. And everyone looks at you like the, you're the professional enemy. Especially if you have to work in a area that's crime. Dude, there's a great app people can get man. I can't remember the name of it. But like when you get pulled over and you're about to get popped, you just start the fucking app because it tells you what to do. Like so that you don't like you, you don't have to like infuriate the fucking cop. There's just exactly what you say, which is basically like, I'm going to need a lawyer in my under arrest, like all this stuff. But not so you don't have to like remember all the shit. And so what, because what that does is if you do get busted, or that if you do this just the right way, then you have a higher chance of whatever the fuck you did being sort of thrown out. Throwing out. Like I can't remember the name of the act. The right steps. You took the right steps. Cause it's good to know those. That's incriminating. Good to know those steps. Cause by the way, that's the other fucking thing. Like their job is not to like suddenly befriend you at 3 a.m. When they fucking pull you over. You're really getcha. Their job is to fucking find out that you commit a crime. Right. And if you fucking are so dumb that you admit to that, then that's kind of your fault. I mean, that's your fault. So I those like that app, I wish I could remember the fucking name of it. Do it up to be a third time. Me too. Thank God. I'm getting pulled over app as if you're, I'm getting pulled over app. Okay. Let's wrap this up. Dunk a trustful your book one more time. Oh, the movie of me to the movie of we. It's an audio book not available on Audible. Oh, yeah. And it's only on Audible. It's not really a book. Okay. If it it's on Audible, then movie of me to the movie of we. And then your podcast, the Dunka Trustful family hour. And I'm going to be the Denver comedy works in January. Please come. You can find his clubs over there. The ink used to be the grade. It was greatest club before you fucked everything up with the brothers. But you define all my dates. It's dumpingtrustle.com. All right. I love you. Love you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.