Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. Headphones, go headphones. Yeah, I'm going to headphones. You don't know where that sounds. Fuck it. What's up, dog? How are you? Well, dude, it's been a roller coaster for me, man. Since the last time I saw you? I've big time. What happened? Well, um, let's see here. The, uh, the year of 2022, last time I saw you, I think it was 2023. Was it that long ago? I think it was, man. OK. Yeah. And, uh, man, dude, I was on high the, the year of 2022. Like we had a, our Jack S. movie in theaters. Number one, the big, like, you know, my profile was all, you know, like white hot. The world just opened up from the pandemic and everybody had stimulus money and there were just revenge spending. Everyone wanted to go out to shows and there were no interest rates. Money was free. It was just like a perfect storm for me to have the most successful year of my life. Like more than double what my next most successful year was. And then like, I don't know, maybe I just got like, uh, super, super high on that. Not like, and it was just like, I was just kind of printing money, you know, like selling merch like crazy and like everything was just going so well. And, um, I don't know if maybe like you become more successful and like people get angry at you, you know, but, uh, there's a point, like a point after that where I felt like man, the internet turned on me kind of, you know, like I saw a lot of negative comments people saying that like all I do is promote merch, you know, like there was, there's a bunch of different stuff and I, um, legitimately agree. That's my thing is when I see a negative comment about me. If I agree with it, then it really bothers me, you know, and I got to do something about it, you know, I think and I've heard you say that that, uh, you know, that that, uh, taking criticism constructively is like super helpful. Very helpful. The problem with the internet is this, it's overwhelming. It's too many, too many voices, too many different people. That's why I would never recommend for a person like you to even read the comments. Right. I, well, what I did was, um, do you have a dick tattooed on your, is that what that is? That's exactly how long I have to keep that for. I don't have to keep it for any amount of time, but it's not a better anything. I mean, it is a bet. How long I last before I get it, lasered off. And is there a money value to this bet? Now, tomorrow, uh, an experiment. Oh, but I've been doing really well with that. It's not even a good dick. It's like a weird dick, like a banana dick. Cause it's, it's, it's pretty awesome. And it was a bad, it takes criticism. And it, it, it was done by Post Malone. Oh, yeah. It makes it even better. Very, it makes it awesome. Yeah. I don't expect to keep it forever, but I was very shocked when I got it that my life didn't really change a whole lot. Yeah. To you. Right. You know what I mean? Like if, uh, you know, Marco Rubio got a dick tattooed on his forehead. They'd be like, hey, take this fucking clearance away. Yeah. Um, but in any case, man, like, um, I, uh, I just, I think you couldn't be more right. There's so many voices and everything. But I agreed with much of this stuff. And, um, you know, I spent like, under 2024, 2025, like, like very mindfully, um, addressing the, you know, the criticism with which I agreed. And I felt like I made like really good progress, you know, like sort of, uh, repairing my, my reputation, even though maybe I didn't even need to. I don't think you need to, but maybe not. But, uh, and then coming into 2026, I was like, wow, I did this. I texted you. I was like, dude, I've got on this Mr. Beast thing. I won the whole damn thing. And, uh, you know, this video, he made 30 celebrities compete to win a million dollars for charity. Oh, we on with. Uh, dude, it was, uh, I said, Matt Rif was one of him. Oh, cool. Solve O'Connor. Oh, nice. How he man, Dell, dip blow. Nice. The Bella twins. Oh, that's a crazy group of people. It was really crazy. It was 20, 20, 30 and 30. Oh, wow. Yeah. 30 like not half as celebrities by any measure. And, uh, yeah, I won the whole damn thing, which was, so what was involved? What'd you have to do? Um, there was, uh, that, I mean, it was, it was an exercise in promoting his beast games on prime, which by the way, is the most phenomenal TV show that I've ever watched. Yeah, my daughter was just telling me about it. She was saying it's so good. It is unbelievably good. And, and I'm not being paid. So wizard, man, that dude's very smart. Yeah, I got to. He's like a really interesting guy, because he's kind of open about what he does. And he tells people how to do it. Right. You know, like how to manipulate the algorithm and how to get people to get excited and click on your link based on images and the text says. And he thinks about all that shit. Yeah. I was able to have him on my podcast, uh, like right, right when the thing came out. Oh, and he was telling me that, um, that he was pretty close to recording a podcast with you on top of the pyramid. Yeah. I could make it out there. Right. Of the time. Yeah. But he's amazing. And I thought when that thing came out, I was like, man, this is just going to, like, be life. Oh, there's something people got mad at him. They got mad at him when he was filming in Egypt, because he was filming filming with Zahi Hawas and Zahi is the, what is the head of the ministry of antiquities? Is that what it is? Or he was at one point in time. He was one of my most controversial podcast guests. People did not like him. Wow. Because he's kind of, he pushes a narrative in defiance of all the evidence that has been sort of uncovered by all these other people. It's like there's this evidence that shows that, you know, the pyramids are kind of, you're not talking about these guys. You know, Mr. Beast, Mr. Beast did something with him and a lot of people online, I'm glad to him for having this guy on Zahi. And it's the guy who pushes the air. Look, nobody knows how they built the pyramids. And he's like, they built it because it was a national project. And I was like, come on, bro. Like, that's a fun thing to say, but that doesn't tell me how they got all those rocks there. Tell me how they got two million, 300,000 stones the way between two and like 80 tons. And they moved into the mountains. Some of them 500 miles away. Like, tell me how they did that. Tell me how they aligned into true sort of North, South, East and West, 4,500 plus years ago. And it's more likely plus than minus. I mean, nobody knows. So he, so that was really controversial. A lot of people have mad at Mr. Beast for that. What in the, like the algorithm that I have people with a problem of chill and letting this guy say nonsense on your show. Wow. Okay. So that's the point is like, don't listen. Right. Right. Right. Nobody gives a shit. No, no, no, under Mr. Beast, his fans, like we're going to abandon him. He has saw he lost on. He's been out for a band off. Nobody cares. Right. There's just too many voices. And if you look at yourself, if you feel like, um, kind of horn out my merch too much, just back off of it. Yeah, that's what it is. That's right. And he gets shit for everything because he's uber successful. Right. So everything he does, like it could be like, can we gave away a million dollars charity? It's fucking, it's fucking ridiculous. Like, they never make all those people happy. They don't want to be happy. That's a big part of what's going on. Right. You're jumping into a pool of mentally ill people and trying to stay clean. And like, watch it. Hey, guys, guys, guys, let's be reasonable. They're not right. Right. Well, they're fucking suicidal. They know what the gun tastes like. They've had it in their mouth recently. This is not a place where you're going to get like, right. Right. This course, right. But again, it's when I agree with stuff that that, right. That it bothers you. Right. But do that to yourself. Right. Right. Right. Right. Just look at yourself. Take a moment. Like, like, there was a, I don't know if I was burned out. Like, if I was touring, but like, um, there was a point going through 2022 in particular 2023 where like, I just, I would lose my mind over people being disruptive in the audience at my shows. Like, I don't even want to, um, call them hecklers because I think like, heckler has like a connotation of wittiness to it. I'm talking about just drunk shit. It's just yelling. You know, and disrupting the show. And I would take the position. I'd be like, man, you know, uh, the, this whole audience of people paid their herder and money to come see this show. And this one person yelling out is just fundamentally disrespecting everybody who's here. And I'm not standing for it. I'm trying to hard, you know, and I would be like, I would, I would, I would snap. Like, no, I would be throwing people out. What happened was everybody thought I was a dick, you know, and like, maybe so. Like, maybe I was burned out and it was like, you were overreacting. Right overreacting. Yeah. And like that's, that's another piece of criticism that I really, really took to heart. And now it's been over two years, like well over two years since I even scolded an audience member. That's cool. That's great. I just got to kind of put that energy out there at the beginning. We're all here to have a good time. You know, we're all here to have a good time. Let them know. So like, like if someone's yelling out like, come on, man, keep it to yourself. State, stake. All right. They're, they're, they're, they're, they're, they're, hold it together. If I get like really pushed in and it, and it egregious situation, the farthest all goes, I'll say, hey, you know what, guys, I used to get really bent out of shape over people being disruptive. I don't do it anymore. And that tends to do that. And as soon as I stopped reacting so much, like the problem out of house, well, you got to realize like your entire career, you've kind of been a disruptor. Sure. So it's kind of natural that disruptive people would be attracted to come to your show. Of course. Of course. And then you're saying, please be polite at this moment. Right. Yeah. Like, you're about to see me put some things up my butt and I demand respect. Is always doing your show. You put stuff up your butt. It's multimedia show. So, um, so it like it. So of course you put something up. That's multimedia. I mean, so if it's fun to or Jamie, what's with the questions, Jamie? God. Right. Um, but I still to this day cringe when Tim Kennedy choked on conscious and let you drop. I wasn't right at him. Yeah. That was mad at him. You didn't have to let you drop like that. I did ask him to drop me which one. I would have said no. Yeah. I was said no. If you made me do that too, first of all, I would have tried to talk you out of it. But then I would have said there's no way I'm going to let you drop. In hindsight, it wasn't particularly funny. Not only was it not funny. It was like super disturbing. Right. I would have put a cushion under you at the very least. Right. Like a nice, like what are them judo pads or four people on being choked out and in and of itself is not it's not really nothing. Probably nothing. Best for you. Right. Yeah. I don't know what the data is. I don't think a lot of Jiu Jitsu people have done double blind police, placebo control studies on tap or no tap. What's the best for your brain? Right. I can't think it's good. Now you bring it shut off for a few seconds. I can't think it's good. You know? One of the gnarliest things I've ever done in my life, if not the gnarliest, way back in 2003, we had just had the first jackass movie come out. While filming for the first jackass movie, one of the bits that it was never used because it was too dark. Too far for jackass? For jackass. Right. You have a clip of this? Um, of what? I'm sure that it exists. Okay. But you'll appreciate this. The legend Jean-Labelle. Oh, judo Jean. judo Jean. The legend. Real legend. Yeah. Like they had Jean-Labelle. They lined up the whole cast of jackass and he just went down the line. Just choked his tongue. Yeah. And like the swiftness with which he got it. He was a brutal man. I mean, it was just light. And he was just like, sorry. Super nice guy, but a brutal man. Right. And it was, it wasn't even brutal. There was like, general. Oh, it was just like, I mean, it was just so fast. It was just, his style was known for being particularly painful. Yeah. My friend, Sylvia Pimenta was one of his students and he was one of my first year jits who instructors and he taught me a bunch of gene stuff. And I was like, Oh, what a meaning. God. So right. So mean, it was like knuckles in your neck and like real crazy shit that gene would do to people. Yeah. It's like particularly painful. Yeah, there you go. There you go. Out cold. Oh, yeah, that looks gentle. Super gentle. No, I'm not even kidding. Like the way he's doing it. I mean, he's technique is so flawless. You know, that Chuck, Chuck Liddell was really good at it too. He choked out one time. So who did he punch? Who did he punch in the arm full blast? Some someone like that. One of you guys. Oh, that would have been before jackass. Was it Jason Ellis? I forget who it was, but someone let Chuck full blast right hand them in the arm. I'm like, well, that arms useless for a couple of months now. Fucking Chris. That's not like your buddy punching you in the arm versus chuckle. He's going to rip some stuff apart in there. He might blow your shoulder out. Like that's crazy to let that guy hit you. Yeah. What a sweetheart too. Oh, he's a great guy. Chuck was the weirdest because when he was in his prime, like you look at him, he was so scary because he's tall. He was fucking built in a brick shithouse mohawk tattoo in his head. Super kind. Like you talked him super calm and relaxed and you know a bunch of time with great fucking guy. Great fucking guy. Okay. So Jean Lebald like Chuck, just lays us all down one by one. Okay. Like they considered it too dark. They didn't even like just because he went unconscious. Yeah. Just like right here was this. 2002 that we've done. People weren't used to be in choked out yet. The ocean didn't really get big until 2005. Right. Because of Chuck. Really. And what was really because of Stefan Bonner and Forrest, right? Right, right, right, right. That one fight on the old crazy one fight on the ultimate fighter changed the course of the history of the sport. That was the premier on spike. Uh huh. Because there was a good fight before that. Diego Sanchez beat Kenny Florian. So that was before that. That was really good fight too. And then but but that was like, you know, Diego beat his ass. Whereas the Stefan Bonner Forrest Griffin fight was a crazy like, like completely even fight. And two dudes who knew each other really well, they were fucking going for it. They said that during the time, you know, like maybe a million people were watching it at first and the peak was like six or seven million, which for them was nuts. So what that meant was everybody was calling their friend and go, do, turn on spike TV right now. This is crazy. And like, what is this? Like no one knew what it was back then. Like they had heard a hoist crazy, but no one knew that it was going to be on TV and like boom, that was it. And then they had Chuck as the champion, which was the perfect champion for an emerging sport. This guy was just a seeking destroy psychopath with a tattoo like congee tattoo and it's had an a Mohawk just fucking starching people. Whoo. I remember that. Why so time? I mean, you're 2000 was when Jack has came out on MTV. And I mean, at that time, you couldn't watch video on the internet. That was the dark times. That was when it was banned from cable and you could only watch. I got direct TV because there's the only way you could watch the UFC. Yeah. Because why I got direct TV? And and the media just wasn't so fragmented at that time. There were only so many TV channels. There was no social media, no video on the internet. Right. Someone something hit on a basic cable. It hit big. Yeah. Yeah. And I think the most views, the most concurrent viewers on MTV that we got was like 4.5 million. So and that for cable, that's a lot. That move the needle in a big way. That's unheard of now. Right. Which is really kind of crazy if you think about it. Yeah. So much things have gotten diluted because there's so many show. It's impossible to watch everything. Right. Every time I turn on Apple TV, there's some new interesting show. Yeah. There's a fucking million of them on Amazon Prime that you've never even heard of. They're really good. They're all over the place. Right. I mean, you know, I had a really great conversation with Mark McGrath, the guy from Sugar Ray. Oh, really? Yeah. She's a, I just fell in love with this guy. How did my podcast? And he made such a valid point about how the 90s, 90s nostalgia is so rad. Because it was really the last time when everybody watched the same shows on TV together. Right. You know, like, I mean, like all the albums came out on the Tuesday or like whatever, you know, like everything, everything, it was a communal audience for everything. Right. But we don't have that anymore. There's only one UFC 326 this Saturday and on Draft King Sportsbook, the number one sportsbook for live betting. Once it's over, you're shot to get in on the action is gone. Draft King Sportsbook is built for live betting, not just pre-fight picks. Because in the UFC, one moment can flip the entire fight. One punch, one kick, one takedown. New to Draft King's new customers can bet just five bucks and get $200 in bonus bets if you're bet wins with the code Rogan. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use code Rogan. That's code Rogan for new customers to turn five bucks into 200 in bonus bets. If you're bet wins in partnership with Draft King's, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called one 800 gambler in New York called 877-8 open wire, text hope in Y 467-369 in Connecticut called 888-787-7777 or visit CCPG. On behalf of Budhill Casino and resorting Kansas passed through of per-wage or tax may apply in Illinois, 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction, void and Ontario restrictions apply. Bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinema must require four additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer. Well, we knew when albums were going to be released and everybody got excited about it. Yeah, new van hailing. Yeah. Yeah, it was it was a fun time. It was an interesting time and it was a time like before the internet. You had to find out about stuff from friends. Yeah. You know, like I remember I was headed to a gig with this dude. God, I wish I could remember his last name, but it was really funny. It was Johnny something. Fuck. I'll remember it eventually, but we were on our way to this comic from Connecticut. We were on our way to a gig together and he's like, have you heard of the brand new heavies? And I go, no, who are they? He goes, it's a jazz band and they linked up with a bunch of rappers and made this heavy rhyme experience album. It was fucking incredible. Like I would have never found out about that. It's not sick. Oh, it's sick dude. There's there's one with a gang star that's great. It's getting hectic. It's fucking great because it's like you got this music that's like this like real live band music sort of like how that tiny desk show does it now. See, I don't even know the time. But like you got like cool. You rap. Oh, do cool G. That's it, Johnny Rizzo. How did you do that? Another trick. It's how the fuck did you do that? Shout out to Johnny Rizzo. Is he around still? He was a funny dude. He had to like a rubber face. The dude could make the craziest faces. You're like it was so funny. Yeah. Back to the the choking. I think the reason why I was a dark and disturbing because you guys are twitching. Yeah, it's the twitching. When you when you get choked out, you're twitching and that's a little bit of this is waking up. It's a little bit upsetting. It's not that the that's hilarious. All the shit you guys did that they left in. Well, yeah. And another big problem is that with the choking out, it's particularly imitable. That's something that we know. If I if it's something that little kids could like pretty easily imitate, then that's more problematic for us. But in that whole experience, Ryan Dunn just came away and feeling qualified to start choking people out himself. Oh, no. I don't know the Ryan Dunn had any kind of combat sports background. I kind of doubt it. I think it was literally just from this one experience with Jean Labell kind of watching it happen and having the experience himself. He just started choking people out. And back then I had a wildly different style of tour, but I was on tour and on the less and Ryan Dunn would be with me on tour. He would say to the audience, who wants to get on stage, get choked out? And even back then, I was like out of my mind on drugs. And I was like, please don't be doing this. You really, really often. It made me so uncomfortable. I would leave the stage when Ryan Dunn was choking out audience members. It's so crazy that they signed up for that. Right. And people would be jumping up and down. Like, please, please, please let them down. He didn't draw. He didn't let them down. He didn't. But it bothered me so much until the one day when I'd been on cocaine for like three days in a row. And I was feeling a little bit self-conscious about how little like very intense footage that I had been generating. And I was like, you know what? Today is my day Ryan Dunn choked me out. And so he did it once. And then he did it again. He returned to the whole day. He six times in a row. At each time, it became more like a violent throwing me down. So that's number two. It seems like he's having fun with your body after it's out. Yeah. He sort of just ragged all in you. Yeah. Dude, six of them in one day. That's too much. Oh my God. The last one that rarely happens in training. Right. Actually, you tap out. Yeah. The after this one, I think there's two more. And the last one is just so upsetting. This one? Yeah. I guess the one where, uh, where you threw me on my head. Oh, dude. Yeah. Like, right. I don't want to see. No, no, no, no, no, no. Yeah. I landed right on my face, dude. Fuck, man. Why did he do that? I'd because it wanted it to be more exciting. I think they did like in the cocaine. Yeah. There was cocaine falling out of my nose in the shot. Because I put it there. Right. And so I think that's probably the gnarliest thing. Yeah. But, uh, but in any case, so did you get hurt from that at all? I think I had other repeated shoes. Oh, from falling your face. Yeah. Did you get hurt at all from the repeated chokes? I don't think so. No. It's pretty amazing. Given what I've put myself through, both both professionally and personally, that like I've, I've good recall. Yeah. You know, pretty. How many times did a giant told me he's been knocked out on Caught just 16 times? How many times did you know? I'm not at that level. Um, I got knocked out, um, in the WWE ring. Oh, are you? On Monday night, Raw. It was, this was, this was a, a heavy one man. Which we're hit with. Uh, and it was an elbow that really put me out. Who hit you? Umaga. This is the cause of his fighter name and the WWE was the Samoa and Bull Dawser. Brocemones got some heavy bones. Yeah. So yeah, it passed some hole in there. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah, I bet you can bring that one up. Really good. Good. That's a Monday night, Raw. Steve O. And Chris Pontius. We were promoting the second Jack S movie. So we're going to get in the ring. We're getting in the ring. We're, we're, we're doing a whole match. And it's, it's fascinating the way that they kind of block out what the matches are. It's kind of like a jam band. Right. You know, like a jam band that you've got like the kind of 10 pull moments and then you just kind of fill it in. But it's like there's kind of this is going to happen. This is going to happen. This is going to happen. And, um, what was to be the last move? Uh, it's called a splash where this 350 pound Simone bulldozers going to jump off the top rope and with, with me laying on the ground and like body slam, you know, off the top rope. But what I didn't understand, what I didn't know is that the match for it to be over, that means the person who lost like stops moving. You know, like not only way. Well, you're not supposed to move around. Oh, you moved around. I've moved it so like so he put you to sleep. Yeah. Like he jumped off the top rope and it was such a devastating blow that I couldn't help but react. You know, I was like, oh, you know, like whoa, like an laughing and rolling around like I came and he's looking at me like, oh, no, I'm disrespecting him because I'm moving around. So so he hits me again. And, and I'm confused because I understood that what just happened was supposed to be the final move. But now he just hit me again and I'm like, what are you doing? You know, like, but he's like, if I'm going to move around, he's going to keep hitting me. So what I told you that? Right. So then he hits me again. And yeah, we got pretty radical on the, yeah, there's all the cases. They he drops this elbow. They they didn't even show the end of the match. They went to commercial because it was too dark for the WWE to show. See right there. Not supposed to be over, but, but I'm moving around. And so that I was kicking me and I'm like, wait, but that, dude, I think that elbow was what put me out. And they, they cut to the commercial. I don't remember leaving the ring. Wow. Yeah. That elbow looked pretty fucking hard, dude. Yeah. Right there. But that's also all the other banging of your brain. I mean, this is a lot of banging of your brain. The body slams a banging of your brain. Yeah. Yeah. You definitely got a concussion from that one. Son. Yeah. Those two is getting concussions all the time. You don't think about it because you think, oh, it's wrestling. It's pro wrestling. But just the physical contacts on the boy to vote. Those guys when Hulk Hogan came in here, man, it was one of the saddest things I'd met him a long time ago in Beverly Hills. I ran into him in front of a cigar bar. I was like, holy shit, he was gigantic. And then I met him the second time when he did, well, I met him another time when he, he and I did a spike TV thing. It was awesome. And then he came in to do the podcast and he had so many back surgeries that he was like six inches shorter. Oh, wow. It was crazy. It's because they have to fuse all of his disks and he had a cane everywhere, man. He was fucked up. And he said it was from that thing that he would do where he dropped down on his ass with an elbow. So every time he did that, he fucked his back up. I mean, think about how big he was in his prime 300 plus pounds. Right. So every time you're dropping down, your body's taking the shock on your ass bone of 300 plus pounds flying through the air and bouncing off the ground. So all of his disks got herniated. You got to get him all fused. It was horrible. Yeah. Those guys get fucking busted. Up. Yeah. The rock is like a weird, well, he's an outlier because I don't know what kind of physical issues he has. But he doesn't even have any. Like I worked out with him. He's mobile. He could do stuff. He looks amazing. So I don't know how he got through that insane long career and not got busted up. Yep. I feel like a star called Steve Austin is in reasonably good shape too. I don't know. for beer and not got busted up. Yep. I feel like a strong cold Steve Austin is in reasonably good shape too. I don't know. I don't know about that one. But I know a lot of those guys, man. They leave that career and they fake hips, fake backs, fused. Everybody has something wrong. Yep. Well, I've been pretty lucky. For the most part, I've had some hardware in my ankle. I've had hardware in my collarbone. I had meniscus surgery on my knee. That's it for your knees, just one. Just one. And any was an elective one, too. Like it was a partially torn meniscus. Why'd you decide to get it snoop? Because I was told that it would be better. I don't know. Like in the long run, my knee would be better for us. Yeah, I had a donut on my left knee. And it was pretty good until a skiing accent a few years ago. And it's been like irritating the shit out of me since then. Not about a few other little injuries with it. But the thing about it is that cushion, once it's gone, it's gone. Like it doesn't come back. And that cushion is kind of important. Like my knee always felt a little loose. Like that cushion really goes banging around in there. They do replace meniscus. They use cadaver meniscus. But it's not 100%. It doesn't always work. I don't know. I think they have to cut the entirety of your meniscus out and put up cadaver one in there. And then sew it in place. That recovery from that meniscus surgery was rough. Really? Yeah. Like that. I thought that was one of the easiest ones. For me, man, my knee really hurt for quite a while. Were you doing anything for it? How long ago? It was in 2006, so which it said? Oh, whatnot. How long was it? The knee surgery? The meniscus was recent. That's 23. Oh, OK. Well, get on some peptides. That's not a pro, help it. I was. I was doing peptides. Yeah. Donald Seroni. Oh, there you go. He got me dialed in with the folks at Transcend. Right. He works with those guys. Right. And that's how you got super jacked after you retired. Right. I just travel so much that all of these things that need to be refrigerated and you're traveling with the ice pack. Yeah. I get it. It's just like kind of too much. I just like. You know what a simple solution though is? What's that? Just get yourself like one of them little Yeti thermuses. Put some ice in there and put your peptides in there thrown in your bag. Simple. That's it. OK. It keeps it cold, seals up. I was doing testosterone too. You stopped? I did. Why'd you stop? I just kind of like kept forgetting. I was like, ah. Ah. That was right. And I didn't. I mean, I don't want to say I didn't notice anything because there are different things going on in my life that I could have attributed. But like having stopped taking it, I don't notice really any difference. And did you get your blood work done before you took it? Like, Dad got my blood work done by the folks at Transcents. Right. And they prescribed it to me. What did they say your levels were? I think my testosterone was like 300. That's pretty low. Yeah. It's on the other side. There's stuff you can take though. Stuff called, well, you know, I need to take in peptides. But there's other stuff you could take that could rate ramp up your natural testosterone. Right. I've been doing more like strength training too. And I know that that does it. Yeah. There's a bunch of different things like deadlifts and squats. They ramp up your testosterone, especially zerch or squats. I could certainly get back into all that. Because I love the idea of being super healthy longevity. Yeah. It's good for you. Feel better. Feel better. Think better. Yeah. And my baseline's pretty good too. Like I've got my whoop band. And you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, the whoop is kind of hilarious. I'm a little concerned about my health. I love it. I've got trade all my actions for the past 40 plus years. Right. I love it so much. And it's great. Right. You get so much data. Yeah. You're sleeping well. Well, what's your HR V like? I don't know, man. I don't have a morn wondering a while. Right. Because I like today I'm 113 HR V. I don't know if that's good. Is that good? It's super good. Congratulations. Yeah. And that's awesome. My average is like 90. That's great. So you're working out feeling good. Yeah. Take care of myself. Boy, those blows to the head, son. Yeah. For sure. Especially as you get older, it seems like a lot of people only get older, they're really hard to recover from. Right. Yeah. The last jackass movie we did, the fourth one, jackass forever. They had this huge treadmill. It's a treadmill for horses. And they got us, they got it just humming. And all of us, a bunch of us, the cast dressed up in marching band, like with marching band. And like we're marching, playing our instruments. And one by one, we jump on this treadmill. Right. And I was hilarious. But dude, I got knocked out so cold. I wonder if you could bring that up, Jamie. Like I was out out for maybe the longest I've ever. How did you get knocked out? What happened? I hit my head. Just fell. Yeah. Like as I got spit off the end of this treadmill. Oh, Jesus Christ. Yeah. Just kind of jumped on it. So it looks like Knoxville went forward. Oh my god. Oh my god, dude. So I'm like, everyone is awake. And I am like super not awake at all. Knoxville's bleeding from the head. Yeah. You guys are so ridiculous. What a silly way to make a living. Yeah, don't do that anymore. Yeah, that. Oh boy. Yeah, that might have been my worst concussion. But there's been more than that even, you know, not 16. But the one that hurt me in the most was Johnny Knoxville when he was in that store and butter bean. Beat him out. Oh my god. That was crazy. That one bothered me. Because if you know how hard butter bean hits, that's just a silly thing to sign up for. It left that guy beat the shit out of you. And then even after he's down, butter lean, how to get back up and put him away. Like don't let him do that. Right. Especially butter bean, man. That guy. There's a highlight reel, a input, and giant men to sleep. Right. You know what I do not want that guy punched you on the chin. Talk about sweethearts too, man. What in butter bean? Yeah, up until that moment. Right. This is a thing with those guys, though. There's so accustomed to hurting people. Yeah. You want to sign up for this? You sure? I'm sure. OK. Right. And they're just going to do to you what they've done to a bunch of other people that decided to box them. Yeah. Man, looking at that trap. That really was gnarly. No, no, no. It's not good. I mean, you were flying through the air and landed on your fucking head. Not really, dude. Yeah, that's good. They had that eye. That's probably way for get to take your peptides. That's right. I've read a story about Jim McMahon, the football player. And that's his name, right? The guy from the Chicago Bears? Yeah, Jim McMahon was the quarterback, right? Yeah, the quarterback. And I think it was a sports illustrated article. And they were talking about, like, he can't remember anything. He'll be standing in the middle of his living room, not knowing why he's there, where he was going. He doesn't know where his keys are. Doesn't know where his phone is just like, can't. It's just like, it just blacks out, comes back. Blacks out, comes back. You can imagine that that would be more for like, lineman because every single player. Those days though, the quarterbacks got taken out. Back in those days, that's the 80s. You got to think of how much harder the game was. But I'm not obviously not a football official not a whore expert by any means. But from what I've been told, the rules are much more favorable today to protect the court of court. Right, OK. And back then, those dudes got it. And it's not just that, man. It's also all the different years you played. Those all count. Like, just because you're only getting knocked out a couple of times as a professional in the NFL, what about all the times you got knocked out in high school? What about all the times you got knocked out in college? Those guys, man, I have a massive amount of respect for football players. I mean, I've watched a lot of high school games in Texas and I've watched a lot of college games at UT. It is a fucking brutal sport. I mean, it's no wonder that's the American pastime. It is a psychotic fucking sport. I love it. It's fun to watch, man. I become a fan. I really, I think, was the smartest thing the NFL did. They got into the routine with their NFL YouTube channel. At the conclusion of every game, they upload a video to YouTube, which is a condensed version of the game that runs anywhere from like 10 to 15 minutes. So like, you can watch a super digestible. More than highlights, more than sports center. But like, you know, you're only seeing the awesome stuff. Man was involved in Texas as one of the dirtiest plays in NFL history. Oh, he's got slammed after the play. After the play slammed on his head. That's crazy. I took this into this season. This play. I don't know which game of the year it was, but that's not going. Oh, man. Look at them. Oh, my God. That's crazy that they did that. And what did he get? Like a one game panel to hear some of the back down. Back down is probably pretty. Yeah. Back down, they probably gave him extra steroids. Good job. But I hope this reaches the NFL when I say this, is that as much as, by the end of the season, whatever it was, 2023, 2024, like I was so invested because I was watching this digestible like YouTube videos that by the time the playoffs rolled around, I was subscribed to every single different platform because now like the stakes are so high. I got to watch the whole game. Like they really converted me. Oh, that's great. Yeah. It was the smartest thing that's good. That's wise. I mean, because you think about there's a lot of downtime and football in play. Right. So this is where people talk. The best thing, but I have a really, really important thing that I want that NFL to know is that they were the thumbnails a lot of the times that gave away the outcome of the game. And this was the problem that the UFC had for a while. Like, I would be doing my shows, especially if I'm in a comedy club. I've got the second show on Saturday night. So I've missed the whole pay-per-view event. Now I get back to my hotel room and I'm going to watch everything the whole thing. But then when I go into the video on demand and the thumbnail shows like the winner of the main event like celebrating, you know? Like it's like, oh, so I reached out to Dana. I'm like Dana, the thumbnail are giving her away. And he's like, took care of it, man. Just got up at the bottom. But they had a Disney, the president of the interview. That's nice of that kind of pull. Right. And I wish I could do that for them in the Philippines. And they don't always do it. Maybe they won't. Maybe they will know. They don't always give away the game. But for the love of God, please make the thumbnail neutral so that because of the reason why we're clicking on this video is because we don't want to know what happened. We want to watch it and enjoy it. Right. And so how long are these condensed games? Anywhere from like eight to 16 minutes. Wow. That's smart. And it's so exciting because if you see a punt or a kickoff, you know something awesome is going to happen because they'll never include a punt or a kickoff unless it gets run all the way down for a touchdown or if there's a turnover or something like that. So it's like, ooh, you know, like you get excited when you watch these videos if there's a punt. Right. That makes sense. Yeah. You have seen does a good job with the, they do these videos that chose like all the knockouts from a particular map. Yeah. So anybody who just wants to see knockouts. Yep. I've been seeing that. And, you know, I've been in situations already since the Paramount deal where I got to go back and watch the whole card. And Paramount, like, it's pretty awesome, man. Like on ESPN. It's not very intuitive. I got to say it's a little clunky when you're searching for the show because you go to like live TV to watch it. And then if it's not on live TV anymore, like if you go out and you pause it and you come back and try to, and you click on it, it doesn't work. And then you got to find it. And then you got to go to home. And then you got to go down to the UFC and then I've search out each individual. And then it brings you up a grid of all the stuff that's on TV right now. And then if you click on that, it's not playing anymore. So it tells you it's not on. You got to go back again to home. So like, where the fuck is it? Like, just have a little UFC thing where I could click at the home page. And it shows all the matches. What's live? What's not? Just a little clunky. I think ESPN plus kind of had it down. And I'm just starting to get. You know, you know what I'm talking about? I'm with ESPN plus was though. What is that? You know, you scroll through to get to the main card. They would have each fight individually up there. And you got to like blur your eyes because on the thumb, it says the duration of the right. You got a lot of timestamp. And it's like, oh, damn it. I mean, I'm like, I just saw that the... You got to not look at that. Yeah. You got to unblur your eyes, look through the cracks. The problem is when you play it, that'll show you how short the amount of time is, how quickly the time is going. Right. You can't wait, you can't like it. You can't ever skip anything because then the time bar will come up. Do you watch anything else other than UFC? Sports wise or? No, it's not fighting wise. Oh, man, I don't know. No, not at all. Not at all. I've been trying to get to in a way to do a striking league. I'm trying, because like, you know, people still boo in complaining when things go to the ground. And if the UFC has time to do like slap fight, let's not really into. But if they have time to do that, like do a stand up only league, because there's other organizations that are doing that. You know what? The Mike Tyson Jake Paul thing. I understand that they had 100 million viewers. Is that real? I think they did. And then the Jake Paul Anthony, Joshua had like maybe 30 million. Right. So there's nowhere near. But God, I thought that I thought that would you get those numbers? Just whatever I just saw it in there. Because I don't know if Netflix gives those numbers out. Or maybe they did. Did they say it? 108 million. Paul Tyson had 108 million. And then Josh Anthony Joshua, I think it was like 30. Interesting. 108 million is crazy. That's a lot of fucking people. But what have blown opportunity? When you think like, okay, now Netflix had, they knew they were going to have that many viewers. Or not that many. They knew they were going to have a lot. Right. They had the opportunity to take the boxing model and fix it. And I don't know. But Netflix did? Yeah. Netflix has only had a small handful of events, though. Understood. But if you look at the UFC broadcast, just how, like, there's just not downtime. You know how it's like, people care about the undercard. Me, you know what I mean? Like, I'm there. Yeah. I'm there for the first fight pass prelim. Oh, some of the undercards are the best fights. For sure. Yeah. That's why I'm actually contentor series is so good. Particularly, yeah, right. Exactly. Especially when you see some of these guys coming out of the contender series that are so high level already. Right. There's guys that are getting matched up in the undercard that no one's ever heard of. There are two undefeated fighters that could be world champions. For sure. There's guys that are that good now. Right. And that's what's so great about the UFC is that the whole card is good. The production's insane. There's no downtime. It's just like, you can sit there for fucking six hours. Right. I would like it to be thoroughly happy that you're watching the whole time. But with boxing, there's so much time in between the bouts. Yes. Like, yeah, they don't do as nearly as good a job. Or do you see without doubt is the best promotion in all of the costs in terms of entertainment, production value, the people in the truck, the experts, 100% of the best. That's what I'm saying about Netflix is that they could have fixed it. They could have fixed it. Well, Zuf is trying to do that now. Right. You know, Zuf is trying to do that. They're basically using the promotion machine behind the UFC. Sure. So stuff like boxing. And they're just getting rolling right now. But they signed some really big guys. They signed Connor Ben. They signed Jaya Patel, who's a fucking beast. They signed some legit boxers. So it should be interesting. Yeah. Boxing is, it is a fascinating sport. It's a mess. I mean, as far as the broadcast goes. Well, I think there's a few companies that know how to do it right. And HBO was the best. And when HBO went off the air with boxing, it was a real bummer. Because HBO boxing had been around for decades. They were the peak. That was like the best production team. It was Jim Lampley, Larry Merch and rather. Roy Jones Jr. sometimes, George Foreman sometimes. And different fighters would sit in sometimes. And it was the Jim Lampley is the fucking best. It was the best. It was like the smoothest production. They were the best with the cameras and the production quality. And they get you hyped up about the fight with the little pre-made videos. They didn't drag it out. They knew how to do it. HBO did it right. They did it right. But I guess it was like either it was not profitable or something. They just decided when they can to HBO boxers, I couldn't believe it. I was like, after all these years, it's such a crazy thing to do. They were the best. If you had an HBO boxing card and it was a big fight, fuck I was pumped. It was like the quality of the product was so high level. And they only put on really great fights. I give it got to HBO. That was going to be a great fuck. Right. Well, comedy specials were the same way, right? Sure. Yeah. Now, it's weird because it's like the landscape is so filled with different platforms. And some guys take money over visibility. Like there's young guys that have gotten offers for places that I was like, listen, man, I think you should put on YouTube. You're not going to make any money. But you got to think about that money investing in yourself. Because I think you're really good. And I think that this material, if you put it on YouTube, it's going to go viral. It'll spread around. Right. Way more people will know. Sure. I sorely regret my approach. Because my comedy specials are multimedia. And I got stuff in there. I mean, the whole point of my comedy with the multimedia is to have stuff that you can't even show on jackass. Right. You know, like just like super, extra naughty jackass when we were in the collides of the stand-up show. Right. And I love that. I have so much fun with that. And when I put out my last one, I did this thing that Andrew Schultz did the moment. You know, like to pay all. Oh, yeah. Like my own company moment. Right. And that was me trying to make money off this special. I mean, I spent so much making it. You know, but whatever. I wish that I would have had no paywall whatsoever. Just, you know, I can't put it on YouTube, but put it on my website so that I could get the eyeballs because I think in the long run that would benefit way more. Why can't you put on YouTube? Because the content? Because like, like, two extreme nudity, violence. Like, like literally. That's going to be hard to distribute anywhere. Right. Even on a website, even on your website. That's just hard. That's just hard to get out. Now I have my multimedia specials on my website with no paywall, totally free, like no ads. Yeah. Just go to stevo.com and change. Well, Andrew did it very smart. Like, you want to see it now, pay. And then I'm going to put it on YouTube and X amount of wants. A lot of people got mad about that. People get about everything. You got to always remember that, man. People get mad about everything. Right. You can't concentrate on that. I think that maybe they're a little bit more of a window. Because for the people who are like, man, I just spent. I'll tell them what the window is. Right. Just if you want to do it that way, just tell them. I want to put it on YouTube in three months. Right. Understood. But it all is like how successful are you? Right. So if you're a successful comedian, you need to do that, then your fans are like, hey, why do you need more money on me? Well, I can't just release it. But if you're a successful comedian that's been kind of banished, like Louis C.K. was for a while. And then Louis C.K. has done a brilliant job. of putting everything on his website. Like Harold and Pete is animated show, Lucky Louis. All the different Louis episodes. So what he did was really create his own thing that is like a one-stop shop of all things, Louis C.K. 100%. And it's really good. And his mailing list. Yeah. I'm on his mailing list. Me too. And whenever I see an email from Louis C.K., I absolutely click on it because he doesn't. He doesn't so masterfully. Yeah. It's interesting and funny. And it's entertaining. It's an entertaining little thing that you get. And then he lets you know what he's doing. And he's never pressuring you into like, he's got the perfect balance, I think, of capitalism and still being an artist. Yep. It's the way to do it. But everybody's at their own little path. And the problem with someone like Andrew is he's already really successful. So it's like asking for money for a special. At this point, people are like, come on, man. So just fuck it, put it on YouTube. My next one, I'm absolutely determined to have no payable. Stan Ho, boy, said it best. He said, basically, your special is just an ad to get people to come see. So burst of that. Yeah. That's really what it is. Right. And it's also like you got a retire material. Yeah. Just let it go. Right. So it's a sale out to see and let it on fire. It's hard for me. Of course it is. I got it. Of course it is. It's hard for everybody. Yeah. It's hard for everybody. But it's probably even harder for you because a lot of your stuff is physical. So you have to come up with new things that you could do to yourself. Stable your lips shut and tie a dick to your asshole. I'm so happy with what I've got now. That's good. I'm thrilled with it. OK. So I was telling you, I spent a couple of years like really in the darkness. In the darkness. Yeah. And being a feeling. Being very mindful to adjust my approach in a way that I felt really good about. There was a, they're beginning of 2025. And I got really heavy on spirituality and faith. I'm that way anyway. Like I really really care about that. Be January of 2025. I get this opportunity of Mark Walberg on my podcast. And I'm on there. And he's very big into his face. Very Catholic. Yeah. Very big into his Christianity. And I was in the thick of it too at that point. I was like, man, you know, like I've been criticism for being too much of a shill and this and that. And like. Really bothered you that much. I kind of did. Yeah. Because I think because I was that. Well, because it was accurate. It was accurate. It absolutely. Right. For example, last time I was here, I'm like, Joe, my butt wipes for my bottle. And you're like, that's bad for the plumbing. It is bad for me. Right. And that. You flush those things. Dude, I like what I wish I said in that moment when you said that how it's bad for plumbing, I'd seen on a package of dude wipes. It said only flush one at a time. And you'll be OK. Uh-oh. You're going to be like, man, that's true. Now they've got a day stop selling those fucking things. Don't flush anything other than toilet paper. Period. I talked to any plumber. OK. I'll tell you. Don't flush anything other than toilet paper. The internet had a field day when you shut down my butt wipes plug on here. See? I didn't even know about it. I love that. I love that. I love that. And this episode is brought to you by ketone IQ. The demands on my time, energy, and focus arguments. So when I need my brain to lock in for hours and hours and fire at its fastest, most alert state, I'm taking ketone IQ. It's an energy shot powered by this little miracle molecule that your body already naturally makes. And your brain especially loves ketones. I've been talking about ketones for over a decade. And this company's finally figured out how to put them in a bottle. When I take ketone IQ, I drop right into a state of laser-like focus and sustained mental clarity, whether I'm podcasting, training in the gym, or just want to show up locked in when it matters. The difference is night and day with ketone IQ. Visit ketone.com slash-rogan for 30% off your subscription order. Or find ketone IQ at Target stores nationwide in the protein and electrolyte aisle and get your first shot free. Plus, they have a 60-day money-back guarantee. That's how confident they are that you're going to love the increased focus you get from ketone IQ. And they had a field day because, like, I'm going to be with the ceiling. And you with the point about the plumbing. And it was just like, fuck, I just stopped selling those fucking things. I stopped selling everything. We used to have a sponsor. It's not a sponsor anymore, but I want to tell people to get it anyway. It's a thing called Tushie. You put it on your phone. Oh, my God, my foot dude. Every single time I promote Tushie and my podcast, I say, it is my favorite podcast sponsor that I've ever had. And then I know that that's not a wise thing to say. Like, if you think of all the others, we're on tape. They'll get mad. Yeah. I don't care. Well, it's not even our sponsor anymore. But I tell everybody. It's not expensive. And it's legit. And it cleans your butt hole. And then you just need a little wipe to pat it down. It feels, you're just drying it off. Also, you feel better. Like, you don't feel like you smear shit a little real bottle. Like, I don't know if you have a hairy asshole, but I do. Yeah. I'm hairy. I do. That's chaos down there. If I don't trim it. So it's like, you're wiping shit on the ass hairs and like, yeah. Look. And that's, you know, that's what, like, as soon as I started using the Tushie, then I'm like, oh, my God, now, if I ever find myself having to take a shit and there's not a bidet. Right. Now it's a crisis for me. Now I'm like, ew. Now I've got a problem. And that's why having the wet wipes, the butt wipes, I became so important because if I don't have the bidet, like I had to get it. But if you had shit smeared all over your fingernails and your hand, would you be happy just using a butt wipe and then having a sandwich? No, you would not. You would want to wash your fucking hands. Right. Well, yeah. My wipes are okay. It's okay. And it's better than not having them, but you have to throw them in the garbage. So then you have a shit smeared wet wipe in the fucking garbage, which was just kind of nasty. You're walking, you could smell the shit and no one's cleaned it yet. And so then you have to have a plastic bag liner on your garbage can because otherwise you get some loose. Yeah. Those Tushie things, I don't want, we have them here at all the, not, it's not a Tushie, but it's another company. Right. On all our toilets, we have it at the mother shit. Oh my God. The best. Yeah. You have to have those things. The changes your life. And when you get the Tushie ace, which has the heated sea, the warm water. And then it blow dries your butt on the ice. Nice. Yeah. It's ready for presentation. Okay. So I sit down with Mark Wahlberg and I'm talking about this and I say, you know, how like leaning into face, like really just like, it's so important. You know, like it's like it's important to me. And I had this meaningful conversation with Mark Wahlberg about that. And then with the day the episode comes out, it didn't even occur to me until the day the episode came out. I was hiking with my dog through a fucking state park in Tennessee and it strikes me. Oh my God. I had the audacity. As I knew that the episode went out that day, I had the audacity to cut from this thoughtful conversation about faith with Mark Wahlberg to an ad for gambling. I was like, oh my God. I was like, I don't have to be in the comment section to know to see people saying what a hypocrite. Like, oh my God. Wait, how is gambling like you have a credit? I mean, I just, I don't think that makes you have a credit roll. Right. Listen, the gambling thing online, which probably you probably addressed this, is a very hot topic. And a lot of people criticize people for promoting gambling sites online. The problem is not gambling. The problem is people who are addicted to gambling. Trust this is a very hot topic and a lot of people criticize people for promoting gambling sites online The problem is not gambling the problem is people who are addicted to gambling so the problem is self control All right, and I'm not saying I'm a person who's immune to being addicted to gambling I am sure that given other circumstances in my life given I Could have easily gotten addicted to gambling, but I'm not and I don't mind gambling on stuff I think sometimes it's probably fun the problem is people You saw on cut gems, right? Oh my god best that is gambling that is the problem with gambling I'm so good fucking a man's movie. I don't say I look killed in that movie. It's such a good Never felt so good about a movie. I'm going like oh, yeah Don't you know what they're like I made a decision on that day hiking with my dog I said I'm not gonna put anything unless it's good for people. Wow good for you I said I said like I don't want to do harm man. I don't like that. I know it does harm. I think it does harm if you let it do harm But I think food does harm if you let it do harm I think alcohol does harm if you let it do harm. I think marijuana drugs all kinds of things do harm If you let them do harm right, but it's just it's in your face You know shit and I don't want to participate in that. I get out and I just haven't done it since then I feel good about that So all these different things that I've done To be mindful to be to feel more good about right how I approach my life and my career And then and then coming into this year 2026 I was like oh man like now with the mr. Beast come out. I'm like oh, this is gonna change my life We got a new jackass movie coming out like I feel really good about how I've restored my Integrity like I feel good about myself for myself and then Joe Then I have Harland Williams on my podcast, okay this guy is the most Genius like them, but like that is just something you can't even understand the guy like he's one of the weirdest funny guys This snake is on this desk because he kept it in his pants the entire episode Tell us that he had a tape worm and then he pulled it out at the end of the episode and I've left it on the desk Ever since and when Trump was in here I left on the desk and he got so excited. He goes hey buddy Thanks for keeping I would it he call it to Thanks for keeping Dimitri on the desk while Trump was in there It's just such an odd ball So Magnificent such a great guy, too And I record my podcast in an RV right? I got like three different RVs that I used for it and and one I keep in Los Angeles So we get to Harland Williams house for some reason. I'm driving down the fucking worst driver ever And he's got this small driveway and I'm trying to maneuver it around and I get out of the van and I'm like I Don't know how I don't know how I can be such a fucking bad driver and just like that Harland Williams says to me goes It's a it's a devote you have eight Just like the most fucking absurd thing and so like going into this podcast I'm like all right like now we're entering the realm of the absurd You know like let's play with harland Williams. Okay, okay at some point in the episode the most fucking Dom idea that ever popped in my head But I'm you know you want to be like a step ahead and like figure out how like we're gonna keep this going Like one of our you know what's like what's where we going to next? So I say to Harland Williams I'm like I think at one point I said like I said how about politics, you know Like just thinking to myself this absurd guy if you ask him about politics like like how does his absurdity Right navigate that and that's what motivated me so then Somewhere in this back and forth Like effectively I say like oh yeah all this shit with ice makes perfect sense because like because the majority of immigrants are Murderers, right? This is the most badly fucking absurd comment that I've ever made on the podcast and yet after it comes out it gets clipped on its own and The it genuinely looks like I'm not kidding even though you cut the Harland Williams But it genuinely looks like I wasn't fucking kidding right and then I open up my phone and it's like basically rotten hell use it that like you know like you think like all immigrants are murderers like Joe I could not be more the opposite of that You're being sarcastic. I would say I could not have been more Like I could not have been less serious right as the most absurd fucking deliberately sarcastic thing I've ever said and And dude I just like now and I was in this place. I was so excited like And that was so excited about doing my podcast. It was corn, you know and then now I'm just like Deluged with this tsunami of hate and that's what so You know did you respond I did yeah, I just say this is just I I posted on my Instagram. Okay, like like for for clarification I said I can't even said I was so shocked to believe that this absurd comment that I made was like taken seriously But like just you know I can't believe I'm gonna have to do this but for the for the record you know less than 0.1% of the population is ever gonna Commit murder of course The majority of no group of fucking people is gonna commit murder, but if you want to know how I actually feel If there's a group of people that's more likely to murder someone It's I say And so then in certain I post that now like the whole other half Yeah, I wouldn't say that either right there you go, you know like and uh my sister is um my voice of reason She like I was like hey, what do you think about this and she like made like one small tweak? She's like go for it. I just posted that. I don't even mind You know like I don't even mind that I feel like if people are gonna hate me let me hate me for like how I actually feel You know like as I can watch how dare you yeah, it's my dad I feel my shit. I don't do not disturb Maybe your dad goes through cuz he's like one of your Yeah, yeah, yeah, he's on my he's on my speed dial But yes, it was a terrible fucking episode that I just went in and we said this Like a couple months ago like this happened like maybe three four weeks ago I was like when I like when you know when I was texting with you I was like oh man I was in a you know like shitty place. I feel really rad dude like me to be great to get together And then now since then I'm like in a shape Yeah Well, you know obviously that ice subject is a very hot subject. Yeah people gotten mad at me from my takes on as well You just you have to be right and you know like speak your mind say what you really feel if I'm honest I regret all of it. You know like you know I could have I could have worded my clarification in a way That made a lot more sense. I just it bothered me so much to be so badly misunderstood. Yeah, you know Well, you talk sarcastically with a guy like Harlan Williams when you fuck around and you say things you don't really mean That's gonna happen when we dunk in is the best at that like dunk a tress hole like yeah He will have entire podcast where he pretends he's in the Illuminati and we'll talk to another comic who pretends he's one of the Rothschilds Frantone gets Tony to see his gets on his podcast and what does Tony pretend a Rockefeller or Rothschild One of them so he I think it's a Rockefeller Might be wrong, but I mean he dies his hair for the episode and everything and like it's so ridiculous and people think he really is One of those people me while he's a door man at the mothership But Duncan will go through an entire podcast without breaking character They'll talk about how important is to control the population. Let's talk about how important is to you know spread misinformation And keep people in the dark and how stupid the plebs are Yeah, I just kind of like I'm too fucking sensitive Yeah, what seems like it's not just that you're sensitive. It seems like you're seeking out input You're seeking your seeking out feedback and just I think you're a little too famous for that. I just don't think it's healthy I've known so many people that are loved loved by so many and yet they'll still find the people that hate them and dwell on that and I've seen it with like very successful people. Yeah, it's just It's just Louis said at best. Louis said at best. He said the internet is just talk It's just you're it's written down. So it seems more real You know, okay stays up there forever, but it's just talk just like people talk at a bar Fuck that guy, you know people say things and they're not necessarily rational They're not necessarily Their opinions aren't necessarily valuable some of them are and some of them aren't but to go through all that and figure it out The problem is your brain only recognizes threats Danger and people that hate you, right? So you get a hundred people that love you But one person who says you fucking suck and you'll just think about that guy. Oh, no that guy He used to be a fan I unfollowed him a long time ago Right, yeah, that makes sense and you know another thing that to that point Here I thought that When this Mr. Beast came video came out and I won a million dollars. I gave it to doctors without borders Like I just thought oh man, this is gonna be life altering and like it came in You know like I had one kid come up to me in an airport and say dude your stevo for Mr. Beast It was like oh wow different generation but other than that like my like I thought it would be life altering and it really wasn't you know Yeah, and then so now like in this this little like This What would everyone call backlash this like thing like to me it feels like the the whole world hates me, you know like when in reality It's probably not no reality everybody feels about you the exact same way they did before It's crazy man. It's great because I'm like I'm like I'll walk around and think like man Like people don't think I mean, maybe they hate me I was talking to a friend of mine who was one of the earlier ones to get canceled This was quite a few years ago This was like more than 10 years ago Something happened online and someone said something about something that he said that was patently false But a lot of people believed it and he would you know, he made a His own statement and but then he said everywhere I go He goes I know this was small and was laying the comedy community But everywhere I went I felt like these people hated me They knew who they were they were judging me so it was like it was tainting my feelings everywhere I went right now Imagine being Monica Lewinsky. Oh my god. I know so no internet right? So this is like there's no way to tell whether people Are siding with you or not and everybody knows you suck the president's dick and you're 20 and you have to go to the store You have to take guys and if you don't blow a guy's like what the fuck? You're like famous for it right yeah, I Every time she's probably giving head. She's thinking oh my god. Why am I doing this? I got this is what got me in all this trouble in the first place right I can imagine that kind of weirdness Do you know she did an HBO thing? She did an HBO thing way way back in the day where she sat down to talk about what this experience has been like for her and It was weird because there was a guy in the audience that like she was like taking questions I guess in a guy in the audience was like why are you doing this? Like you say you don't want attention but here you are just getting more attention talking about it and like you could tell Like she didn't really think that through like that someone was gonna have that kind of response and it was like that was the end of the thing I think that like You know when you're in that kind of a situation you want to on some level clarify Right like you know you want to you want to say you are side of it Right so you are side of it ultimately for most people is going to be trying to make yourself look better Right and I think that's a problem. Yeah. That's a problem Because that's very transparent and people kind of know what you're doing I think it's always better like what you just did where you said like maybe I did overreact or maybe I shouldn't have done this That's a stupid thing to say like be Much more real about how you feel about things. Oh, I fucking blew it Joe Nobody means that's but it doesn't matter man. I'm telling you this is all in your head. Everybody still loves you You're the same guy the people who love you will always love you the people who hate you know It's like it's very rare that someone who really loves you hate you like if they do they're usually mentally ill and they want to like Remember when I was a kid people would get mad if bands became famous and be like fuck those guys They're sellouts and I remember we were in high school. I go let me get this trade This is me like 16. I go you love them. You think they're awesome, right? Yeah I go but when more people know they're awesome than they're not awesome anymore because now they're mainstream He goes yeah, I go do you know how fucking dumb that sounds either they are awesome or they are not if they are awesome More people should know they are awesome and we're all just sitting around and a couple of my friends go yeah Like yeah, yeah, this idea of like being underground is fucking retarded Like why would you want that if you're great people are gonna find out about you? Right It doesn't mean you sold out It just means other people found out you are great like you recognize something and you think you're unique in your talent to recognize Really good music and only you can appreciate it and if other people appreciate it then all of a sudden It's not good. That is the dumbest fucking way to think I've ever encountered in my life. I mean it To be fair. I think that the criticism at that point is when they change when they're when they're trying to yes Reach more broad on rights, but there's a lot of bands like in for instance that are not doing that They just they just fucking hit like people are mad at Nirvana for getting big Like okay, right? I couldn't agree with you more. I'm just being a devil's advocate well I get it. I mean, but it's my point is it's a human inclination where you feel like you're a part of a small So let group it really values and appreciate something and all these normies these fuck ads Listening to fucking Debbie Gibson or whatever they're listening to you don't want those assholes listening to super cool music But if it's like Nirvana, guess what it's so good that everyone is gonna want to listen to that and then it becomes big You like fuck those guys it fucking sold out like right It's just a dumb you're just mad at yourself. You're mad at your life. You're mad at your position in this universe Well, I think that life is just getting really difficult to well This is now true right, but we're talking about people were doing this back in fucking 80s they've always done this man. Yeah, this is just how people behave and You add that to the internet and it's just everything's accelerated Times 10 times a hundred times a million whatever the fuck it is down and this is just the beginning You know, we're at the brink of something really crazy as soon as AI takes over our society, which is like within years We're we're gonna experience the most radical change this Together Literally a perfect storm with the Unsustainable debt Well, that's part of it. It's I mean, it's a big part of it. Yeah, I mean that's part of it Like even if there was unsustainable debt you have an artificial life form that's emerging that's Incidentally smarter than human beings what what I'm saying is that it has autonomy that the unsustainable debt Like I'm already over a trillion dollars just paying for the interest alone You know like there's all that now like you know other nations central banks whatever like They'd like that they want to de-dollarize They're not buying the United States Treasuries the way they were and that's like how the United States has has been able to overspend is Because they can sell the Treasuries now without people selling the Treasuries the only Like the only buyer of the Treasuries is the Fed and they're buying the Treasuries with printing money is that accurate I think what you think I think it's it's other countries are buying our treasure The less so it's it's becoming less. It's Of course, there's still like the United States Treasuries is the most liquid like you know, but less so so When it becomes more difficult for the United States to sell its Treasuries they got to increase the yield which means bigger interest payments so at a certain point it's like just the Paying the interest on the debt is like a crippling thing and by the Fed printing money The way they're printed you can't inflate the money supply without devaluing the dollar So inflation more and more is gonna be a thing maybe not Why more Germany or like Zimbabwe inflation? But still inflation is not gonna go away you just can't have the money supply increase without that being the case and so People's purchasing power goes down their wages aren't going up Like the people's people are getting more and more squeezed with how much money they can afford to spend and then on top of that AI comes and wipes out all the jobs. Yeah It's boogey It's boogey because no one really knows exactly what's gonna happen You know or how it's gonna happen or how people will be Compensated in order to keep society functional. You know, Elon has this utopian vision of universal high-income Yeah, you'd be a universal base. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. No His his utopian vision is that so much money will be generated from AI that you'll be able to give people universal high-income So they won't have to work and so they'll be able to do whatever they want to do with their life That's the ideal perspective the problem is Obviously that people find a lot of identity in their work sure I mean especially if you went to school for it. You love it This is the thing you've done you've been a lawyer your whole life You've been a doctor your whole life you've been to this your whole life And then also an AI comes in and wipes that out like what are you gonna do? You're gonna play golf all day right and then you have a fixed income now because even if it's universal high-income There's no incentive for you to work harder and get more things done and make more money Which is what drives a lot of people and drives a lot of innovation? So then is all innovation left up to artificial intelligence is that what we're really gonna do because that seems kind of crazy It's so great. I got one Power what keeps you going? I mean like like you you're in here doing these podcast all-time with you have see you with like you know like you don't have to be doing this Everything I do is fun. I do everything I do for free and I do all the time I do stand up for free all the time. I do guest bots all the time Everybody does every comic does. Oh my god. Did I have so much fucking fun at Kill Tony last night. Oh, it's the best show It's the best show Unbelievably talented like he's the best host of any live Comedy show rather of all time. There's no way like like like the The the amount of time when something is presented that he nails the funniest possible thing that you could react Yeah, like it's written Like you had a team of writers sitting there for 100% a week coming up with the best line and it busts off the top of his head It's always mean He's the best okay, he's the best I Know that he's sensitive about Man, he he wouldn't have wanted me to say I was on it last night What because even before the show he'd ask the audience don't give away the secret of who's the guest? It doesn't all right then I'll say one thing because it was don't say what happened Because this show's gonna come up before that right right don't do that. I'll tell you that it's just Suffice it to say that Tony Henscliffe has got to be the fastest wittiest fucking comic I've ever when he's the best at that format like and he created it right? So it's like a genius idea have comics do one minute It would do comics have done one minute the first time they've ever been on stage at Madison Square thousand people and fucking eight dick Right, it's a great show and then he has you know guys like David tell Shane Gillish You fucking Harlan is like one of the greatest guests of all time No, yeah, yeah, that was amazing. He's got I mean There's just so many there's an end like Carl Dunn again who does like five different characters that are incredible Yeah such high-level comics. Uh-huh. I'm right. I mean maybe the world right But I'm saying like a high-level feature comics. Uh-huh who aren't like super known who do one minute as well Yeah, seeking out to go I brought my opener from tour A guy's not like widely known, but I just love him and he's so funny so good Like he put his name in the barrel put his name in the barrel that's the thing too If people ask you me to get them on kill Tony, I cannot no one can that is true That barrel is legit that barrel is legit You reach into that barrel Tony grabs whatever piece of paper his hands touch and he pulls it out And that's how it's always been done and that's how he's always gonna do it People come to a mall at time. Hey, could you get my friend on the show? He's like I cannot do that it's like that is the show Thank God It's got to be chance. It's got to be chaos. That's part of the fun of it Right, and then every now and then someone that you've never heard of comes up and does a minute and everybody goes fuck Yeah, that was awesome right and they kill it and also they have a career right It's great. Okay. Um, it's the cornerstone of stand up to it really is because it's wild All it's like there are no rules. It's no holds barred and it's you've got great comics on the panel and it has Launch careers Sure, because of that like it is so important for us having kill Tony at the club It's so important because It sets the tone for all these comics to know like hey This isn't just like some random thing of I don't know what I'm doing How do I figure it out? How do I get seen like there's a pathway And if you can get on kill Tony and if you can work your ass off before then and build up a real solid routine and go on there and kill it You can have a fucking career. It's real. Yep And then the club has two nights of open mic nights and this real development program and the real talent coordinator Adam e good who watches sets he gives feedback that the opener that I'm talking about and he drove all the way from Tampa to be there last night His name's Chris Harvey. I love his six foot four 480 pounds Like missing to his beard funniest guy. Where's it from? He's from Ohio Is it Dayton? I'm not sure where we're not but I was I was at a comedy club in Fort Wayne, Indiana And he does they just set him up to open for me. I watched his set I was like what are you doing for the next three weeks? Oh, that's awesome. Yeah, that's awesome So did he get up on the open mic? Yeah, that's where I texted Tony like I've got this opener Can I get him on? And Tony said I can get him in the bucket who knows about pull him out But I can also get him on the open mic to perform for the the booker three did that nice nice Yeah, it's important that you can't just get on the show Yeah, because then he his phone would be just overrun with people get my boy on and then some of them Sock and that makes perfect sense. Yeah, you have to just let it happen if they suck they suck they don't they're You know, it's like anything can happen and that's part of the beauty of it It's like a real magical moment when you reach into that bucket and you pull out a name and Smith and then Bob Smith comes on out and give it a I mean, it was that I just had so much fun man and I don't like being on the end Because you're too close to these psychos You never know like I'm always on edge That's funny what it'd be like protected by like one body apologies to Tony for giving away that I was on it last night The he's not gonna care that you know what I want to talk about I watched Brian Callan special very recent at the mothership Like it was like you got all these people like you know whenever anybody put that's the thing about fucking comedy It's so subjective that like it's just If anybody can shit on a special that they want and I saw these like the YouTube videos I call it Brian Callan's this is the most worst bomb is kind of like end his crew I was like come on like I mean, I was there Let me watch this I fucking enjoyed the hell out of Brian Callan special is one that he just taped the mothership That's great. You gotta stop paying attention to people. Yeah, I enjoy people want it to suck like People to think everything should pels last special sucked This oh my god. Can you talk about that? I didn't I haven't seen it yet. So okay that But I heard it was awesome the the real that I trust the Riyadh comedy festival, right? Like it was such like an a cop a pock a lip dick fucking nuclear bomb in the jugoda I didn't know but like there was so much backlash for people who went to it and there were like individual comics had They're they're they're their own way of kind of defending their move to you know A lot of comics were very defensive about how they went and and a lot of them And maybe like were seemed a little bit disingenuous about like about in their defense and then Dude Dave Chappelle puts out this special and So unapologetic about him being at the Riyadh comedy it was just like It was so fucking masterful. He's a master the way he was just like oh Like I went to Riyadh and got paid like a fucked out of money to do comedy and like So unapologetic and it was just like oh my god Well the idea is that you support the regime by doing stand up over there Which I think is crazy because you're doing it for the audience members and the audience members have no saying who their government is They're literally no anarchy. I'm not even I don't even have a judgment whatsoever especially because have I ever not watched a UFC event because it happened Yeah, or Dubai or wherever You don't do that with sporting events, but you deal with comedy I think the idea is that comedians are supposed to be social commentators They're supposed to like carry a baton for free speech and they're one of the particularly egregious things It's been attributed to Saudi Arabia was the murder of Jamal Khashoggi Who is a journalist from the Washington Post? Who was killed at the Turkish Embassy and they kind of met with a fucking bones on dark shit? Yeah, I get it I get the criticism and I get people saying well I'm gonna perform for my audience and my audience is over there And if they say I can't make fun of I think you can't make fun of the monarchy You can't make fun of the the leaders or the government and you can't make fun of Islam or religion I think maybe it might just be religion period. Yeah, I think it was you can't be disparaging of Islam or the royal family Yeah All right, well you got to decide then if you know what those the parameters are, you know If you maybe it doesn't fit with your act at all or maybe you're like I don't have any Bits about the royal family or I could just go over and do my act for a bunch of people uncensored right I Thought about it I see both sides. I don't give a shit one way or the other my only input here is the Dave Chappelle like Check made it of course He handles everything perfectly and again He's not on social media. He's not paying attention to people's opinions of him You cannot because there's so many people that had decided that he was a horrible transphobe for telling a story about his transgender friend Like I mean literally told a story about this person in his act and people didn't care because he made jokes about trans people like of course it's in the public eye this idea that you can't joke about something is If there's a thing you can't joke about that thing is fucked up and that's why the Lakota used to have a Like a sacred clown they called it a Heioka and a Heoka was like a member of the community That was supposed to make fun of everything and if you couldn't make fun of anything Then you knew something was wrong with that thing because if you if there's a thing that you can't joke around about That thing has been compromised, right? Because you can kind of joke around about everything if it's actually funny No matter what it is sure even tragedy given enough time you can joke around about it. Yep I mean you could do a 9-11 joke right now and no one's gonna blink. Oh my god You remind me of what I think was the funniest fucking tweet that I ever saw from Jeff Ross Going back there the year I want to say was like a 2016 the magic castle is I ever saw from Jeff Ross. Going back to the year, I want to say it was like 2016. The magic castle in Los Angeles. There was, like in the magicians, you know what a magician was found hanging in a closet in the magic castle. Yeah, it commits to his house. Had taken his own life. Yeah. That morning, Jeff Ross tweeted that his last words were, Abric had never. That's correct. That's fucking funny. That's such a Jeff Ross type joke. That's a Tony H. Clifthab joke too. Silly record, dapper. Yeah. I mean, if there's a thing that you can't make fun of, that thing is usually bullshit. If that thing is trans people, like then you're, you are ignoring that there's a glaring hole in this narrative that you're trying to push and whether or not people are accepting that narrative. You know, I'll be spilling out some of the stuff that I have in my current hour. And I really don't mind. For me, I feel like the bar has got to keep getting higher and keep getting higher. So as I went into putting together this new hour that I'm touring with, one of my multimedia bits, like ended up not being a really great idea, but I thought I'm going to get a fucking boob job. Oh, yeah, I heard about that. Right. Did you do it? I was within 10 hours of being under the knife. And like the universe just intervened, right? Because they have to cut your muscle, man. Right. Well, I'm like, I mean, you know the, Don't they? Or do they go into this skin? They go to your nipples. You can do it in multiple different ways. I was told, I was interested in just the idea. See, because like I'm now in my 50s, right? And so like my whole new hour is the theme of it is how the fuck is Steveos supposed to be in his 50s. You know, like, and so with putting the stuff up my butt section is like the importance of where we're at an age, we got to get prostate exams, colonoscopies, you know, that's a real thing. And so I'm trying to like destigmatize the prostate exam. Right. That's a very hard. Right. Definitely not putting things up your ass for entertainment. I'm blending it together. Oh, it's pretty awesome. And you know what? One of my things is like, you know, it's a rite of passage for men in middle age to one day you realize, holy fuck, I'm getting to it. You know, like, like I noticed it one time, I'm like, I'm fucking like a dimples. You know, like actual fucking underboob over here. And it's fucking like, this wasn't supposed to happen to me. And so like that kind of was my motivation. I'm like, if this is going to happen, then like, I'm lashing out at father time, I'm going to get a boob job. So I had the guy famous plastic surgeon from botched deteriorated bro on my podcast. Now, is he one of those guys that fixes people? Yeah, botched. He's great. I love that guy. Happened to be brothers with the lead singer of quiet riot too. No way. Yeah. Come on, feel it. Yeah. Terry Dipero and that's crazy. He was epic. So on the podcast, I was like, hey, I'm thinking about it from wild crazy stunt. Like, a boob job and then just like, film a bunch of pranks and stunts and then get it out. You know, like wild publicity stunt. I feel like the whole world's going to know about it. And he had me take off my shirt. And he's like, yeah, your skin is already loosened up. You could fit double D implants. He says, but you got to get them out within two months or the stretching would be unmanageable. And I'm like, boy, and in my head, I'm thinking, this is the loudest fucking craziest. Like this is where the bar is at. You know, like that, that you need better friends. That the level of commitment to do something that fucked up. Like, I just thought and now I was really into the idea. I got super cool. Me next time. Just fucking call me dude. Don't. Dana said the same thing. Yeah, don't do that. Dana said the same thing, but so now like I had blabbed it to the media. Which is why you ought to be heard about it. So, you know, there are all these articles. It's the night before my fucking operation. And I get a phone call from the doctors, whatever guy says, hey, buddy, we had a snag man like the anesthesiologist backed out. You know, we got to reschedule the surgery. I'm like, fuck man. So now the next day they're trying to reschedule it. And I'm buying groceries in the supermarket in LA. And the person ringing me up on the cash register is like, seems pretty evidently transgender. And I'm just like, dude. It's like the fucking universe has given me signs over here. You know, and so I asked this. Didn't even occur to me up to this point that I'm going to, that I need to like run it by anybody. Because I'm like, fucking my body, my choice, who cares. You know, I'm doing a dumb stunt to like, you know, be crazy. But in this situation, talk this transient, this transgender person like, hey, can I run something by you can? And I spoke with them. They described to me a level of oppression that genuinely fucking broke my heart. They said, hey, let me tell you. I am not allowed to use the bathroom at my own place of work. We've got like politics. That's not true. They're just not allowed to use the bathroom. It doesn't align with their biological sex. OK. Ah, but you got to realize they're not all, listen. I genuinely think there's people that feel like they are in the wrong biological sex. Right. But there's also people that are fucking perverts. And they have a thing called autogonophilia. And what that is is they get a turn on by pretending to be a woman. They get excited by it. And they want to be around women and their creeps. And so you give them a fucking Willie Walker Golden ticket to go into the Willy, to the women's locker room and the women's bathroom and stare at women and pretend you're a woman when you're just a crazy man. And you're actually into women. OK. That's real to me. I don't doubt that that's real. And I know that it's a super complex nuanced thing. And I don't know. Here's what's not complex. What is your chromosomes? Right. OK. This is the same thing for competing. All these fucking mental gymnastics that seemingly intelligent people do to justify biological males competing with females. I'm with the nirthing anybody's time. It's the same thing. Right. It's the same thing. Right. And especially speaking as a man who has daughters, like there are creeps. And if you give a creep, and I'm not saying all trans people are creeps. Right. But a lot of these fucking people that are in trouble for going into women's bathrooms just as a woman with a fucking beard and a hard on are just that. Right. They're crazy men. And these crazy men, their entire life, they would get beaten up for that. Now all of a sudden they have to be accepted. So you've got two things going at the same time. For sure. You've got people with gender dysphoria that genuinely wish they were a woman or genuinely wish they were a man. And by the way, it's men that are the problem. No one gives a fuck about trans men going into the men's bathroom. Come on in. Who cares? Right. Who cares? Oh, a girl's going to shit next to you? Or what is she going to do? She's going to pee out of a funnel. Right. What is she going to do? Right. Now what's going to give her? No one's going to get hurt. This is the problem. When you allow perverts to have this hall pass to go into women's locker rooms in bathrooms. You can't say you're not allowed to use the bathroom where you work. That's not true. You're just not allowed to use the women's room where other women are in there because you're not a woman. And I know you wish you were a woman or whatever's going on. But you're not. No, you make a very, very good point. If you're a woman, talk to most women about this. And it's unless they're insanely captured by this woke ideology where they can't see reality. In fact, that perverts are still a real fucking thing. And this loophole, you've given loopholes. Like there's men in prison. I think it's like 47 biological males in California or House and Women's Prisons. Some of them are sex offenders. Some of them in Canada. There's a guy in Canada that they had to pay for his boob job while he was in jail for being a sex offender. And they put him in a women's prison. Yeah. I'm not arguing with him. There's men who have pretended to be women gone into women's prison had sex with women and impregnated them. There's men who have sexually assaulted and raped women in prison that are pretending to be women with functional dicks. All they have to do is identify air quotes. When you just have to identify, that's it. No operation, no nothing. Identify. That is bonkers. And do you think they're giving them estrogen when they get in prison? Do they give hormone replacement therapy to people in prison? I don't know. I don't know. But even then, it's still a man with estrogen. You can't escape your fucking chromosomes. Until you can. Until there's some sort of a crisper thing that you really want to be a woman, we can turn you into an actual woman. Until that happens, what you're dealing with is a form of gender dysphoria, which has always been classified as a mental illness. People became much more empathetic and sensitive to people that have this problem. Right. And you make a completely valid argument. Nobody should be able to tell you you can't do something fucking stupid like a boob job because they are transgender. I understood. I understood. My experience was that I didn't get any of this. I just thought they don't have to be a creepy pervert. Right. But still a man. I understood. I just thought, man. I heard what they had to say about politicians trying to put them in internment camps. Who's doing that? What politicians are saying they should be putting in their medias? Some kind of, there might be one cooc out there that's saying that to try to get attention. There's no movement to try to put transgender people in internment camps. Okay. Well, then I'll land on this. Do you know who's killed more people than ICE this year? Transshooters. Do you know the majority of these high school shootings have been transgender people? I did not know that. Yeah. How many of them? There was one recently. Yeah. Yeah. It's a lot of them. Why? Because they're giving them psych medications, they're giving them a bunch of crazy hormones. And a lot of them probably have mental struggles already. And they're ostracized from society and fill in the blank. And then they're empowered by thinking that the world has done something bad to them. And that there's a genocide against trans people. And they attack J.K. Rowling. And they attack all these people. Martina Navertalova, who's like a famous lesbian for being a bigot. Because she doesn't want biological men competing with women in tennis. It's nuts, man. Yeah. And it's like either you go by biology or you do not. Either you go by XY chromosome or then you're in this weird fucking gray area where someone could just tell you they're a woman. That's how you get men and women's prisons. Yeah. All right. We have convinced me. Doesn't mean you can't be kind. Yeah. It doesn't mean you can't. I try to be kind to everyone. Yeah. And if I meet someone who's trans, if they want me to call them Stacy or whatever, like, I know a couple of trans people. My friend Jim Norton is married to a trans woman. Yeah. Super cool with them. Hugger every time I see her. I'm out of the way. But at the end of the day, if I was a woman, I want biological women in my, I think the solution is individual bathrooms. It went ever feasible. And if you want to have an all-gender bathroom, good luck with the legal ramifications of that, if it's a bar, because then any guy can fucking go in there and any guy and girl can get a, if it's a multiple stall bathroom. But the solution is X, Y chromosome. The solution is like if a guy walks into the men's room with a dress on and he's trans, just leave him alone. Leave him alone. Let him go to the bathroom. What is a big deal? Yeah. Like at the end of the day, we have to understand that like what is more important? One person's feelings or the safety of all these women. The safety of all these women is much more important. Yep. So you, you gotta be kind to people, but also you gotta have rules. There's a reason why there's a woman's room and a men's room. It's cause some men are fucking creeps. And if you allow those creeps to just put on a dress, well you, and again, I'm not saying all trans people are like this at all, but you can't have that loophole. You can't, let's like you, can't have an open border. Doesn't mean that all immigrants are murderers and you don't think that either, right? But some people that speak across the board if you don't check are going to be murderers. It's just a fact. Yeah. So you have to have a fucking close border check and you have to have a gender border too. Yeah. Well, God damn it. And my only takeaway from my experience that I was relating to you is that it made me feel compassionate. Well, that's what I want to be. I want to be a good guy. That's good. A better reason would be it's fucking stupid, but it would go down. Don't do it. Don't like you more. I think you're cool because you got a boob job. I'm glad. I'm glad. Hold, you know, yeah, that's too old for a boob job. Yeah. Even if you're a girl. I'm just got divorced. You're like, I need some new decor. I'm really glad that I didn't do it. Yeah, me too. Yeah. If you were here with a boob with two giant boobs, I'd be like, I don't know what to say to this guy. This is so stupid. You know, who was who was into the idea thought it was fucking really funny was bird. Of course. Of course. Also he has his own boobs. Right. All right. All right. Broke goes back and forth, but he's light now. He's he quit drinking for like six months. Oh man, and he's a little bit of a health scare. His fucking sick common Netflix is really good. He's funny, man. He's a fun dude. It's just like he's another guy that is like a little overexposed. He does so much promotion and so much stuff like you. You know, like to talk about that thing where you get the feet, the negative feedback. You've got a lot of negative feedback for over promoting shows, but don't listen. Don't watch it. Who cares? Right. If you think he's promoting himself too much, just don't pay attention. Let me let me run this by. There's shit to be angry about in the world. Sure. Burke, Kreischer, promoting a comedy special is not on that list. Right. Let me let me run this by. Okay. The, okay. So I decided like I'm only going to promote things that are healthy, you know, or at the very least don't do harm. Okay. I felt really good about that. All right. So why are you promoting that you have a problem with? What? I see this guy, Brian Johnson. Oh, the guy wants to live forever. Yeah. The guy wants to live forever. I'm fascinated by him. I had him on my podcast and I, you know, I mean, he's a unique guy, but I see him. He's on this war path against age one. and I'm like, God damn it. I'm like, where I, he sells a competing supplement. Right. That sounds, here's the thing about that. For what it's worth, I drink aging when every God damn day in a world. It's a vitamin. It's a multivitamin. It's not the end all be all it's going to fix your health, but vitamins are good for you. And if you can get vitamins and a simple travel pack like a G1 has and throw them in your book bag and take them with you places, it's better than not having vitamins. Period. That's all it is. Yeah. I think part of the problem that people have with age one is maybe they overstated some of the benefits of the probiotics and prebiotics. Like when people have analyzed the, the nutrient density of these packs and what the ingredients is, that's been their criticism. But criticizing a multivitamin that you're taking in a liquid form, like it seems kind of silly. Like it's, is it going to be the best thing that you've ever done for your health? No, being in shape and eating well is the best thing you've ever done for your health. But having like some sort of nutritional insurance, some sort of a little thing, little thing that you add to your, your food every day, your, you know, your... It's, it's designed to fill in the gaps in your diet. It's, it's a good thing to have vitamins. Period. That's it. Vitamins are good. And it tastes good. I like it. A lot of people say age is very simple. It's very simple. I like the way it's. You know, and if you think it's too expensive or you think it's not good enough, then okay, don't take it. Whatever. Take it. It's not bad for you. There's a lot of things that are bad for you. Age you want it's not bad for you. It's fucking vitamins. It's pretty simple. Pretty simple stuff. Okay good. Take it or don't take it. Who cares? You know, people worry too much again about stupid fucking shit. You have a brief amount of time and it's, you're off way dead, Bubba. You know how much time on this planet to be worrying about stupid shit. Thank you, Joe. Yeah. Thank you. Don't, don't do it, man. Okay. I want, I just want to be a good guy. Yeah. That's my thing. Yeah. But don't worry about it all the time. Good. That shit ain't good for you. Yeah. Don't be in your head. No, you know what? You're in your head worrying about your public image. You're in your head worried about where you are in your career. You're in your head. Just do your best. Yeah. Just do your best all the time. Yeah. Um, if you enjoy what you're doing and you do your best, everything's going to be fine. Yeah. Or not. I, I do. Or you die. You know, like you can't control that either. So what do you just keep going? Yeah. Stop being in your head. Everybody is like, you know, you've got this all mapped out and a lot of what you're mapping out as other people's opinions of you. And like, oh, there's no better way to fuck up your life than to live for other people's opinions. There you go. Yeah. Yeah. Do self auditing, do some self assessing. You know, there's many times in my life when I'm unhappy with myself. And so I don't, I fix it. Figure it out. Fix it. Do, do better. Do fix that. Fix this. Don't, don't do as much of that. Do more of what you think is good, you know. Yep. Try being a nicer person. Try to be kind. Like it's like, you can, but don't sit around worrying about what each individual commenter thinks about. God, that's crazy for you. It's, you're, you're absorbing too much negativity. And it's, this is the message that I give to everybody. Look, there's a great benefit to social media. It's an amazing tool and it's changed society. However, it's just like gambling. It's just like pornography. It's just like food. You can get wrapped up in it and it could be your whole fucking life if you let it. It's been over a decade since I watched porn. That's awesome. Yeah. Good to you. And some people, it's been about five minutes. Some people are watching porn on a split screen right now. We're watching this. They're, they're jacking off right now to a gang bang where they listen to Steve, I'll talk about how, oh, you're missing out. You know how many people are subscribed to OnlyFans? We were looking this up the other day. It's like, what are the numbers of Americans? It's something shocking. It's some insanely shocking number. It's like a hundred plus million subscribers to OnlyFans. And then with women, it's somewhere between like the ages of 18 to like 20 something. It's like 10% of the population is on OnlyFans as content. As content creators. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. So that's what's weird is because like if you think about it, if you fuck on camera, right, your kind, your porn star, right? But maybe you're only fucking your boyfriend. Maybe you wear a mask. Okay. But you're, are you doing it for money? What if you have sex with other people for money? Is that prostitution? And what if they just said, well, let's just legalize prostitution? Do you know how many fucking people would become prostitutes if they got desperate like Uber driver prostitute? Right. You know, what do I do? Like there's a lot of people who would go into prostitution. And some people think they should have that right to do that. And it should be freedom and freedom of expression and freedom of occupation. And then other people go, that might not be the best for society. I had this crazy thought at one point. What are the numbers for OnlyFans? There's no official numbers. It's somewhere in the range of 100 to 150 million. But only 4% of those are actually people who pay. Oh, how's that work? My, uh, they're free accounts. Okay. So what percentage people to pay? Sorry, 4% for 4.2. 4. Oh, so there's 100 million people accessing free content and 4% of the users actually compete paid transactions. Wait a minute, but does it cost money to join? Nope. It doesn't cost to join. It's up to the person who's making the content. So is a paid transaction mean you subscribed? Depends. So like, so if you go on OnlyFans, you have to subscribe to each person's content. Right? Yes. Okay. So it's only 4% that are doing that. So over 100 million creepers, they're just checking it out. Well, that's where you go. People have multiple accounts. Right. That's a good point. Um, why? Well, various reasons I wouldn't get into it. James got one of those bullet counts. I never subscribed to one of the four. I was joking, but I mean, so 4% is not as much, but it's still. Four million people that are paying for 4 or 5 million people that are. Yeah, still a lot. And what are the percentage of young girls that are on OnlyFans as content creators? And they're not all showing the coach. Some of them are just a little nipsil slip, maybe just a bikini shot, you know, G string, bend over, but it's still. But then we've got like the bad baby check, make like 50 million dollars on there. I know. That's crazy. What did she do on there? I don't know. I have no idea. Or to 4.6 million creators worldwide with 1 million of them being in America. Oh, that's it. So when they said it's 10% of girls 18 to 49, what percentage of girls, uh, not 18 to 25? I think that was the number. What percentage of girls put that in 18 to 25 in America are, uh, having to count on OnlyFans percentage of girls between 18 to 25 in America, uh, have an account on OnlyFans. Okay. Let's see here. Let's see what it says. 10% 14% of American women age 18 to 24 haven't only fans account. That's crazy, dude. That is really crazy. That's crazy. 14% of American women age 18 to 24 haven't only fans account. That is wild. It's just to estimate though just for arguments. Yeah. Cause there are not official numbers. I don't think in any way. Um, I had this crazy thought hypothetical. It's a crazy estimate. Hypothetically, if you had like a brick and mortar establishment with a bunch of chicks in there and, uh, and we're also mean right. Yeah. And, and, and ordains minister. So that like a guy could walk in, pick out a woman and marry them, marry them on the spot. So then now that's your wife and you are, uh, consummating your marriage. That's gotta be totally legal. And then as you leave the establishment, you and all the marriage. Is that not like, uh, with that not just all that. That's a loophole of prostitution loophole. Well, one thing you could do is you could have a thing where you could fall in love immediately and get married and give someone citizenship. Right. As soon as you, as, as, but they come and visit you, they want to see if you're like really in love. Like they're like, how long you guys knew each other. It's crazy. Let me see a hold hands. I know. Let me see a kiss. I know a bunch of people who have gotten married for just citizenship. Oh, yeah. I know a dude who married a girl for citizenship. Yeah. Bad, bad. You got to stay married. Yeah. It was, he did it for her. She was a fuck where was she from? I forget, but they didn't even really have a relationship. I think she was from Russia. They didn't really. They seem to attend to be from Russia. Yeah. She, it was just like they made a deal. I think it was a financial deal. This is the 90s. She's dead now. Okay. I want to ask you, do you believe in reincarnation? I don't not believe in it. I think that there's like pretty like solid evidence. It's like, if not irrefutable, but like you got little kids that are like giving like details that check out, total like, you know, and then they know like there's another alternative. That alternative is genetic memory. And so we know that some memories are transferred through genes. And this is one of the reasons why Iraq, no phobia exists. Iraq, no phobia is an irrational fear of spiders. Right. The idea is that at some point in your genetic lineage, someone got really fucked up by a spider. Either you witness someone dying from a spider bite or you almost died from a spider bite. And that memory is transferred through the genes, the same with a phobia, which is a fear of snakes. There's irrational fears that some people have that they attribute to a possible genetic memory. And then there's also there's genetic memories like that are in animals that we know for a fact. Like a dog does not have to be taught like I have a golden retriever. Marshall Marshall. He's the best. You don't have to teach Marshall to bring a ball back. He's a retriever. He has some sort of a genetic memory. And he also, I didn't have to teach him to pee on a bush and lift his leg. Like he knew how to do that. He just, it's in their, it's in their system. Right. There's a bunch of things that are in their system. There's, they see animals, they get excited. They want to bite them. Like it's not a learned behavior. Like that dog's super well fed, but he will fuck a squirrel up if he catches it. Why? Because it's in his genetics. It's in his. It's very instinct. And then with humans, think about all the different things that humans learn and think of all the different fears that humans have and how many of them are programmed like Rupert Sheldrake had a really important point once about what children are afraid of. He goes, so do you think about it? What are children afraid of? They're afraid of monsters in the dark. Right. They're, they're not afraid of child molesters or murders or rapists and it's their car accidents. They're not afraid of, they're not afraid of things that really can harm them. They're afraid of monsters and most children, especially living in a city of never seen a monster. Right. So why are they afraid of this thing? Well, it's because there's a genetic memory of us being preyed on by cats and big cats who killed people forever hid in the trees, they hid in the dark and you would go out to get water and they'd fuck you up and kill you. And so that is in little kids memories. So if there's, if there's these kind of peripheral abstract memories or, or really radical sharp memories, it don't make sense like a rat, a phobia and things like that. It's so possible that it's not just those things that are transferred through the genetics, but also learned experiences and maybe even information. You just don't have a way of expressing it yet. That's one of the reasons why you'll notice that a lot of the children of talented musicians are really talented. Even when they're adopted, even when they grew up in different families, they might have never even been around that parent, but they have like some sort of innate musical talent or literary talent or something. It's I think there's some things that get transferred in DNA that were not totally aware of. It's not like you get a menu list of all the things that you got from your parents. Oh, look, my dad was into history. That's why I'm in history. You look at all these things. I think there's a lot of stuff that transfers that maybe gets filed away and maybe other people have access to those memories that you don't. Like there's weird levels of memory retention. We were talking about Mary Lou Hener from Taxi the other day. What's that disease she has? It's not a disease. It's the opposite of a disease. It's an amazing ability. She has this incredible ability. You can tell her July 2nd, 1976. She could tell you it was a Tuesday. She could tell you what happened. What was in the news? Who did what she did? What color she was wearing? Highly superior autobiographical memory. Now imagine if that, whatever that is, that incredible memory is passed genetically occasionally and passed into some children and then they don't just get the memory of their own life but they get the memory of previous lives that other people have lived. Okay. So you think about how many different generations of human beings had to exist before Steve O was born? You have all of this DNA and all of this information inside of your genes supposedly. of human beings how to exist before Steve O was born. You have all of this DNA and all of this information inside of your genes supposedly. Maybe you can access some of that. And that some of it that you're accessing might be what we're calling reincarnation. What is this, James? This is the doctor who is a specialist in reincarnation at the University of Virginia. His name is Dr. Jim Tucker. He's continuing the work of a previous doctor. I think Hammond is his last name. Interesting. These are the two most repeated stories. I've heard about that. That people talk about. There's a kid that repeats stories of playing crash when he was a pilot. He's got a lot. There's further videos I've watched on this kid. So many details are insane. Details verified against historical records of a pilot who died 50 years early are matching exactly despite no prior family exposure. OK. Well, that's very different. He went so people and recognized them, I think, and even pointed out. Oh, yeah. OK, so that, but here's the thing. If that kid is not related in any way to this person who died from the playing crash, I don't believe so. Then we're talking about something totally different then. But what you are getting at, there is discussions of this kind of overall work. I think it's on here where people talk about that. It's a deep-bok show press says it's a little bit like quantum physics. So how this happens isn't known, obviously, because this guy even says it starts at the same time, it's between age two. And by age five or so, all the memories are kind of gone, and they don't remember this stuff anymore. Wow. It's like, very clear. You can't really ask a lot of questions. They have to just tell you. And if you start asking too many questions, they freak out some of the kids start crying, and they don't need to go the way. It's very odd, but there's... Well, it's really odd. It's as it goes away. Yeah. That's really odd. Well, as you were saying with Mary Lou Hener, hers doesn't even start until she was age 11. Interesting. So she has always little kids for that. It's always little kids that have memories of past lives. And they're supposed to name the Dolly Lama based on a kid having a memory. You know, it's supposed to be a reincarnation thing. You know, I'm fascinated by that. And also, kind of in the same vein of it. So many irrefutable examples of where consciousness is evident separate from the brain. Like you've got the... You know, like people with no brain activity whatsoever, you know, like they're officially dead. You know, they're in the hospital. And they wake up, come back to life, or whatever the case may be. And they're explaining to the doctor what was happening while they were unconscious. And to the extent that that can maybe be explained from what they were in the room, a lot of these cases, they wake up and they say what the doctor was doing in a different part of the hospital. You know, like there's a case of a guy, a doctor. He was like, you know, I had a patient and, you know, he's in the cafeteria at the hospital. He gets like spills spaghetti on his shirt or something. He's like, oh man, I got to stain on my shirt. And so he like puts his lab coat, you know, over it and then does it up. And then the patient wakes up and says, oh yeah, he's still on your shirt. You know, like there's a lot of evidence of consciousness like operating separate from the brain. And I had the most fascinating conversation with Duncan Trueswell about the idea that the brain is not a generator. It's not a transmitter. It's an antenna. Yeah, it's an antenna. Yeah. And that explains a lot of stuff to me, you know, about the soul. I was saying like to Duncan Trueswell, imagine that there were more of a radio, like an antenna. You know, like you can take a radio and with a sledgehammer just smash it to smithereens. You've done nothing to disrupt the actual signal. So the, you know, that signal can now tune in, be picked up by another radio. And that kind of explains reincarnation to me on some level. And Duncan Trueswell here at that he goes, yeah, and he got so many fucking people walking around. They don't realize their radio. They think they're the fucking Beatles. That's hilarious. Yeah. Duncan's so funny. He's so good. It's such a unique human. Yeah. And so all of this stuff is like super fascinating to me. It is interesting, but there's no answers. So it's like, there's a reason why so many societies and so many civilizations for a long time have believed in reincarnation after life that there's some sort of disembodied consciousness. There's a reason. Conscious. But then it gets really weird. It's like they're also believed in beings that have come down from the heavens. So what are those things? Yeah. What are those things? What's that about? Who are those people? How about near-death experiences? Well, near-death experiences, you could attribute to a lot of things, right? One of the things you could attribute to is an endogenous dump of psychedelic chemicals that we know the brain makes under stress. And one of the big ones is dimethyl-triptamine, which we know your body makes. And there's a lot of people that think that it's sort of a chemical gateway and that what you're doing is getting a peak into the afterlife that when you're having these DMT experiences and that when you have an near-death experience, that's your brain flooding with DMT to prepare you for leaving this world. OK. It's just weird that they all have a very similar thing about going through a journal and a light at the end of the tunnel. It's like this, it's a journey. And what is, you know, I haven't had a near-death experience. I don't know what it's like. You know who had one, Jeremy Rinner. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. With the snowmobile actually. Like I'm so fascinated by near-death experience videos on YouTube. You've got thousands of people who've had the experience of dying on the other side. And they describe what's called life review. OK. Like there's the saying that everybody's familiar with that when you die, your life flashes before your eyes. However, the way that these people describe it, it's that on the other side of death, like as a spirit, like somehow the concept of time is like doesn't apply anymore. So you've got like, it's not like that your life flashes before your eyes, because time isn't like there's no time constraint. So you've got like unfathomable immersion without time and that it's not that you're experiencing your life as you experience it. But rather, they describe experiencing your life in the most, like, I guess, an important memorable moment from the perspective of the people who you influenced, the people who you had an impact on. And it's not just from their perspective, but in this near-death experience life review, the way that they describe it, you are those people. It's like in every, all the scriptures, all the spirituality, like there's this idea that separation is an illusion. That at the end of the day, that there's only oneness. We're all one thing. We're all eyes in the same head. We're all the same thing wearing different costumes. Right, so that begs the question, like why are we separate? Like what's the purpose of these separate? Like, as I understand it, the way that what I've bought onto is that the universe, everything, like God. In the absolute form, God as one thing cannot have experience because there's nothing to relate to. And so God in the absolute sense is kind of a pure love. It's this pure, the awesome, but it's very lonely proposition. So the idea of the separation is the universe. God blasts itself into infinite different things to create the realm of the relative. So now we have this separation. So now we can relate to this allows for God to experience itself. Which you would never be able to do. You would never be able to have up and down or anything. And so it's like that the whole point is for experience. Right, but what's the benefit of experience for God? To know itself. So this is in regards only to human beings or to all animals? Different, like the souls. And I go down these fucking rabbit holes, dude. Like particularly recently, I did this whole audio book, a modern English version of a book that was published in 1857 by a French dude named Alan Cardack, who it's called the Spirits Book. And you've got all these mediums that you're communicating with and putting together of this definitive book on spiritism. And the way that that book describes it is that animals have souls, but not souls that with moral implications of the growth. The purpose of our separation and the purpose of our experience is to have free will, to have the choice to do good or bad or whatever. But to evolve as a soul, where you evolve towards being loving and you know. Where was he getting this from? From mediums. From mediums. So the spirit world was telling him this. Yeah. And like crazy. Like a lot of like the problem with mediums is the problem with the problem that you have with trans people using the bathroom. Some are legit. And some of them are just not. Right, right, right, right. That's the issue with anybody saying that they know exactly why. you know, and what is the difference between the way animals think and behave and humans think and behave? Well, just I think with animals, there's, you know, it's that they're like. They're in the wild. They need to survive. You know, where like where humans have kind of a higher level of like a higher bar to meet because we have like more there's more moral implications to the way we conduct our lives. Yeah. Well, we've also figured out shelter, right. So we're a little bit set. We have doors. So we're not separated from the wild world, which is allowed us to have a lot more time to innovate and think. It might be correct. I think that it's just interesting because it's like the problem is people, like they buy in to things as being like absolute truth. Sure. And especially things that are exciting like spiritual mediums and spirits and channeling and all that shit. I think that with the near death experience, you know, all these thousands of people have had the accounts. There's a there's a society of near death experience or like, you know, official, like what, you know, when if any fraud's slip in there with a fake story of almost dying? I don't know. I bet they do. I doubt it. But the consistency across all of the accounts, it's like it's it kind of like lends legitimacy to me. Well, that's the case with the alien abduction experiences. Right. That's a that's another weird one. It's like I want to dismiss it out. You know, I haven't had it. So I'm like, fuck these people. It's not right. But man, it gets weird. It gets real, especially when you go, you read like Jacques Valais work and you realize this stuff has been going on in the 1700s, 1800s. They just had a different way of talking about it because they didn't have the idea that a physical craft could fly in the sky that's made out of metal to them. That was alien. Right. I did make, I mean, for lack of a better word. But so they didn't describe it that way. But they did describe meeting these creatures and being taken away and waking up. It's like, it's like there's so many of those stories. And then the actual stories of people that have been supposedly abducted that have these stories of these encounters. They're oddly similar regardless of where they live in the world, which is real weird. Right. And it's one of those things. If it hasn't happened to you, you really wouldn't be able to describe it. Sure. And if you didn't believe, and if it did happen to you, you'd be like, how am I even going to tell anybody about this? Right. No one else has this experience. So this is going to be a crazy thing that I'm going to talk about. Everyone's going to think I'm a coo. That's been a lot of people's experience, I think, up until recently. So now, with the way that people describe the life review, and they describe things where they said something nasty and whatever. They did something hurtful. And in their life review, they are the person. They feel that and they come back with such maybe remorse, maybe more heightened compassion, like less interest in material things. And I just think to myself, oh my god, in my life, when I was such a fucking nightmare with drugs and sex and all that fucking crazy, just like, I did a lot of a lot. I created a lot of wreckage. I think I was harmful and hurtful. I've been better. But even coming up, I'm almost 18 years cleaning sober. Even in those 18 years, I've had bad temper of whatever. You know, over a human being, man. Right. The trajectory of my life, I believe, has been much upward improvement, which I'm really grateful for. But when I hear about these accounts, when people describing the life review, I think, oh my god, I got to... You're worried about a comment section in heaven. That's literally what you're sitting here tweaking out about. A little bit. Like, a little bit. Like, I view the remainder of my life as an opportunity, like a big gigantic opportunity to stack the good and, you know, like, bit and just be more... Well, that's good. So I'll just go around. Okay. Anything that gives you motivation to be a good person is, yeah. That's great. If that's how you have to do it. Yeah, I'll keep like a big fucking wad of cash in my pocket. So I can just give 20 bucks to every Uber driver, every homeless person, like, you know, and I think like, yeah, maybe that's just selfishly, I won't have a better life review. Well, if selfishly wanting to have a better life review makes you be a nicer person, then it's worth it. 100%. Yeah, that's all. I care about that so much. Okay. You're in your own head a lot, huh? Yeah, it's a pretty nice. Do you have anything else you do that, like, wears you out? Do you do anything physical, deal with hard workouts that, like, drain you of anxiety again? I do, you know, I do yoga every day for 30 minutes. Oh, that's good. And I get the perfect push-ups. You ever do those? Sure. I just got this killer strength machine in my house in Tennessee that I haven't been to in fucking two months. Yeah, for a lot of people, that's a relief from anxieties, like hard workouts. Yeah. Because look, there's benefits to having regret because you course correct and you become a good person. But after a while, you can't be thinking about it all the fucking time because then what you're doing is you're addicted to self-analysis. Right. And there's a lot of people out there addicted to self-analysis. Yeah. There's a lot of people that love going to therapy so they can talk about themselves and talk about their feelings. And some of that is really good for you. And some of that is very beneficial because you can develop tools that can help you manage your life. But there's also people that are just narcissists and just like going to a place where it's all about them for an hour. And this is a problem with self-analysis and living in your own head. As you got to get outside of your head. Yeah. But this is the benefit of psychedelics. They get you outside your head. And in living in that whole, what does everybody think about me? Let me check. What do I do? Oh, my bad guy. Uh-huh-huh-huh. Right. Not good for you, man. And not just it's not productive. It doesn't allow you to do the things that you want to do in life efficiently and effectively. Whoa. What does it say in you? Seriously? I didn't have that thing. Gary, those fucking watches, little bit of the ghost. Watch and tell you the fucking time. That should be reading emails too. You have a phone. Stop. Stop. Oh, shit. You carry around with the adults. Right. I feel like you're seeing right there, Joe. Like, uh, I do. My head is very fucking mean to me. Well, um, it also could be the kind of people you surround yourself with. You know, uh, if you're around other people that think more along the lines of look, you got to have radical self forgiveness for your past. You got to let it go. You're not a loser from, you know, I've got stuff into a locker in high school. Okay. You got to let that go. There's people that were so bullied in high school that they will go to high school as a fucking grown man with children and they will get anxiety and panic. I mean, that's same high school because they still associate themselves with who they were back then. And you know, at a certain point in time, you have to, you have to move on. You know, you have to let it go. Yeah. And, you know, it's good to recognize your flaws and want to improve upon them. Up to a point and then you got to concentrate on what you're doing and what you enjoy doing and just doing a good job at everything that you do. And one of the things that prevents you from doing a good job at everything you do is constantly being in your own head. Right. You can get in the way. Yep. You know, I got this, I moved out to Tennessee. I got this big property. Yup. Nashville? 45 minutes in North of Nashville. Okay. So you're out in the woods. I'm out in the woods. Yeah. All the fancy, like. You ever hear a yehah in the middle of the night and get worried your shotguns in the distance? No, but I've got this great neighbor's been like that. My name, my neighbors are so awesome. I got the place in September 2023. So I've been there. How did you choose that area? You know what it was? I got the, I started hearing about people getting notifications from their insurance companies in LA that their homeowners policy wouldn't be renewed because of the risk of fires. And I was like, dude, I live in the Hollywood Hills. Like it's just a fucking exercise and waiting for my house to burn down. Like I've got this fucking house is uninsurable. You know? And like, I was like, man, I don't want to be waiting for my house to burn down. I wanted, and I wanted to have a bunch of land so I can open up an animal sanctuary. You know, that's my deal. Cool. Yeah. So I knew that I wanted to get a place outside of California and who was, it was supposed to be quercing Hagin against Islam in Nashville, Tennessee. And I was like, oh my fuck. It didn't happen. I'm different. We classes. Okay. No, no, no, no. Okay. Yeah. Not Islam. Who's more? Who more? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. Um, yeah. Good catch. Uh, it was supposed to be Omar like, I was like, oh my god, I gotta be there. So I ended up being quercing Hagin against Rob Fong because the bar backed out somehow. Probably got injured. Yeah. Yeah. I'm like, all right, I'm fucking going out to Sarah. I decided that I'm going to go look at properties and in Tennessee just for a weekend. And the only motivation was to go for the fights. Oh, that fucking love the UFC man. Oh, that's awesome. I love the UFC. So I went out there. Come on there. Yeah, right. The BMF. Yeah, that should be exciting. Max Hallaway. And Charles Charles Hall of Barrow. That is a great fight. You're the whole fucking card. And all the way down the pre limbs. Like get the fuck out of your sense of name number. Oh, Lord. Yeah. So I looked at properties. We went down like in all around. And when I got to this one, 44 acres house with the fucking additional dwelling unit, like apartment on the garage, like, and this trail that goes through the woods in a perfect one mile loop, they drove us around that trail. I was like, I got it. Oh, that's awesome. I'm like, this place, they can get me for what I have to have it. They're just going to... Well, for a guy like you, that's probably a great thing to have too. It just gets a piece. I do. When I got out there, I was like, oh my god, I'm not chewing on my lip. I'm not. Like I can breathe. Not the problem is that I'm not there very much because I'm always fucking touring and working and chasing. Listen, that's the touring and working as a gift. You know, you have the ability to do that. It's way better than wishing you could be touring and working. Right. I mean, that's how it was when I started doing comedy. I got sober in 2008. Right? Up to that, I was 33. And up to that point, I never thought I was going to fucking make it to third. You know, I was just like... You were chaos. Yeah, I was like, literally never even imagined. Like I wasn't worried about saving money. I wasn't worried about like it was just like, ah, I'm going to be dead. Right. And then all of a sudden I got clean and sober. And it's like, wow, now I'm ceasing to like actively kill myself. I'm starting to take care of myself. Maybe I'm going to be alive for decades to come. Right. And like Holy shit, like 2008, like whatever I had saved at that time was just... you know, like, and I'm like, how am I going to fucking eat? If I'm going to be alive, I'm only like less than halfway through my life. I burned every bridge in my career. And you know, they're telling me that if I want to like be, you know, clean and sober and have any kind of a good life, I've got to deflate my ego. I've got to practice spiritual principles. How the fuck am I supposed to be Steve O. Advising with a deflated ego and on a spiritual path. I didn't know if I could continue to have any kind of a career as I knew it. So now I'm like, how am I going to eat? You know, like my savings just got blasted. And I started doing comedy. Going to the lab factory, like, they'd give you like 20 bucks. You know, like sign here and they'd be like 20 bucks. And then like when the jackass 3D came out, I went on the Howard Stern Show and I'm like, Howard, I've been in the comedy club every night. I'm having a blast. And just by saying that on Howard Stern, my lawyer called me up like in the next week or something. He says, I've got comedy clubs all over the country. You're calling trying to book you like, what's this about? And they're offering like all this money. I'm like, wait, you can make what? You can make that much money like going to a fucking comedy club for a weekend. Like holy shit. I'm like, I got to fucking figure out how I'm going to eat for the next, you know, 50 years maybe. So I just fucking started grinding. And we've talked about this. Yeah. It's, you know, I think that anybody who wants to do comedy is to do comedy. And there's a weird thing that happens with comedy where it's like there's a lot of gatekeepers. Like, oh, what is he doing doing comedy? Right. Which I think is gross. But yeah, I mean, I'm glad you found something else. But it's just being yourself, you know, you could still be on a spiritual path and so I figured that out. I figured that out completely. I think that the point being that I like that in 2011, like Jesus man, like I'd have been, you know, 52 weeks of the year. Like no way that I wasn't like full on fucking engagement for like 45 weeks of that year. You know what's awesome. Yeah. And just by doing it that much, like the repetition, it's like, oh, okay, now like I'm developing a craft. Yeah, if you care about it, if you care about it and you get into it, you get better. I can't tell. It's harder for a guy like you that's already famous to start out because, you know, some people they're already famous like, I went on the road with Charlie Murphy when he was doing that. And it was like the ball'siest thing ever. Like Charlie was famous for being on the Chappelle show and then starting out doing comedy. But I went on the road with him. I think he'd only been doing comedy like two years at the time. I'm like, man, this is such a ballsy thing to do. There's so many expectations of you, a, you're Eddie Murphy's brother, which is nuts. You saw your brother, one of the greatest of all time. And then on top of that, you're already famous from one of the funniest comedy shows of all time and you're a beginner, which is wild. You know? Yeah. It's blessing in a curse because you can sell tickets because people know you they want to see you. Yeah. But you're a lot of guys they get together with other people that can help them, you know, formulate an act, maybe help them write, help them piece together. Like maybe if they're not even writing for you, at least they can help you consolidate your thoughts and, you know, put together some like if you're smart, that's the way to do it. Like hire some people that can help you. I've never been able to have people write for me. But it's not necessary. You don't have to, but it's a good idea for like you're a little bit different than a traditional stand up comic though. You have to stand up comedy, but you also do multimedia stuff and stunts and silly things. For people that just like Charlie was just doing comedy, you know, I started out doing that. I would do like a set of stand up and then I would have like a set of sort of repeatable stunts and tricks at the end. Right. So this is not like laugh actor when you're one of the people on the right. This is when you're doing your own shows. Yeah. Yeah. That's how the tour began. Oh, that's awesome man. But yeah, dude, I'm just fucking stoked and you're in a good place. You just got to get out of your own head. Yeah. My head terrorizes me a lot. You got to get out of your own head and probably surround yourself more with people that also are not in their own head. Right. You know, because that shit's contagious. Just like being a loser is contagious. Like if you're if you're around people that are losers, like that's chicken rub off on you, but on people that sabotage their life all the time, you're with them like, then you're wrapped up in their shit and you're not only not progressing, you're regressing. Because you're like constantly with this guy's like fucking his life up all the time. Real, you know, some people have to cut ties. Try to surround yourself with people from your yoga class. Like go to a good little solid yoga class and find solid people. Like just that is one of like be the type of person that solid people want to be around, but also find those people too. Right. And both of those things will benefit you. Because if you're in your own head and you're on other people that are like worried about their career too and they're in their own head and they're freaking out about their comments and you're freaking out about your comments. Like jeez. Right. This is not good for anybody. Yep. Yeah. And it's helpful to you to look at the facts, you know, like whatever I've been through or whatever, like, but even that is thinking about yourself too much. Think about your stuff. Think about what you're doing. Right. Don't think about like, I have accomplished so much and this is why I don't have to worry. Like eh, that don't, you know, good. There's no gas in that. Right. But that's what I meant. But like what I've been gone through over the last few weeks, I was telling you about, didn't change the fact that like our jackass movies and fucking full bore, full force. There you go. Doesn't change the fact you have a dick on your forehead. Does it change that? Yeah. Like, nobody has, nobody who matters to me has voiced any concern about any of that. That's all that matters. Yeah. It's the people that are close to you that really matter. It's just like, yeah. You're just a little too in your own head, bro. I hope this helped. I didn't even know I really fucking did. It really good dude, Ben. You shouldn't be worried. I care. I know you do. But it's the reason why you care is because you're a good dude. But you're breaking high jack you. You know, your thoughts can run, your thoughts can run away with you. I mean, we've all had it happen before. Right. And you get a thought, it runs away with you and then you got to bring it back. But you got to get better at corralling that bitch. You know, it's like being a dog trainer. You can't have your dog sittin' all over your house and chewin' up your furniture. You're like, hey, hey, stop. That's me, you don't love your dog. It's like you don't want him shitting on your couch. Like tell him not to do that. Be a good dog trainer. Be a good... Hey, hey, stop. Doesn't mean you don't love your dog. It's like you don't want them shitting on your couch. Like tell them not to do that. Be a good dog trainer. Be a good Steve O'Trainer. Don't let Steve O'Trainer run away from him and piss on the TV. That's crazy. You know what I mean? Same kind of thing. You got to train yourself. Yeah. I think that that's perfectly fair, man. And I'm super grateful for your brother. I'm grateful for you too. Like I said, I just hate seeing you in your own head. Because you're a great guy. You're fun to be around. You know, he's very thoughtful and very friendly. And don't worry about it, man. It's going to be all right. Well, thank you, dude. And then you're going to come back as a butterfly or some shit. Right. Maybe you'll come back as a World War II pilot. Maybe you'll go back in time. That'll be wild. You have memories in the future. Oh, yeah. You haven't heard about that. Yeah, that's because if reincarnation, if time's not linear. Maybe there's people that die and then they have messages from the future. You know, imagine you're in the trenches of World War I. You're like, are you fucking kidding me? Are you seven iPhone? I had a watch that my dad was calling me on it. Right. This is so stupid. Now, worried about getting eaten by wolves in this fucking trench. Right. I mean, the idea of quantum physics, quantum mechanics. And a single minute. Oh, oh. Oh, oh. All possible realities all exist. All in one moment. Allegedly. I don't understand it. I've tried. Right. How's Marshall? He's great. He's great. He's great. How old is Marshall? He's nine. Wow. Yeah. It makes me sad that I worry that he's only going to live for a few more years. Right. That's what's spooky. Golden's when they eat well and they're, well, they're not. They could live like 15, 16 years. I just got to take care of them. I just like, it's just like thinking about him not being around. It's like, it's really hard. Like we were playing today. Now take him in the yard, throw the ball with him, and we're hanging out and cuddling. And I just can't imagine a life for that dog's not around. Right. Like he's, he's just a big, love sponge. Yeah. He loves everybody. Everybody comes over the house. The first thing he does is he's like, he runs up to you. He waxes tail, he rubs up against you. And then he lies down because he knows you want to pet his belly. He's like, come on. You know, you love me. He's just so used to being touched by everybody. Right. I mean, that's his existence. His just love. I was in Peru in 2017 with Chuck Lado. We were doing this. We found that dog. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That, I still have Wendy. That's what I'm doing. Yeah. That's awesome. That's awesome. That's awesome. She's at this point like 11. Wow. And just like dogs, it's so sad. They don't live long enough. I know. But did since when do you now retired? Living on my ranch in Tennessee. That's cool. And she has become the gnarliest country girl. Like, shelters go out on the on the property and come back with like a fucking gnarly, deer leg. And then she found the words. Yeah. And she just sits there. That's normal. That's dog behavior. That's. That's. That's. That's cat that I'm pretty sure like he goes out there and like hunts squirrels or whatever. But everything. And then he brings him to Wendy. Cause I was trying to figure out why is Wendy getting so fucking fat. I'm like, tell my ranch hand. I'm like, dude, we got to like not feed Wendy so much. She's like kind of like getting fat. She's like, dude, I've been like feeding her less, but she just seems to still be getting fucking fat. And we find her like she cruises up with like just some big ass rodent. Big. And I, that's going to kiss you. And she's just pulled breath. Just crunching it. Just watch her house a whole fucking squirrel to the face. And she's just while the whole fucking thing's going. And I know that she's her old, old badass wasn't fast enough to catch it squirrel. The only way is it's got to be the cats killing it. So the cat killed the squirrel and it's like, hey, friend, I got some for you. Cause cats just want to kill. Yeah. They kill so much man. Wild, if you let a cat go wild, you basically, you want to do harm. Let a cat go loose. That they'll kill thousands and thousands of things. I saw a cat the other day on a ranch. It was really wild. I turned a corner and I saw it right as his cat pounced. So this cat was in the grass and he was doing that thing where their back goes up and the butt starts wiggling and just flew through the air. I'm like, how happy is this fucking cat living out here? Like just being able to jack all these poor little unsuspecting animals all day long. That's what they want to do, man. The guy brought the property from. He said, you will never see a fucking mouse. A fucking rat. He's like, this cat, we inherited the cat right here. Oh, that's cool. Like this cat takes his job fucking seriously. It's way better than having mice around. That's for sure. But they are mass murders. Yeah. Do you know that like house cats, wild house cats, feral cats kill billions of mammals every year just in America? Billions. Farrow house cats. Wild cats. Right, right, right, right, right. Cats have get left out time. Regular old cats. Regular cats, not like cougars. And they kill billions of billions of birds and mammals. Be I, billions, billions. Yeah. They are so good at it. They love to do it. I just have this like fluffy. She was like, I forget what they're called. They're kind of catchers, but she was just a ball fluff. Like she would just purr when you pet her and like, that little bitch was a murderer. I literally are outside. She'd have a bird. I'm like, this is crazy. He's jump up and snag a bird out of the air. I'm like, they're, and they would sit by the window and she would see a squirrel outside. And her teeth would start chattin' up. I just couldn't wait to bite it. Ha ha ha ha. It would make these weird noises staring at birds and squirrels. Like it's just in them, man. Yeah. They're little killing machines. Yep. I got a good fucking fucking, I got to, I'm gonna have so many fucking animals. That's also. I find it's pigs and goats and cats and dogs. That's dope, dude. That sounds like a great life. And a great balance to the chaos that you have when you were younger. And also a great balance to touring, right? Right. And touring in all these cities, you come back home. Yeah. Tweet, tweet, tweet, tweet. Oh, dear, I love it so much, man. And it's, I'm, I'm all set up. It's an official 501c3 nonprofit animal sanctuary. Oh, so you could take in animals. Like if someone has a dog that's abandoned or a goat that they can't take care of any of, oh, that's cool. Yep. That sounds really cool, man. It's called the radical ranch. Yeah. Yeah. And the website's radical ranch.org. Oh, you have a website. Just went live like last month. Oh, cool. Like a month like a, in January it went live. So yeah, like people can fucking donate or whatever. See all the animals on there. It's pretty, it's pretty rare. That's dope, brother. There it is. There it is. Radical ranch. There's windy. Oh, look at all those little animals. That was a good time. I believe it or not, that's Photoshop. You're not getting all those animals in one. That's Photoshop. Yeah. Oh, okay. That's deceptive. How dare you? Well, I mean, you have it a party. Just like a Disney movie. I wanted to have all the animals in one shot. And, uh, it actually makes sense. Otherwise I was like, why not dog chase those goats? Well, I was a goat dealing with the dog being right there. Right. All right, brother. Well, I appreciate you very much. Dude, likewise. It's always good to talk to you. Yeah. I had like, I'm trying to like be pretty sparing if I'm going to hit you up or try to make sure that it, that it, that it. Don't worry about it, man. Just, just be you. Don't worry about it. Yeah. Well, it's hard. It's all going to be fun. I appreciate you so much. I appreciate you too, brother. Fuckin' the word for me. I did. Fuck, ladies. All right. Bye, buddy.