So they cordoned off the area that I'm talking about right now, and that's where the girls had the encounter and two blocks away at 530 where military officers Marco Cheerizi and Eric Loops saw this creature when I crossed the road in front of them Slambana's brakes Marco jumps out the passenger door and grabs this thing with his bare hands He takes it and he puts it in the back seat on his lap believe it was the back seat on his lap on his lap Yes And they take it initially to a clinic in the town of Virginia and the guy comes out and says I don't know what the heck that thing is Get it out of here. I've know what what are you guys doing kind of thing and so they go to another hospital called hospital regional And at which point the creature remains in hospital regional hospital, sorry the creature remains in and regional hospital for I'm not sure exactly how long but it ultimately ended up in humanities hospital and we have testimony from doctors that performed certain things as well as Military guys that drove the creature We have the whole Tire area where the creature was so they captured two creatures one was alive And I think the other one was not alive the one that Eric Loops caught that you said was in his lap in the car Was that one alive or dead with alive that one was still alive. Yeah, but a very little resistance So you got to cut on his arm Kind of in a shoulder like right here During the capture of it whether it scratched him with a nail or I don't know what exactly happened but he got infection and Within days week or whatever it was He went into the hospital The doctor administered Antipiotics and he said he'd never and all of his years prior or since seen anything like it Marko trees perfectly healthy 23 year old young man Got this like complete immune system failure any died And we interviewed the family that his sister we interviewed the doctor who worked on him and They wanted to put him in the ground as soon as possible I Couldn't believe that you actually got the doctor on camera the doctor that treated him. I know it's crazy right what what did he say? What was he looking for? What did he see when he was treating Eric? You just said that he'd never and all of his career and he's been In there for like 40 plus years. He's never seen Someone with an infection From a simple cut like that Have a complete immune system failure and not respond to any of the antibiotics that he's he pumped him full of everything and nothing worked at all And he just his health just went down and he died there was some sort of mention of a granular toxin. Yeah, I know I didn't quite yes We have the autopsy reports which the family had to fight to get we interviewed We I didn't interview his wife his wife was interviewed one time very briefly never seen a light a day by Roger Lear Roger Lear Dr. Roger Lear is a UFO Researcher he used to take allegedly implants out of people and when Roger Lear found out that I was making this movie years ago 2014 He was adamant that he wanted to talk with me he wanted to get together and I I sincerely wanted to talk to him too, but I was investigating Rua at the time and I I was kind of back burning back burning Virginia case Long story short he sent me that he said well if I can't if you can't get me on camera You got to have my tapes. I went to Virginia in 2002 and I documented a bunch of witnesses Some of whom have gone off the radar completely forever those tapes had never seen a light a day I transferred the tapes had them digitized and then Dr. Roger Lear sent them back to rear To Dr. Roger Lear and then he died and so I never got a chance to talk to Dr. Roger Lear But I got his tapes and one of those tapes He interviewed the wife of Marco trees. Nobody's ever done that nobody's even going to hold her But nobody had ever managed to get the driver Eric Lopes. He'd been in hiding for like 26 years Marco was the name of the guy who died again Marco That was Marco where he was he died. Yes He was the guy that leapt out of the passenger seat and grabbed his creature Apparently and the guy who was driving the car has never been Now what anyone talked to the family of the guy who deceased the guy who was driving the car That's the guy who basically was trying was about to shoot you guys. Yes. Yeah Yeah, it's crazy story, you know, and we interviewed the town mayor He was like yeah, this is unbelievable. This sounds I believe this actually happened. I interviewed the local news station You know saying the same thing they completely threatened to lock us up if we asked one more question at the military base as a To lock up the local media in the in prison for asking questions They came down so hard and then you know, I don't want to give away too much of the film the storyline but Because I won't ruin it for anybody but but they They shut it down. They shut the story down and then we Came to the realization Not for about 10 years on my last trip to Virginia which was just last year We came to the realization that the US government was 100% involved and that they arrived and they took we talked to the radar operator We saw the plane coming in and saw you US Air Force plane I say it's their force airplane coming in and it came into the exact area where we knew the body was because we drove We interviewed the guy who drove the body to their location and then the United States Air Force plane came in Yeah, and then flew out in and out. Yeah. Wow. So it's heavy highly likely Extremely likely that they one of the reasons for the level of secrecy is that the Brazilian government would be exposing the US government By revealing what they know So I'm just guessing here, but There are some pretty crazy Aspects that we uncovered during during meeting the witnesses and stuff that you just go Jesus like really guys and suits from some unknown government agency coming in trying to like intimidate and influence testimony and offering large sums of money Prove their bribes and then you've got like the lead UFO researcher on the case Obitajada Rodriguez who's a lawyer in the town of Virginia who suddenly After writing a book does a complete 180 and he won't even talk to anybody anymore back a cheney the same thing Loyo Kovils unfortunately passed but um So they managed to like Get the lead UFO researchers to either recant what they said previously or made to print in a book or Just go silent altogether never comment on the case ever again And then threatening the witnesses and say I never heard a witness say to me they said they're gonna kill me they just say that the Consequences of revealing what you know would be extremely severe the punishment would be extremely severe and then ask you know has has the family like kind of right right? So yeah, so now As crazy as it all sounds and I think I told your audience earlier Don't believe a single word. I'm telling you because I wouldn't vary you but but but this story happened One of the parts that freaked me the fuck out the most was the interview with the x-ray technician crazy What would they he say? Specifically like how was his description of it? Just working it working a lot, you know working in the And the hospital one night one late afternoon or evening and military trucks pulled up and They're like this is you're gonna be doing some work for us He's like okay like what exactly what I do in here and they had an object in a black body bag He said it stank to no end and it was kind of smaller But you said that they were armed guards in there watching his every move Look at him in the eyes. You just perform this you can't look at the x-rays for the first time in history Couldn't look at the x-rays because he always verifies to make sure they come out. Mm-hmm. Couldn't look at the x-rays They just looked at him very carefully and then and then he'd perform to duties and then they said don't you ever talk about any of this stuff?