So everyone's mad that, um, even some Democrats, I think, are mad about these last-minute Biden pardons of Fauci and the J-6 committee, etc., etc. Um, so let's just set that aside. My concern is not that these people are punished. Fauci is 81. Yeah, who cares? I think he'll be punished. Yeah. Okay. You know what's the largest sense? But I want to know what they did. That's the, okay. So can we just go through a couple of these and, um, like, why would you pardon Fauci? What are the potential crimes? The crimes you think he committed and could be punished for the, you're trying to prevent him from being punished for by parking him? Well, with Fauci specifically, the, the one thing that comes to mind, uh, immediately is perjury. Yes. Because he's been accused of that essentially already by, you know, the House committee, um, lying under oath to the Congress. Lying under oath to the Congress in particular, saying, um, you know, that we have never funded gain of research, um, that we weren't doing it during this time period, even as, as there are other people in the government, like, you know, the deputy director of the NIH, uh, saying, yes, we were or Ralph Barrick, who was one of the, the scientist that, um, UNC saying, yes, absolutely. That was a gain of function. Yeah. So there's a little bit of a problem there. Now he later amended the statement, uh, and said that he was speaking in a specific way, under a specific definition, but there's exposure there, but that's, that's not really the issue with Fauci. The issue, I, I believe that the issue is really it's about the whole rat's nest of gain of function. How much did the authorities know about what was going on at the Wuhan Institute? Did they have human sources at the Wuhan Institute? Um, did they, what was their advance warning that this was coming? Were they suppressing investigations into the possibility of a lab leak, uh, because of the connections to US research? All that stuff is in play. I mean, there's, there's a lot of stuff that's going on, uh, that, you know, that you want to know. So Fauci was part of the US bioweapons program, obviously, right? I mean, if you're funding a gain of function, it's, you know, vaccines are one part of that, but probably not the only part of it, right? So the ideas you make, the virus more dangerous in order to create a vaccine to fight the virus right that in the process, you wind it with much more dangerous viruses. Right. And that's one of the things that, that raised a red flag for some of the people who were looking at the COVID phenomenon is just look at this surface characteristics of the disease. It's highly transmissible. Yes. It doesn't, it's not terribly symptomatic. Um, everybody's going to get it. Not everybody's going to be harmed by it. It's, it's what they designed, uh, what you would do if you were designing a disease to carry a vaccine, for instance. Yes. Yeah. So my interest is not in Fauci. I think any normal person can make it was minded about Fauci. It's pretty obvious how Fauci is the super bureaucrat. It's in the bioweapon programs and the Frankenstein science that's being funded by our tax dollars around the world to be specific in Ukraine, in China, in Jubuti. Um, in we bio labs in a lot of places around the world and like what are they doing? What are they doing? What was their relation to, to the one institute also? I mean, I think those are all important questions like both the bioweapons and, you know, the, the relation to the, to the pandemic. But the, the thing is about these pardons, uh, their mistake. If you want to know what's happening, they just made it a lot easier for us to find out. Wow. Because now, uh, once the pardons, uh, delivered, the person can't plead the fifth. If they're brought before a grand jury, they can't take the fifth anymore. Uh, if they're brought before a congressional committee, uh, they, they can't evoke their right against self-incrimination. So they have to say something. Um, and this is what's so interesting because I've been talking to criminal defense attorneys, people who are former Senate investigators, some current Senate investigators. And they all kind of said the same thing. It's so illogical to give somebody a pardon if you're trying to cover up, uh, things that the only reason you would really do it is if there's very serious crimes involved. Right. A red flag for us when we see somebody getting, getting a pardon, we think, well, why would they do that unless there's something really bad there? Right? Yeah. So, uh, either it's a mistake where they just stupidly made it easier for everybody to investigate or there's something we don't know about that is interesting. Well, it's such a profound thing to do. I mean, if somebody said to you, Matt, would you accept a pardon, you would say, well, why would I just get why would I need a pardon? No. It's incriminating. It's morally incriminating or has the appearance of moral incrimination just by its fact, right? It's not only morally incriminating. It's legally incriminating as the Department of Justice itself said in a memo, I think, on one of the J6 cases, it said, this does not unring the bell of conviction if you get a, uh, a pardon going forward. So you're making an admission if you accept a pardon. Yeah. I wouldn't accept one of our totally innocent. Of course. Yeah. And also, I wouldn't accept one if I had something to hide because now, you know, if I'm dragged before a congressional committee or especially a grand jury investigation, now I can't tap out and say, yeah, I'm sorry. I'm going to take the fifth on that. Fascinating. Right. So the whole thing is really illogical. Um, I think it was more meant to be a symbolic gesture. And this is really, I think speaks through the thinking of the Biden administration about so many things, right? They were so driven by optics with Trump that they did some, they did a lot of things that were incredibly stupid. So they want to portray him as vengeful and out to get people. And the, the pardons are a good way to do that. I mean, if you're aiming for that audience, but it had the negative effect of opening all these investigations up, it seems to me. She really think this was aimed at MSNBC viewers just to paint Trump as a vindictive person. So I asked a lot of people, why did they do this? Like what's the point? And one of the theories was that that this is messaging that they were trying to create a headline. And there were lots of headlines instantaneously, if you saw them, they all basically said the same thing, like, you know, to, to ward off future vindictive retaliatory acts by the Trump administration, you know, Biden issues pardons. It's always after the comma, right? Yeah. Um, that's one theory. The other theory is that in the last days of a presidential administration, it gets pretty chaotic in the White House and people who want things. You know, they will come in and they'll be a hurried frenzy to put stuff on paper. And that's why they're unprecedented things in these pardons. For instance, the J6 pardons, this has never happened before where you give a pardon to a category of unnamed people, right? It says to the members of the committee, to the Capitol police officers who testified to the staff, but it doesn't delineate the names of the people who are pardoned. So now if you want to invoke your pardon, you actually have to go over a test to prove that you're actually part of that category that I testified before the committee. Does that mean that the committee called you that you talked to his staff or once? Or does that mean you actually sat in front of the hall and testified? It's very weird and the only explanation that I could come up with from people is that they were in a hurry. They didn't have all the names. It's amazing. Right? So, but why would you preemptively pardon the J6 committee? I mean, that's like the single most legitimate, morally empowered, great group of people ever impaneled in this country. Like, truly. Well, I mean, there are obviously some theories about why they would do that, right? What? Other trees issues, such a great person are going to preemptively pardon. Like, what? This is crazy. No, it is absolutely crazy. And if I were some of those people, I'd be offended. Yes. Especially the people who testified and who didn't lie under oath, for instance, right? Because they're all named. Yeah, all the police officers who testified to the committee. Now, what if they're only really trying to protect a couple of them? And there are some very conspicuous names. I think we know who they are. Exactly. Who wants to try to protect? Right. But what if you're one of the other ones who just gave some testimony? They, I mean, they interviewed hundreds and probably thousands of people, right? It's some number like that. That's massive number. Yeah. And most of them told the truth. Right. People do tell the truth, actually, I think. I think that's probably the case. Yeah. I mean, especially if you're under oath and you're a law enforcement officer. Right. And it's a very serious thing to lie in those situations. And, you know, there are a couple of places in the testimony where it doesn't look good for some of the people who testified. But for the vast majority of them, I would take it as a grievous insult to be given that pardon. And especially to not be named. That's what's so weird about it. But it suggests what I have thought from the first week, which is there are like serious crimes here. I mean, you talked to Steve Sund, you know, ran Capitol Police, who's like a non political person, just career law enforcement former MP, you know, former Washington DC cop. I don't think he has any word agenda. I mean, his story's so unbelievable. They just didn't give him any intel at all and didn't give him any resources and everybody else knew this was happening except him. I mean, the whole thing is so nuts that you're like, wait, there's something going on here. I don't really know the pipe bombs at the pipe bombs, the gallows that was erected by some weird unknown group the night before. Or will we ever get disclosure? I guess that's what I want. I just want to know, again, I am not, I am not a vegetable. I don't really want to punish people so much as I just want to know that feels like punishment enough. Will we? I think we will. I think we're heading into a golden age for investigative journalism. I think this is after eight years of crazy misleading news stories and dead ends and unanswered questions and fake news, you know, ranging from Russia gate to Nord Stream to, you know, the COVID origins were actively kept away from one side of that story for years. I think we're going to find out a lot of this stuff. There are investigations already underway, document hunts going on all over the place. There are reports that have been commissioned to look into a lot of these questions and they're going to be staffed up with a lot of money and a lot of personnel. And it's just an unprecedented situation where, for instance, the DHS or the FBI or the DOJ would be in sync with congressional investigators to the point where they're not going to have to issue subpoenas for a lot of this stuff. They're just going to sit down and say, here's a list of the documents we want to find. And I think that they're going to have that collaborative arrangement. Incredible. There's panic. I sense panic. And I sense it in some of these confirmation battles, particularly the sort of offline stuff that you don't see in the media, but just when you find out the lengths to which permanent Washington is going to say sabotage Tulsi Gabbard. There's an army officer who's had a clearance for more than a decade. Carries don't amount like weapon. I mean, clearly we trust her with America's, you know, defense. Why can't we trust her with America's secrets? Of course we can. So what is this? And it really is people are panicked that what they've been doing is going to come to light, I think. Well, they should be panicked because if you read the executive order on the weaponization of government, it's specifically in powers the director of national intelligence to conduct a wide ranging report into the possible misdeeds of the entire intelligence community and orders her to come up with, you know, anything negative that they can find. So can you imagine? No. Right? I mean, that's like trying to make a list of everything. She'll be doing it from now to the end of time. But no, I mean, to in perfect seriousness, this is it's setting the stage for, you know, kind of a second church committee hearings era. And that was a great moment in American history. Every 50 years. Right. What they're doing with their black budgets. Yeah. And really in the mid 70s, who would have known, right, that we were doing such an incredibly wide ranging, you know, list of horrible stupid things from, you know, trying to yes, murder Castro with exploding seashells to spying on Martin Luther King Jr to trying to, you know, leak news about mistresses of civil rights leaders. I mean, it goes the list went on and on and on. And we only found out about it because they went too far, right? And now it's suddenly people in the Senate had a hammer to start looking, you know, into this direction. And it all came out. Well, not all of it, but a lot of it came out. A lot of it. Frank Church sadly got incredibly fast developing cancer. I noticed. Did he? Yes, he did. He did kind of like Jack Ruby style cancer. Hugo Chavez style cancer is interesting. Huh. I did not know that. Yeah, couldn't treat it. He died. Sad. I'm sorry. No, it's all right. I mean, look, it's hard not to think I never thought this way until like a year ago. I could have. I don't know. Oh, no, I did not think this way. I attacked anyone who did. Right. Yeah. But I can I say one thing that I've noticed now that I'm in middle age is that all my life, the older guys I've known, like you go on duck hunting trips or whatever in Washington where I live, like with my dad and his friends or whatever. And the guys who were in their 50s and 60s all thought this way. They all thought this way. You know, after like a lifetime of government service as an operations officer, whatever you're doing, right? Right. Right. They all had this mindset. And I remember sitting like in a duck blind thinking, it's guys are fucking crazy. They're all nuts. What I didn't realize was there's a reason that people become more open to these sorts of explanations the more they see. Of course. Right. Yeah. I don't know why I didn't get that. Yeah. It's probably just our generation that thought the schoolhouse rock thing was true. I mean, right? It's so true. Cause you know, we grew up with all the presidents men and after the church commute, so we thought it all it could come out. The good guys won, there's transparency. We have the free new information act. We can find everything out. No, right. It turns out. No, right. No, you're I never thought. of schoolhouse rock and all the presidents men is sophisticated propaganda put there by the intelligences, but I think you're right. Whether they were whoever did it, it was effective. One here something creepy. You are being bought and sold every day without your knowledge. Data brokers are watching everything you do online. They track every website you visit, every link that you click, every video that you play. They collected information about you and your behavior and your thoughts and they sell it to anybody who wants to buy it, including governments. No privacy whatsoever. Obviously it should be illegal. It's not illegal. People get paid off to keep it legal. Politicians specifically. Politicians, by the way, are some of the ones using your data. They buy it and then employ it in campaigns to swing your vote. It's creepy as hell. There's a way to get around it though. It's called ExpressVPN. With ExpressVPN, our online activity here at this office goes through secure encrypted servers. That means no data brokers can see what you're doing online or we're doing online. Not that we're doing anything wrong. ExpressVPN also hides our IP address. There's no way for information we bought or sold. We cannot recommend it enough. It's our identity defender. It could be yours as well. Right now, you get an extra three months for free when you use our special link to expressvpn.com slash Tucker. Get three extra months of ExpressVPN. Can we just go through since I think you're, as I've said, many times that I mean, I think you're one of the great reporters still working. Not that there are many. There's a ton of competition there. There aren't many. In an, you are by your nature, a curious person, which is like requirement one for journalism. The one thing, no one else seems curious about anything, but you are. Can you just go through a no particular order, the stories whose endings you'd like to know? What are you curious about as we enter an age of disclosure and God willing we do? What do you want to know? So first of all, just to back up, I tried to make a list a couple of days ago. Oh, did you really? Yeah. Of all the things that I would want to investigate if I were, you know, in that kind of a position to order these kinds of things. I'm actually going to take notes as you talk. Because I'm going to follow along at home as this happens. Okay. But I couldn't finish. There were so many different things that I never got to the end, but I would say that the big ones, you know, they're huge glaring questions, which is unusual. For instance, who was president the last four years, especially the last year? I mean, I think that's an enormous question. John Blinken. Do you think it was Blinken? You know, I think Blinken's so evil. So demonstrably evil and also stupid that I just see his fingerprints everywhere. Right. Right. But that's pure guess. That's the problem. We don't really know that in the last two months, Blinken did everything he could to accelerate the war between the United States and Russia, which is like I should be illegal. I don't know how we got away with that. Nobody said anything about it, but that's a fact. So anyway, sorry. And you know, the his State Department was also involved in the censorship stuff too. So who was president who was president? Who was president? It was start with the big question. No, I mean, I think of all the crimes that are on the table and the potential corruption issues, people signing documents or somehow getting documents signed by an incompetent president or an unfit president has to rank up there with the most serious things that have ever happened in an American history. Right. So you have to look at what was the process of the White House operation, right? Who was actually running things? We know from a surface point who was who held the posts. So Ron Kline was the chief of staff. We know roughly who else was in Joe Biden's orbit. What was the schedule? You know, did he sign things by auto pen because they have this machine that does. And who basically had the power of attorney to turn that on, right? Like these are all questions that we have to get answers to. What was the day to day operation of the Biden White House? And again, especially in the last year because I think, you know, that gets to bigger questions of who was really making these big foreign policy decisions and who was making decisions about things like, you know, cutting off the democratic primaries to challenge yours. Yeah. You know, I think these are big party decisions, not necessarily White House decisions. Who decided to kick Biden off the ticket? Biden on July 13th was giving a speech in Detroit and he's like, I'm running. I mean, he couldn't have been more affirmative about the idea that he was not going to drop out of the race within seven days. He was out of the race within three days after that Detroit thing. There were stories linked out in Politico that were basically saying that Nancy Pelosi was is going to ask him to or going to try to pressure him to drop out. But I don't believe that. I think we need to find out exactly what those communications were. I mean, who had the authority to push the president of the United States off his own ticket? Unless he had a sudden change of heart. Do you believe that? I think it's really obvious that his statement dropping out on Twitter was issued before he knew. I mean, I've heard that again, I don't know is the truth, but I've heard that. It's very conspicuous that when he when he wanted to say things, he said it on camera, but there were all kinds of things where the wording was much more careful and that was done on Twitter or in a letter or in a bad press release. I mean, even even the the note explaining the pardons who wrote that right? It was on a, you know, Biden's Twitter account. I doubt he's sitting there tweeting. So it's just a coup. I mean, that's a coup. If you take a sitting president of the United States and force him to drop out, I mean, right? It's on the table. It has to be because, you know, Joe Biden has been very circumspect and talking about it. She's said these really curious things about how she wants to reevaluate her relationships. I think she was referring to Nancy Pelosi. What exactly happened in that one week period between, you know, the middle of July and the 21st or so? And then what happened in between the 21st and the 22nd or whenever it was when Biden's suddenly came out and made Kamala the nominee like, how did that happen? Who made that decision? So that was after the Republican convention. Yes. Yes. Maybe you had this incredible week or two where Trump gets shot survives. You have the convention and Biden drops out. I mean, that's, and as far as I know, I don't think anyone's ever done like a real Tiktok on that. No. There were stories, but they were incredibly incomplete. And this is one of the things where, you know, I was looking at it even from just the the professionalism point of view in terms of the New York Times, the Washington Post, all of these papers. How does nobody ask who made the decision to nominate Kamala Harris? How did that happen? How was he kicked off or how did he come to that decision? Normally there would be a big show of that, right? There would be somebody would come out and give an interview to, I don't know, 60 minutes to say, well, here's how that happened, right? And whether it was true or not, there would be a grand explanation. Whenever there's something big that happens with the president here, they just, they just kind of did a little tweet or press release and there were things that were leaked out in newspapers. None of it made any sense. So, you know, they have to get all those communications. And I think that's what was important. There, you know, there were preservation letters that were sent out by some Senate committees. I hope it captured a lot of this stuff, but we'll see. Do you have any sense of what the answer is to either one of these questions who was functionally operating the Biden administration and who kicked Biden out? Who made these decisions? I've only heard theories about this, right? And that's the problem. It's kind of irresponsible to report, it's especially like an angry. We don't know. All we know, we saw little bits and pieces of things. There was a really weird moment. You might remember when Biden said something to the effect of we can't allow Putin to stay in office or whatever it was, right? And people immediately interpreted that as a regime change, of course. Comment, right? 47 minutes later, the White House comes out with a walk back clarifying statement saying, you know, our policy towards Russia is unchanged or something, something ambiguous like that. But there were leaks in the press about what happened there. And there was a remarkable line in one of the stories saying that Biden was allowed to participate in the workshopping of that second statement. How is he not in charge of it? First of all, right? Like, in the order of talking about Jake Sullivan is involved in the process. But that just gives you a little glimpse into this idea of a collective presidency. Or at best Biden was a participant. So I think we need to know a lot of things about who was actually making those decisions. It might be different in terms of, you know, for each realm of the government, right? Maybe the national security questions were dealt with by one person, then, you know, the foreign policy things by another. I don't know. I mean, we'll see. And then domestic policy, which doesn't even really exist in this country. It's all natural security, like, who runs everything. Right. Right. Who's doing that? Yeah. Oh, that was only the first thing in the list, right? No, you just got, you know, it's so funny as you say this and I won't interrupt you anymore, but I just can't. I mean, it's like crazy. You're going through this stuff. This just happened this summer. Yeah. And I was there. I mean, I know a lot of the people. I feel like I'm not that informed, but maybe more informed than average because it's my job. I kind of forgot about all this stuff. Like so much stuff is happened. It's like it's amazing. Yeah. What we have allowed to sort of pass bias without demanding answers. I mean, I remember being in Russia in the late 90s, there were multiple episodes that you might classify as quasi-coos. Yes. Right. There were there was an episode where people tried to arrest Yeltsin's bodyguard, Alexander Karsha Kof, and it kind of turned out the other way in the end. And, but there was intense reporting about this by the supposedly unfree Russian press at the time. And then there was also the whole question of why was Putin brought in? What did he do when he immediately kind of used to clamp down on the investigation of Yeltsin that was done by the general prosecutor at the time? I mean, that's all in the way. So what I'm trying to say is even in the third world country, we got more information about stuff that was going on than we got last year in the United States of America, where we had a gigantic press corps sitting in Washington, supposedly covering all this stuff. It blows my mind. I mean, you've done this your whole life. So you know and you grew up in it. So you you must still know people in that gigantic press corps. A few, but you know, the ones that I'm still in touch with mostly have been kind of squeezed out. You know, there are people who did try to get to the bottom of what happened. I mean, Saicharsh did a story about the mechanics of how it got to be went from Biden to Kamala. And, you know, that story came out on sub-stack, but it wasn't picked up anywhere. And that's kind of the way the media works. And that also broke the story that the United States, NATO, the Biden administration, was behind the sabotage of Nord Stream. Right. And I should guess pipeline to Western Europe, to Germany. And that I mean, that's on the list too obviously. But that's I mean, I think we can say that's true. And I mean, why isn't Saicharsh getting the culture for that? Why, you know, he was immediately disguised as been a hero on the left for my entire life. Before I was born, he was a hero on the left. And all of a sudden everyone's like, shut up, Putin, Apologist. Oh, I know. I know. I mean, I'm sorry. I'm, you know, all this is just, ah, trust me insane. It's just me insane. It's not only are there almost no good reporters left, the few good reporters left are like attacked all the time. Yeah, now they've all been kicked to the. trust me insane. It's not only are there almost no good reporters left, the few good reporters left are like attacked all the time. Yeah, they know they've all been kicked to the curb. It's I think it's very notable that a lot of the high profile investigative reporters just can't even publish in the United States. You know, and you know, look at somebody like Jeff Girth, who writes, who made a point of kind of keeping ties to traditional media and not burning bridges and doing all that stuff and worked as is bought off to get this 24,000 word piece about Russiagate into the Columbia journalism review. And it should have landed hard. It should have landed like a Mike Tyson upper cut, you know, and it people just ignored it. So even when they don't kick you out of the club, they just they ignore the hard. And then Jeff Girth for people who were, you know, under 40 was definitely one of the most famous investigative reporters in the world and feared. Yeah, New York Times front page first. Yeah, the deal guy for many, many years. He was the bulldog going after the Clinton administration on everything, right? So I mean, when he did a story, it mattered. It was on the desk of every senator in the country. Of course, you know, and that that's what's so interesting about this period is that there there is none of that. The stuff that lands on the desks of people in the relevant committees in Washington is PR. There's no reporting there for the most part. Maybe that will change now. I don't know, but you know, I doubt it. People read your stuff. I happen to know. So that would be great to they do. Yeah. So, um, okay. But Nord Stream, don't forget the documents on the stream. Let's go to Nord Stream. I'm going to stop interrupting Nord Stream. What do we know? I mean, I mean, we know that there's five or six shifting official explanations of what happened. They eventually settled on this kind of labyrinthine the story about a rogue Ukrainian operation that apparently without our input when went into this. Yeah, I don't believe it. I mean, it's laughable to think that that's true. And so, you know, but that's the kind of Nord Stream is just one. It's like looking up at the stars in the sky. That's just one of them. And that's a huge story. I mean, think about it. That could have started a German economy. It will destroy the EU ultimately when people wake up from their dream state. It will destroy NATO because it was an attack by one NATO power on a NATO battle. Another NATO member was attacked by the United States on Germany. So and it wrecked the German economy. Absolutely. It's stranded strain in the incoming relations and it's just it could have resulted in, you know, an immediate nuclear escalation. I mean, there's so many different things that it was a massive ecological disaster. It's a deep water horizon level environmental event. Greatest man made a mission of carbon dioxide in history. Right. And it's a tiny footnote to the insane lunacies that happened during this period. I'm sorry, but it is. Like Nord Stream is if you're making a list of the 10 weirdest things that happened in the last eight years, it's probably at the bottom, I would think. I mean, I mean, don't you think? I mean, I think that's right. I just, you know, I like Western Europe. I think it's important to have a thriving Western Europe. I don't think they're a rival. I think they're a complimentary region to the United States. And to see it destroyed intentionally by the Biden administration. Well, that's just a wreck Western Europe. Like why would you do that? And I'm fixated on it. But you're right. So what are the others? So COVID? I mean, there are so many different areas where they're going to have to investigate, reinvestigate that. We just went through a period where, you know, there was sort of mass stone walling of Congress when it was trying to investigate what happened with COVID. You know, people, there were key people like Peter Dazzack from the EcoHealth Alliance who just didn't answer subpoenas, right? And so we're going to hit there are documents that we know exist that we're going to get now. You know, with FBI communications between the Bureau and a lot of these scientists, you know, dating back 10 years. And it's going to tell a very crazy story. I mean, a really interesting story. There's a reason why Fauci's pardon is backdated to 2014 because that's the time period that they're going to be have to start looking, which is, you know, when did we start defying the ban on gain of function research? We clearly did. I think that's I think that's pretty established at this point. Why were we doing it? What connection did that have to the Wuhan thing? What kind of advanced notice did we get? What kind of lies were told about it? Who were responsible for those lies? What information did we get about the inefficacy of the vaccine? And how did that connect to statements by the CDC and the White House? This also connects to the censorship issue in a major way because there was also a sort of massive effort to control public the public conversation about this that went through the health agencies. So we know they're looking at that. And that's another executive order, by the way, the free speech order directs them, the Department of Justice, that come up with a comprehensive review of all the censorship stuff. So we're going to find out about that. But I just think COVID is a gigantic rat's nest of stuff. And, you know, it's going to be like a Turkish shoot. Every direction they look, they're going to find something revelatory. The question is, will that information reach the public? Because there is the intermediaries, the media. So like congressional investigators, executive branch agencies like DOJ, you know, they're constantly inspectors general are always releasing reports. And long like no one reads them because nobody picks them up in the media. Do we have enough interested reporters to like disseminate what they find? I think we do because I think that what we think of as the media is dead. They no longer really matter. The media that matters now are people like you and Joe Rogan and other, there's podcasters out there that there's a gigantic thriving independent media culture that turn the last election clearly. It was also abundantly clear that the old media no longer had any ability to control the narrative about anything. They're totally discredited. So I think this stuff is going to come out and because it's going to be so explosive, it's going to sort of solidify and heighten the prestige of all this new media. I think we're probably going to see whole institutions that are going to be built around. I agree. These disclosures, we're going to have new newspapers, new TV stations. So I normally save this for the end, but I'm feeling so enthusiastic. I'm going to do it down in case people don't get to the end. Where do people find you? How do they support you if you've made it this far in this conversation? You're like, this guy's unbelievable. I'm sorry. She famously promote for just no, I'm at racket.news on sub stack where a lot of these news sites are. For those who didn't grow up playing squash, how are you spelling racket? RACKET.news. Right. So racket. Not squash racket. Not squash racket. Like racket. Like that's a racket. Right. Which this is. Yes. It turned out to be aptly named. So nice. But yeah, no, I'm feeling very optimistic now. I think there's still some holes in this new media landscape. We don't have the huge institutions that have reporters who have beats, which I think is crucial. Right. Because you need to have people who develop sources in one small area. Right. But you saw that with Julie Kelly on January 6, Julie Kelly. I don't know what she did before. She's purely kind of a creation of the internet. Well, she's a self creation, but she, her medium was the internet and ex specifically. And she's got mad about January 6 and just roll onlessly focused on that. I'm sure she's other opinions, but she only did that. And I mean, man, this one woman in her thing, she's my age is like unearthed all this information that was like, no, no one else got it, except her because she was just so focused on this thing. And then it's great. It's incredible. And it's that's exactly how the press is supposed to function. They're not supposed to be credentialed. Like it's not supposed to be a thing where, you know, somebody confers a title. You are the official media. No, the citizen, that's part of our job is to be the press. Right. Like that's where the first amendment was designed for exactly for that to happen. And there were there was lots of incredible reporting that was done by either individuals or small indicator, you know, organizations like the US right to know, they filed hundreds of FOIA requests on fauci and gain a function and everything. And they really started the ball rolling on that whole side of that investigation. It's, you know, it's a relatively small site. And they had good, good young reporters there were hungry. And that's how this thing works, you know, amazing, right? Amazing. It's exciting. It's so exciting. And it's also true that there are increasingly people making like a legit living in my pocketing rich, but like, pay in the bills doing this job. Right. And it's important. And that's also how it's supposed to work. I mean, I remember hearing a story about I have stone. When I was starting on sub sub stack, I was calling around to some of of the old timers and saying, like, is this a good idea for me to tap out of mainstream media? And they told me a story that they said, you know, I have stone cranked out a newsletter for those people who don't know. He was a busy stone. Is he stone? He was a, you know, one of the original and independent investigative journalists. He worked out of his house. He put out this little newsletter. The I have stone weekly. It was great reporting. Independent didn't have to answer to editors who told them to shape things one way or the other. And he made a nice living, got himself a nice little house. And that was enough. Right. And he had an impact. And you can do that. No, the Internet makes it easier. Actually, it's amazing. In America, we do things a little differently. And we always have. But the British said, Hey, we're going to tax your favorite morning beverage. The revolutionary son, celebrity said, no, and they poured the entire shipment of tea into Boston Harbor and created a new country, a country based on personal choice and freedom. Well, 251 years later, it is time to throw something else overboard. Your overpriced big wireless contract, you don't need it. Do you need to pay $100 a month just to get a free phone? I don't think so. The cell phone company we use pure talk says no to all of this inflated prices, the BS, the contracts you can't understand. And instead gives you service that you need that you actually need with pure talking super straightforward. You get unlimited talk, taxed 25 gigs of data, mobile hotspot at a fraction of the price. And with a qualifying plan of just $45 a month, they'll throw a free Samsung Galaxy your way. So you get everything and you know exactly what it is. It's not designed to deceive you. We strongly recommend it. Pure talk provides the same coverage as the other guys. It's just a lot more affordable and a lot more straightforward. You can find it for yourself. Visit puretalk.com slash talker. Make the switch today pure talk America's wireless company. You wonder again, I'm delaying you in your narrative once more. No, it's with apologies. But you wonder even just the four topics you've mentioned so far are so big that if we got the truth or some higher percentage of the truth about those things, you wonder about the social effect. So one of the things the sensors always say is they're doing this or preventing you from knowing certain things to preserve societal stability. Yeah, trust and institutions, exactly trust and institutions. So I mean, that's already gone away, but it will evaporate completely the more we know. Don't you think? Yes. Yes, but it'll be like, I mean, I hopefully it'll be like the church committee hearings where like we just have to accept people are going to have their minds blown by discoveries, revelations. For instance, it's already starting in the news media. We're starting to get stories from journalists who were told they had to suppress. I saw certain angles right. You know, there was a, you know, political story about some people who were told to stay away from the the Hunter Biden laptop story to political reporters having left political admitted that political, which is supposed to be covering Washington told them, no, we're not we're not doing that. Right. Exactly. And you know, my first question is, what didn't you say that when it happened? But I guess people have jobs, right? So that's, that's a thing, but there are going to be a lot more of those. I mean, they're already kind of whispers going around. But people are going to learn that institutions they believed in their whole lives were fraudulent that they lied to them about important things. And they're, it's going to be difficult at first, especially since there are not solid new institutions in place to replace them. Yes. You know, it's one thing if you're taking down the CIA in the 70s and there's a supposedly reformed CIA there, right? This is different. The media is going to have to rebuild itself from the ground up. I think it's already doing great, but it doesn't have that look for a lot of people. Right? It doesn't looks very different. Yeah. And so, you know, it's going to be as you, yeah, I think it's a good point. It's a transitional period for people. I guess look, if you want trust institutions and I definitely do, I do. I grew up trusting institutions. I don't now. That's their fault not mine. I think your country doesn't work. If nobody trusts any of the institutions, right? It just doesn't. So we want that. The only way to that is through transparency, honesty. So I get all that and I'm for it vehemently. I guess what I'm saying is the people who've been administering the system and benefiting from it are completely freaked out. Right? It's rather trying to stop Tulsi. But I wonder if they get threatened enough if they don't become like just flat out dangerous to everybody else. Like the only way to stop disclosure at this point would be with like a catastrophe that's so all encompassing 911 COVID that it just everything shuts down. All trends in progress stop. Yeah. And I just feel like there's a lot at stake for these people. If you're, you know, John Brennan or Jim Clapper and you're like a criminal or Mike Pompeo, you're a criminal. That's my opinion. But I think they're obviously criminals. You've got a lot to lose. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. And people in the intelligence agencies, whose names are not known to the public, they're about to be exactly. And, you know, that we don't know what that's going to result in what impact that's going to have. Well, so this was my thinking about, you know, the period between the election and the inauguration this week. I think that's one of the reasons that Tony Blinken was pushing so hard for a real war trying to kill Putin, for example, which the body administration did, they tried to kill Putin. Really? Yes. Yes. They did. Wow. Which is insane. If you're like, okay, so who takes over Russia? Right. And what happens to nuclear arsenal in a country that's like so complex outsiders came in understand. I mean, you live there. You know, yeah, that's demented that you would even think of something like that. Absolutely. So why were they? Because chaos is a screen that protects them. I mean, I don't know this. That's just like watching what they're doing. I'm like, why would they be doing that part of it is because like it's like when you're taking off for the roof or the embassy and Saigon, you burn all the papers, right? Absolutely. They can't because they're digital. So maybe you need like a war to hide your tracks or to keep the public's attention. That's what I mean elsewhere. Right. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. I had the same fears and that was part of my thinking when they started, you know, approving the firing of American missiles, inter Russian territory and British missiles and French missiles. I'm like, why would you do like what possible reason would there be to do this? You're not really going to make any military gains by doing this. So it's you're doing it either to provoke the other side or to create a headline. The headline, I don't think it gets you anything. No. So what were they doing? And you know, if you're if that's you're saying that they were fiddling with regime change in the interim. Yes. Yeah. I think that was a fear that a lot of people had. I didn't think that frankly that Trump would become president. I thought I, you know, for a variety of different reasons. I don't I don't know exactly what could have happened to stop that. But I was hard for me to accept that it did happen. I was sitting at six feet away and I just thought, wow, I can't believe this is actually happened. Right. Yeah. Up until the second he said the oath, I was like, man, you know, I mean, I you just get superstitious or paranoid or whatever it is having seen all this stuff. And I was embarrassed to have those. I was like, wow, I'm becoming crazy. Yeah. But it's not totally crazy when you see the pattern. So, but I guess my point of make is it's like we're not the process has not unfolded fully yet. So, like, there's still a lot that we don't know disclosures as you've said. Like imminent and that sets up an incentive for the people being exposed to do something really crazy. It does. But I think the moment has passed good for for the real it that like there was a moment where they could have installed, you know, a European style regime to go to stop misinformation. This is this is the new trend. Right. Remember the the hurricanes happened and immediately FEMA is talking about setting up an anti misinformation center. Right. It just happened in California. I think crazy. Right. I mean, you know, the fact that Gavin Newsom had time to try to come up with a state bureau for protecting my reputation. But but they could really have done that. They could have basically put a net over everything with. I mean, that that's the thing that's scary about the European situation is is they already have that massive infrastructure in place to completely control the flow of information and what people see, what people don't see, that they can punish people who step out of line. And we were, you know, this far away from being part of something like that. And if they were going to do that, if they had done that, and I think there there was probably some thinking that that would have been accomplished by 2024. If you go back and look at some of the European unions papers on the subject, they were anticipating that we were going to be signatories to certain agreements, like the code of practice on disinformation, that we would have our own version by now. If they had done that, then none of this would be possible. You know, all these independent outlets, they could scream to high heavens, but no one would see it. It would be like, you know, it's totally right. Right. I mean, you know this because you when you were doing shows about COVID, well, now we can look behind the scenes and see that the White House was demanding that Facebook dial it down. They turned it down to 50%. I mean, that's in print. What did you think when you saw that, by the way, when the totally ignored it, I ignore all coverage that in any way pertains to me. I don't want to become self-conscious. So I didn't spend, you know, one second thinking, but I've had a couple other things and one other thing we took over in the last year that was like so shocking. I never thought about it again. Because you just don't have no shirt. You've been through this. I mean, you were speaking I'm mistreated. I'm not going to bring it up, but you were identified as disobedient and I mean, they turned, end you. I watched it. Yeah, you shrug it off for whatever, but you shrug it off. But from my perspective, it's always you see things clearly when you look at someone else's life. Sure. Absolutely. I didn't even know you at the time. I was like, why don't you try to try to kill this guy? Right. Well, they were. And that's my interpretation of it anyway. But you can't brood on it. No, but the fact that the mechanics, they were trying to install the mechanisms by which, oh, yeah, all this stuff would have been locked down. And we saw during the COVID period how how effective it was. Yes. I mean, look, the new head of the NIH, you know, Jay Bottacharya, mostly didn't hear about his research. I mean, this is the guy who can you believe, Tim Potatyra who I love, not thoroughly decent man, by the way, addition to being right on the science, but he's a decent guy. He's like the sweetest guy in the world. Yeah. No, absolutely. He's ahead of NIH. Yeah. I know. He's kind of amazing. Yeah. He went, he goes from being censored to being the head of NIH. It's an amazing transition. But the thing that's so extraordinary about it is America would have had a completely different idea about lockdowns if they had understood how infectious the disease was, how fruitless it was to try to physically prevent people from, you know, getting infected and how unlikely that was to succeed and how, you know, compared to all the other negatives that could have happened from keeping people at home and everything like that. Like they wouldn't have made that decision going forward, but they were able to effectively suppress that point of view, which is really scary. Right. I mean, there was real research out there and most people didn't see it. I didn't see it until a year and a half later. No, I know. Right. No. So, and that's that's what could happen. That's what could have happened with all this stuff. So, but I know that you without getting too specific, but you're, you know, you're in touch with doctors like on a personal level, like you know, doctors. Just practicing, you know, clinical physicians, right? They know if the doctor. Okay, I didn't know if you wanted to say that. Yeah, you're married to a doctor. So, did they know like they, it was kept from them too? Like they didn't. Yeah, I mean, average like emergency room physician was like aware that a lot of COVID propaganda was fake. Well, yeah, I mean, I know some ER doctors as well. And they had to go looking for information and it was very hard to find. And you know, to this day, you go on Google and you go looking for things. You're not likely to find the sort of counter narrative thing easily. And I think for a lot of doctors during that period, it was frustrating because even peer-reviewed research was not always easy to find for them. So, yeah, during that period, it affected the whole question of like experts who talked to the press. Like they weren't always informed about what was going on or about different studies that had been done. And yeah, we had a completely different idea about the, about the pandemic than maybe we should have. But the point being is not so much that that was destructive in itself. Though I think it was, but that it was a proof of concept of something that that was to come, you know, do you think that as we unearthed more about COVID that the biggest question of all which was what was the point of that clear was a point? I mean, if every part of the society was coordinated and aimed toward the same goal, which was increasing the fear, preserving the lies about its origin, hiding a lot of stuff and like telling you and pushing toward the vaccine. So like, and it was utterly coordinated. If anything was coordinated, that was from the churches to the schools, to the media, everything, everyone's in the same age, like why? I don't know. I mean, that's that's what we have to, that's why these documents will be so fast and anything to get. We'll ever get to the, we'll ever be able to say with some certainty or confidence like this is why they did that. We may not know some of the higher level thinking about things. I mean, you're probably not going to get a document that says, look, it's really important that we do this because if we really stress masking, then we'll have established the precedent of that visible symbols of conformity are, you know, positive goal for an authoritarian regime. I mean, they're not going to have that on paper anywhere, right? Yes. But there, you know, there might be emails back and forth about how we get people to follow instructions about how we manage the problem of academic freedom, right? They're probably going to be emails back and forth saying we have to change America's thinking about this and get them to start thinking more in the direction of trusting authority, right? There's probably going to be some stuff about that because we've already seen that in, you know, FOIA disclosures with some, you know, some of these anti disinformation groups and that sort of thing. So I imagine there's, there's going to be some stuff with the White House, the CDC, the NIH, they're, there might be some things like that in there. But the higher level is sort of broader conspiratorial questions. I don't know what we're going to get, but I'm fascinated to find out. Me too. What I tell you about an amazing documentary series from our friend Sean Stone called all the president's men, the conspiracy against Trump. It is a series of interviews with people at the very heart of the first Trump term, many of whom are close to the heart of the second Trump term. This is their stories about what permanent Washington tried to do to them, in many cases, and then to prison, for the crime of supporting Donald Trump. Their words have never been more relevant than they are now, Steve Bannon and Cash Patel. I'm in there even. All the president's men, the conspiracy against Trump and you will find it only on TC and Tucker Carlson dot com highly recommended. So okay, so oh, COVID next. Okay, uh, rush it get rush it. Uh, and you know, the sort of related phenomenon of fake news, intelligence leaks, design to destroy careers, which bleeds into kind of law fair, right? But rush a gate specifically, uh, that's a big story that that's a place where I think that's going to be the easiest hit for investigators because the dot we know where the documents are. In some cases, we even have them already. We just, they're redacted. Um, so we get to look under the reductions now. Why did they start the original investigation? What was the, what was the impetus for the July 31st opening in 2016 of crossfire hurricane? You know, there's some conflicting stories in the past. Did it really come from Britain? Did John Brennan really advise the CIA to look into it? Or was it something else? Uh, why did the FBI open an investigation into Trump specifically after he had taken office in May of 2017? It's just an extraordinary thing. Thinking of, you know, back. quickly after he had taken office in May of 2017, it's just an extraordinary thing. Thinking back to that time, we don't remember it, but the FBI opened a probe into the sitting president of the United States to ask the question of whether he was working for a foreign power at that time and what evidence could they have possibly had for that, apart from the fact that he fired Jim Comey, if there's nothing under those reductions more than that, then that itself is an extraordinary scandal just by itself. So the predicate for all of this, I think, maybe even earlier, but to my knowledge, laid in the summer of 16 with the hacking of the DNC, and the emails from the DNC. And the FBI never investigated it, never investigated the actual, the physical removal of this data from their servers instead of a company called CrowdStrike, which works for the Democratic Party did. And then exactly at that moment, or right around that moment, a DNC staffer was killed in Washington, D.C. in an apparent robbery in which nothing was taken from him that I happen to know for a fact, the MPD, the Metropolitan Department thought was like bizarre, and they kind of didn't believe it. A Fox News host went on air and asked questions about this killing. Why wouldn't you? And the parents of the man who was killed either a shooter, I think they sued, they certainly threatened to sue, and basically scared the crap out of everyone, so no one's ever asked a question about it since. They hired a private investigator who looked around, in that case, I remember, and there were some odd details there, the FBI ended up in possession of his laptop, and then the FBI wind up in, I mean, this is a local crime, right? Yeah. This was one of the first reasons I started to look at that case, because I got a call from somebody about that. And I don't know why that was the case, but it is the case. But and there were people at the DNC, one of whom I know who thought that he was murdered for political reasons at the DNC, a very high ranking person at the DNC told me that. And I probably should just say, but I, everyone can guess who it is, who's informed on this, but I don't want to betray confidence, but I'm not making this up. And I don't know what happened, but like as far as I know, not one person has looked into that in the media. No, and you know, even if it is just an unsolved murder of a type that they normally solve, the whole situation that that whole timeline was very strange. It doesn't really make sense. The, you know, the hacking of the DNC, the bringing in of crowd strike, the one that information was released online, they never really proved that case, but they immediately made inferences about it. And there was an incredibly sophisticated kind of public campaign to create this narrative that, you know, upon closer examination in terms of not to be true. So we got to go back and find out what did exactly happen there. Why did they, why did they order this crossfire hurricane? Why were they sending informants in after Trump or people in his orbit? And we know they did. Who were all those informants? Who'd be interesting? I have some suspicions. Yeah. Well, we know, we know who some of them were, right? But we don't know who all of them were. I mean, I did a story to the effect that the, the people in the House Intelligence Committee who were looking at this, you know, cash hotels, initial probe that they came up with a number that it was 26 different people who were being investigated in Trump's orbit orbit. No matter what happened, it's a huge story because it's it's a political espionage story. It's not unlike Watergate, really. Exactly. And they, and we've, we've laughed it off. Or the mainstream press has shrugged and snorted at the idea that this is a scandal that needs to be taken seriously. But it does. It absolutely does. Just because it's Donald Trump doesn't mean you can ignore the FBI conducting political investigations, Willie Nillion inventing predicates to look into people's campaigns and using Pfizer and all all kinds of other crazy, can I say crazy shit? Yeah. I mean, that stuff was all nuts. And we we need to find out exactly what happened with that. And that is one of the reasons I think that people are nervous about this weaponization of government probe because it's absolutely going to look in that direction. Yes. And, you know, that's one of the first things they're going to look at is who was behind that? You know, who cooked up the steel dossier? How is that released? And then there's the whole question of, you know, leading up to impeachment and the leaks that were done. A lot of them were kind of illegal on their face, right? Like you can't leak signals intelligence to newspapers and it was done repeatedly during that time. They did it to me. Right. Yeah. Exactly. The NSA read my text and leaked them to the New York Times twice. Right. Yeah. And they, you know, admitted it one time. But it was under FISA. So it was which is by the way, hilarious because the initially they were denying that it even happened, right? And then of course later it turns out there was more advantageous to leak the contents. So, but people had developed, they developed very short memories during this time period. Yes. They were not able to retain information. Among other things is because journalists got out of the habit of repeating the story that was one of the things that we were taught. You know, when I was taught growing up when you're doing a story, but anything, you have to recount all of the facts as if the reader has never encountered the story before. Story should stand alone. Yes. Exactly. You have to retell the whole thing so that they don't have to go looking for another story to find out what this means. Exactly. And one of the subtle little changes that happened to the media business in the last eight years is they stopped doing that. They would tell you that's fascinating. Right? They would tell you the thing that happened that day and they wouldn't tell you all this backstory that you needed to know to really understand what you were reading. And so yeah, I think we're going to have the opportunity now to see these things laid out in full and in hindsight. And that's hopefully going to be able to persuade people who didn't see it the first time. That's such a fascinating observation which I've never heard before thought of. But isn't it true? It's so true. And so everything's out of context. Right. Yeah. There's a certain element of dot connecting required in journalism. Like, why am I telling you this? Why does it matter? How does it connect to things that happen? Other things that happened or may happen? Like, even simple things like when, you know, the if Anthony Fauci comes out and says, well, masks are important because of X, well, you have to put in the timeline of what he originally said about that. Yes. Or, you know, Joe Biden saying, you know, we have to be a correct misinformation because they're killing people. And you got to point out that they were wrong about things themselves or that the Biden administration itself was de-amplified by some of these platforms accidentally, but they were right. But yeah, they just left out a lot of backstory. And we have to get back into the business of telling people the whole story from the beginning. Frasiting. Okay. So, rush again. Rush again. I mean, and that's one of the reasons why the the pardon of Adam Schiff is kind of interesting because he's a central figure of of both the J6 committee, but also the rush again story. And, you know, he was somebody who was giving interviews saying that preemptive pardons should never be given, but whatever. Yeah, rush again is a thing. Then there's the whole question of lawfare, right? And the effort to make sure that Biden faced no opposition at all in his reelection campaign. And this is here. I'm not just talking about, you know, Donald Trump and the lawsuit to prevent him from being on the ballot because of the Fourth Amendment and all that. This extends to even to groups like no labels or the Green Party or Dean Phillips or Marianne Williamson or Cornell West, there was an extraordinary calculated effort to prevent competition. No, yes, that's not necessarily illegal. Parties can do whatever they want internally, but it's still fascinating that there had to have been some kind of coordinated campaign. If there's any communication between the White House say and the groups that were suing, you know, no labels or RFK or, you know, issuing challenges, no labels went through this extraordinary incident where somebody created a dummy no label site. And it had a big picture of Donald Trump on it. So that we try to associate no labels with Trump. And there's a lawsuit going on about it right now. What was the real origin in that? Like, you know, who finance that whole thing? I mean, I think there are a lot of stories about little tiny dirty tricks that are that are going to be coming out of it. Well, it also like the main question was who makes these decisions. If the Democratic Party is running the United States, which they have for four years, I think we can say that, what does that mean? Who's running the Democratic Party? Right. I mean, I would imagine it's a coalition of, you know, elected to fix, you know, Chuck Schumer, big fundraisers, right? You know, Jeffrey Casenberg and I don't know, Obama, I guess, but who really is running this? Who's on the central committee? Right. And how has that done? How was the coordination managed with these sort of legal action committees that were mass filing suits about everything from, you know, the ballot access issue to there were Klan statutes that were filed against people. And did that have any connections to people who are actually in office? If it did, you know, then we have another corruption situation involved. But yeah, the larger question of who was managing all this stuff? Because it clearly wasn't Joe Biden. That's right. Right. It's a country who runs the country that don't in a democracy. We have right to know. Right. That, you know, our mutual friend Walter Kern talked about this saying that this was the first time that we had a president were that had its sign on his desk basically said the buck does not stop here. Right. We don't know where the buck stopped during this period. And so that that's a fascinating question. But the whole, you know, war gaming of the last election season, there are a lot of stories. People don't even remember this like new Hampshire held a primary, right? People went and they voted in the new Hampshire primary. And then the results were canceled and they held a second nominating event on a Saturday night months later where a bunch of officials got together and they just decided to allocate the delegates themselves. I'd never heard of that before just canceling an election and just sort of redoing it in a closed meeting. Like how does that happen and just turning this oil over to somebody else? I mean, I think it ended up mostly having the same result. But for some reason they held the second contest that it's just very strange, you know, why that happened. So that we got to get into, you know, then there's the whole question of the investigation of the Trump assassination incidents. We heard nothing about that. It was the most extraordinary news story that I've ever, I mean, apart from the disappearing president and the mysterious nomination and COVID, you know, presidential candidate and ex-president gets shot and the story is dead within like 48 hours. And all you're reading the news from the FBI, there are these comments saying that they don't have any motive evidence. We've done 100 interviews, but we don't know anything about why this happened or, you know, what was going on there. Do you believe that? I have a very hard time believing that there's nothing interesting in this kind of your classic 20 year old American kid with no social media presence whatsoever ever. Right. It's a very typical American story where Wendy just wake up and decide to die assassinating a presidential candidate for no reason. It's like who has like your first joint? Yeah. Yeah. And then this the second one, I mean, you know, the Ryan Ralph thing that that's not weird at all. Like I just flew into Florida last night. I don't think I could have gotten gotten my hands on, you know, a Chinese-made SKS semi automatic rifle without help. I mean, I don't know. That's being a little conspiratorial, but look, there are a lot of members of Congress. He was lifting you crane. What? And we know that our intelligence, he's working through the Ukrainian intelligence. He said, murdered all these people and tried to murder all these people, including some I know personally. And so that's it. Like that's the fact. And he, he was there with them. But this had nothing to do. And by the way, are those the only two attempts on Donald Trump's life? Do you think during this campaign season? I don't think so. So I don't know more about that. I don't know why we don't know more about that. Right. So, and I, I mean, you know, talk to the Trump people and Trump himself. And I, I'm being sincere. I really don't have a sense of what they think of all of that. I know that in public they haven't been anxious to talk about it at all. So I've talked to some of them. And, you know, I've heard a lot of anger about this that, you know, and I think this is, this is the impetus for these investigations. I think the probably the second attempt was the last straw for some of the people on his staff. And, and, you know, it's part of the reason why I think they're going to be very public about this. Can't come, it can come too soon. I really think and, and I will say, you know, whatever people watching think of Trump, I know for a dead certain fact that a lot of people who work for him really like him personally. So I think they are mad about it. They're, they're very mad about it. And, and, and then sorry, just to finish off the, the censorship thing, that is going to be a major investigation. There's, there's at least two that I know of that are already underway. You know, the government affair, the, you know, Rand Paul's Committee, the government oversight committee in the Senate. They, they really want to do a big thing, like a government files type of thing where it would be like the Twitter files, but for the whole federal government basically. And I think there are so many different wings of the government that were involved in what we got to see in the Twitter files, which, you know, to follow the, the example of what I just said, I have to repeat what this is. When Elon Musk bought Twitter, he opened up Twitter, Twitter's internal correspondence. And we got to see that there was this big bureaucracy with government pressuring platforms like Twitter and Facebook to censor content. But we only got to see a little bit of it. And I think what's going to come out is, you know, how extensive it really was. What agencies were really involved in it, you know, how many people were, were committed to that effort. What also were we negotiating with the European Union to be part of the digital services act. What's the state department doing that? You know, I think so there's going to be a big, can you just describe the digital services act? The digital services act is like the, it's like the wet dream of every sensor in the world, right? Basically, it mandates that every internet platform abide by the recommendations of these people called trusted flaggers who are basically licensed content reviewers who look on things on social media. And if they see a narrative that they don't like, they will elevate it to the platform. If the platform does not abide by the recommendations, they get crippling enormous fines. And this is one of the reasons why there was a dispute between Elon Musk and Europe about whether or not he was following these rules closely enough. This just came into effect last year. But it's, it's an extremely effective way to regulate speech because it doesn't require the government to actually do it. It's the private platform that actually commits, of course, the censorship and this third party methodology, specifically by the way, what, what Donald Trump referenced in his free speech executive order, we don't want that to happen. We're going to not allow that. They already have the full blown death star version in Europe of that, right? And so the investigation here in the United States is going to basically uncover how far along were we into developing the same kind of thing. The Twitter file suggests that we were already doing it informally and illegally, probably. But we want to find out exactly what we have snopes and all the other fact checkers. Yes. All the fact checking organizations, right? You know, sometimes that was done informally by inference or was done through NGOs that made recommendations. But I think the really dangerous stuff is when you had state department agencies like the Global Engagement Center or the FBI's foreign influence task force making direct recommendations to these platforms or the White House and your case. We're going to find out all of these communications, not just little pieces of them. What about the US government, the Intel agencies controlled Wikipedia, which basically is our collective memory at this point. It's elevated by Google. It's the top of every search. It is the only history most people will ever read and it's controlled by the US government to disappear in communion facts. Yeah. I mean, Wikipedia has a very advanced system for regulating what gets into Wikipedia pages. If it's not a certain kind of source, it doesn't get on there. There was a bizarre incident last year where the real clear politics, you know, polling average, which is a tool that reporters have been using for almost two decades, they kind of left it off their page of polling average sites because they didn't like the page, I guess. I don't know. But yeah, I think we have to get some clarity about what happened there. Obviously the former head of Wikipedia is now a senior position in NPR. The deputy or the COO government media job to another. Yeah, exactly. And the COO of NPR is the former head of this thing called the Aspen Commission on Information Disorder, which is one of the groups that we investigated in the Twitter files, was sort of heavily into this whole content moderation question. So the merging of state media platforms and regulation of sourcing and all that stuff, that's probably going to come out too. Kind of weird the head of the Aspen's to wrote the biography of Elon Musk, isn't it? Right. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. The Walter Pinkus, right? Isaac. Sorry. Walter Pinkus was the CIA reporter at the Washington. Can you cut that aside? No, no, no, it's just funny. Yeah. Remember Walter Pinkus. Yeah. Walter Aspen. Yeah. Yeah. No, no, it is weird. The Aspen Institute, they played a very strange role in the whole censorship story. But yeah. So what happens to the, you said the media as constituted is dead, but I mean, like the Episcopal church, like they have enormous like shells left, you know what it'd be like the churches died, but they have great churches, right? Buildings. What happens to like the Washington Post and NBC News that still is bureaus and CNN and like what what happens to these things? They're going to struggle, I think, to get audience back. You already see that the strategy of some of them is to try to pander to the audiences that they betrayed previously. Yeah. There was a funny episode over last weekend where NBC and Saturday Night Live, you know, they finally did a joke picking on Rachel Maddow. It wasn't particularly funny, but it was a signal that, okay, we're going to suck up to this group now, right? As opposed to the other one, which is so loathsome, right? And that, but my story is Rachel Maddow is not the core, whatever you think of Rachel Maddow. She just like advertises herself as Rachel Maddow, you know, one person's opinions. That's funny. It sounded like her for a second there. Yeah. Well, I know or not. I've never been mad at her. I couldn't disagree more. I know sure she's attacked me a lot. I wouldn't know, but I'm not mad at Rachel Maddow. I'm I'm mad at Ken Delaney and like, of course, you know what I mean? People who pose as reporters who are actually just mouthpieces for the Intel world. Of course. And I'm my only point is that just by, you know, changing their direction of their BS, they're not going to win back audience, right? People, you know, and this is something that I've noticed since I've been in the business, people immediately underestimate audiences. They think that they're much stupider than they really are. I remember when I covered Wall Street, I was constantly told that you can't do these big stories on credit default swaps and all these other things because audiences don't want to hear about it. They'll they'll turn the page, but it's not true. People have a great hunger to find out things and they have a much stronger ability to understand things than most many people imagine. And so when they do these sort of transparent exercises and lying and PR and political propaganda and they think that people won't notice, it makes it worse. The numbers are going to go down rather than up when they start totally. Well, it's just interesting. I actually think it's more sinister even than you described. So the two topics after, you know, 30 years in the in television, the two topics that they like never wanted to do that was want to do stuff about trainees or race or you know, whatever, all that stuff. But they never want to do economics or foreign policy ever. Right. And their view was, or their their stated view was the audience doesn't care. And then I get fired and start doing foreign policy stuff and it gets crazy numbers. And I only do it purely because I'm interested. That's it. I was always interested. I'm also interested in economics, not an expert, but I think it matters. That's that's why I'm interested. Right. You do a story like that. You blow out of the water, all the path that they do. It turns out there's a deep reservoir of interest among viewers and readers for these stories. And I'm starting to think maybe the people who run the networks where I worked, they just didn't want to address that stuff because there was a consensus on it that they agreed with and that they didn't want to challenge. Absolutely. You think so? Oh, I 100% I think that I think that especially when you're talking about you know, interventionist military policy, whether or not they've been effective. Try pitching stories to one of the big newspapers about maybe some kind of downside to an invasion or an objectation or the expansion of 1000 military bases in the Middle East or whatever it is. Drone warfare. You're going to have a hard time selling that one, right? But they did it in the slightest way. I mean, I went right over my head for decades. They did it, not by saying, you know, we just don't agree. We have one perspective on that and we're going to stick with it. That's a straightforward way to explain it, which I can digest. They instead said, no, the audience just doesn't care and you're basically putting the business at risk by covering things that people don't understand. So get back to Natalie Holloway or whatever the Xatrama of the moment was. You know, and I believe that I believed it. I mean, I just assume people just aren't interested. I guess I internalized that our audience's dumb position, which they had for the whole time I worked there. Yeah. And it's it's worse than TV than it is in print, but but it shouldn't be, right? And but I got the same thing. I mean, not not so much at Rolling Stone, I remember we did one story where our plan was to do one story on what caused the financial crisis. And we got such an overwhelming response because it wasn't anywhere. People could not read anywhere. What happened to the economy in 2008? There was not a rational explanation that people could read. And so you did big, I guess numbers are not applicable to a magazine, but that got, I mean, your stories on that were widely read because you're one of the only people doing it. Right. But it wasn't so much what I was doing. It was just it was just the fact of, you know, how does this work? Who was really profiting by it? What happened to the people who bought these homes, etc, etc? Just basic questions. And people wanted to know. And as you discover, they want to know other things. Where are they spending the money that the nice end of every year that goes to that Pentagon? It's right. Right. How is that? How is it disappear into a black hole? And it's not auditable. And that's okay. And I, you know, it's funny, I remember getting back in the summer late August of 2001 from Maine, been in Maine. And, you know, on just on vacation going back to work. And our I was at CNN. And we were wall to wall, literally wall to wall on a story about a Congressman from Bakersfield, California, Kern County, California, Gary Condett. And the question was did he murders in turn, Sean relief eat? And then later, whatever in case anyone cares, turns out she was killed by in a legal alien from El Salvador called Ingemark, when decade he killed a couple other people, I think, whatever. That was destroyed. But at the time, we were fully immersed in this question of is this moderate Democrat from Bakersfield or murderer? And I mean, we did specials on it. It's all we did. And then that September that was interrupted by 9-11. And I remember thinking at the time, like 9-11 came out of nowhere, there was no kind of backstory. It just happened. It was like truly like the least expected thing that ever happened. Right. Right. And retrospect, I think, where are there things going on in the world? Long bigger trends that maybe we should, you know, as a news company, we should do in paying attention to, sure, prepare people for the, at least the idea. Where are there things going on in the world? Long bigger trends that maybe we should, you know, as a news company, we should have been paying attention to. Sure, prepare people for the, at least the idea that like, wow, something back could happen because there's a lot going on abroad. Yeah, I think if you had visited parts of the Middle East back then, you would have the coal bombing and then like the Saudis where we had bases and places that were clearly very provocative for no real reason. There's a lot of the Kenyan bombing. Yes, exactly. There was a lot going on and we just kind of ignored all of it. But we didn't just ignore it. We ignored it like this manic way like must cover Gary Kondit. And I'm not a conspiracy nutman, but you do sort of wonder like, what was that? Yeah, those were the good old days when the manias were things like the summer of the shark. Right? Remember that? I remember I think I participated in it. But then you get 9-11 like this one, you know, sort of beautiful fall morning and everything changes and it's like, I do think it's fair to ask even if there's no intent involved. Like, how did we like, what should we have done differently to at least give people the sense that there were highly organized, well-funded elements of brother that hated us. I just did not know that and most people didn't. Yeah. And it didn't. We do that. Honestly. And it came as a shock to a lot of people. Like, complete shock. Were you in the country when that happened? No, I was in Russia and... Well, at least you have that excuse, you know, living in other country. I lived in Washington, DC covering the news for sea. I mean, I hosted the show and CNN and I had no idea that like, that's a terrifying feeling right to be... You got to cover something that you have no back-backer under. Well, there was no covering it. There was just watching it. Right. Right. And there's never actually been any covering of it. No, it never really covered 9-11. Like, what was that? Yeah. Exactly. And what followed it. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Well, I mean, we did cover that. But like 9-11, like, how exactly did that happen? We have all these law enforcement intelligence agencies protecting us and they had no idea that there are, you know, dozens and dozens and dozens of, you know, the 19 hijackers, but then all the support people living in our country, training, getting money from some... We never really... What? Anyway, I don't know what I'm going off on that, but it's like, no one ever asked the basic questions. Right. Right. And, you know, there are a lot of people who didn't ask basic questions in the last eight years. You know? Yeah. Including me, I guess, because a lot of the things you just said were like, yeah, whatever happened to that. Well, it becomes overwhelming after a while. That's right. I mean, you know, the 50th time, they tell you that democracy is going to end in 10 minutes. So, you know, you're going to die if you don't, you know, take this medicine or whatever it is or, you know, your kids are going to die. It emotionally it wears on people. And it becomes very difficult. I mean, I think this was a factor in... It was a factor in a lot of the corruption stories because the audiences were not... They were not going to be receptive to alternative versions of what they had just heard because it was such an emotionally-wrenching experience for them. So, it's going to take a while for people to digest a lot of these things. You know, I think it's happening slowly, but... But what's going to be interesting about this period is that there's going to be this avalanche of primary material that's going to come out. And I'm fast. I can't wait for you to hire more staff. You need to keep up with it all. Yeah, I probably probably that's the case. And it's going to be a fun time for journalists like me, but just as a citizen, I can't wait to read it, you know. So, guys, one last question of your reporting is marked by its command of detail, I would say. I mean, it is. I read it slowly. Yeah, but I've like a lot of detail, like a lot of detail. And so, you look at things I kind of like... You know, I'm not a detail guy. You are. What name one, like tiny detail that you are personally obsessed with and maybe mildly embarrassing embarrassed would make your obsessed with, but like, what's the one thing that you just... You want to know, like you've been wondering about? I mean, I think the thing that happened last year with that frenzied week in July with Biden and... You know, in the lying about the poll numbers and the phony, the clearly planted stories about Nancy Pelosi... Why did the poll numbers work? Oh, there were stories that Biden was ahead in the polls that came out as they were telling us that he had to drop out because the poll numbers were so dire. NPR did a story. Like, virtually... I believe it was a couple of days after the debate. I'll have to go back and look at this. But there were stories that he was doing fine in the polls. And of course, we later found out from Biden staffers that they said they never had... I'm sorry. That was about Kamala. They never had internal polling showing Kamala ahead. Yes. Even though there were scads of stories telling us the opposite, which is... But for me, the story that I just can't get past is what happened in that one week. And how did they manufacture that whole thing without anybody showing any kind of curiosity about it? Had the media been so completely paper trained by that moment that they... I guess so, right? But it's the same impulse that maintains discipline in Washington and in the media, which is commitment to party first. So that is the one thing... All the things I disagree with the Democratic Party and some of the Republican Party... I'm policy. I think that's okay, got it. But the one thing I really can't relate to is the loyalty to party. What is that? I never understood that. You know, like what you're going to agree with a bunch of people on everything that they do and you're going to support that. It's one thing for politicians to act that way, but I cannot understand it in a media person. I think that's a defining fact of our life. Is this commitment to party? Well, right now we have the situation where the only versions of things that you get are essentially party explanations. And that's why it's so interesting that there's this sort of intermediate podcast space where people are exploring things from all different directions and that's where all the people are going. I don't think it's a coincidence. In that last... I think what's going to happen is you're going to have new institutions that are built up around that that are that are just going to find new ways to... And you can't have as long as that last, you can't have authoritarian rule. Right. Oh yeah. And that was proven. I mean, look, the handful of podcasts that a lot of people chuckled about how to huge impact in the last election. And you know what? Shame on those media people who laughed at those podcasts because among other things they had lower numbers than a lot of those podcasts significantly lower. Yeah. Right. And you know, there's snobs about it. They say, well, that's, we have a better quality of audience. No, you just are not convincing. That's it. You know, actually, the much lower quality of audience. You know, your average Rogan listener is way smarter than your average Gape-ledoose viewer. Right. Sorry. Right. Yeah. And they're more willing and partly because they watch shows like Joe Rogan, which which ask them to entertain multiple points of view on things. All right. That's kind of the whole idea. You like, you'll see somebody. There are lots of people who go on the Rogan show that I disagree with. Me too. But I hear it. You know, and that's the whole point. Right. Is you get to hear different points of view. And that's been excluded from this other form of media. This kind of bifurcated red blue landscape, which doesn't work anymore and is in collapse. But I just think that this period now, it's going to be great for launching the this new media that's necessary because they're going to have all this material to work with. And because it's going to be all documents, people are going to trust it. Right. And the same way that they trusted the Twitter files. I didn't have anything to say about it. I just sort of put it out there. But all of these these independent organs are going to look at this these rooms of material. And they're going to discuss it and pass it around. And that's going to be how the public is educated, which is great. I love it. That's the best. Right. Man, you put me in such a better mood. Matt, thank you. No, thank you. Seriously. I mean, I think you would do this for free. I get that feeling. Absolutely. I love it. Thanks, Tucker. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a more what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.