Oh shit, I should have tweeted this. Well, you know what folks? This is gonna come out while I'm tweeting. I'm tweeting at the same time. So I'm right. The Joe Rogan experience podcast brought to you by the Fleshlight. If you go to jorogan.net and click on the link for the Fleshlight, shit, I can't do this. I can't type one thing and think, well... I can't type one thing. Yeah, I'll talk about it. So, Fleshlight is this thing you fuck. It's this big rubber sex toy for guys. And there's a whole bunch of different kinds that have different insides that feel different compared to the girls that like Jenna Hayes feels a different kind of. Yeah, really, really, yeah. 100% because there's other connoisseurs out there. Like wine guys who have like a really a good palette, like a little, a good, a good, a good dick palette. Like guys, you can tell the perfect textures the way a guy can tell. Well, the textures are completely different. Yeah, you can tell. If you go to fleshlight.com, you can actually see what the inside of each girl looks like. So, like, there's different grooves, there's different things in different girls. Like, you know, some girls look like they have huge fucking sis in their pussies, but it might feel good against your dick. You don't know. What are you talking about? Well, you get that's the cool fifth sis. Yeah, if you go there, there's one girl that's have like crazy bumps and like bubbles and waves and jagged things. So, they create a bunch of different vagina environments. Yeah, different. It's like, yeah, exactly. And you get a discount if you go to Joe Rogan's website. It's the Rogan and you get 15% off the number one sex toy for men, the flesh like dude, you're an awesome commercial guy. You should do commercials like permanently. That's all you should do all day long. Let's just do commercials. Well, I think it's really good. You're going to segue artists. We're also brought to you by on it.com. It's an NIT makers of Alpha Brain, the cognitive and answering supplement that I enjoy. And we also make Shroom Tech support, which is the quarter steps mushroom supplement for endurance training. If you like really into, if you do something really hard like a CrossFit class or jujitsu or something like that, that's for you. If you're if you're not into that kind of working out, you're probably not going to notice the difference. Brian has no use for this stuff. Now, I did not use this product, but I'm sure it's great. Do you use the Shroom Tech immune though? I use the more the new mood. That's what I've been grooving on as the new mood. I did the new one. I feel sick. And right now, I don't feel sick. I just feel like I need to chill out. And that's why I need the the new mood because that's more of like a, you know, like calm you down. Have some trip to me. You know, you like turkey dinner. You know, make that that makes you tired when you're done eating it. Well, that kind of has trip to fit in it. And it makes you kind of feel relaxed and then also makes you a little bit happier every day, I think. if you take take it every day, I don't really take it. I take Alpha Brain. But I don't take the other ones. I take it from Tech when I work out to take Alpha Brain. And I take the immune shit. Anyway, what all this stuff is, they're, they're new tropics. And this is my advice to you. If you don't know what we're talking about, don't buy anything. Please just Google new tropics. There's a lot of really interesting articles about the subject. And it's controversial, but I've been experimenting with them for years. And I enjoy them. And not just the ones that we sell, I've used, there was a football player. I think his name is Roman Askyd, pretty sure. And he has a company called Neuro1. And apparently he had dealt with some concussions and stuff. So he created his own formula like a new tropic formula to enhance the way his mind worked. And it was really interesting. And I enjoy that stuff. And I have no vested interest in whether you buy it or don't buy it. If you feel like you don't want to buy it or you feel like it's too expensive, I encourage people to steal the ingredients, copy it and make your own. Like buy, buy this stuff in bulk and make your own. And, you know, and the other thing is if you try and you don't like it, it's, you get a hundred percent money back. So we can't make it any easier. We can't make it any nicer. What's most important to me is that nobody feels ripped off. That nobody wants to get ready to go to buy you. Don't go to Wikipedia. Don't go to Wikipedia. It's blacked out. But fucking go to Yahoo. Go to Bing. Go to the other one. So, search engines that are not supporting the soap. All right. Against the soap movement. The soap movement. Scary. It's fucked, right? Yeah. I'll talk about that. Hamilton Morris is here. Listen, go to onad.com. O-N-N-I-T. And they're in the code name Rogan. Get 10% off. That's it, but just, all right, here we go. A man is here that I've been wanting to talk to for a long time. Good job. Rogan. Experience. Rogan podcast my night. All day. Hamilton Morris comes here with a video camera when the podcast in its most cluttered state possible. This room is a wreck. I look like I should be on hoarders in this fucking room. I got to clean this bitch out. This is ridiculous. Too much travel and man. Too much travel and, you know, you know, it is Hamilton Morris. Hello. What's up, buddy? Thanks for coming on. Thanks for having me. I enjoyed a lot of your stuff that I saw online, man, especially that for those who don't know, you write for, for vice, right, for vice.com. That's right. Vice magazine. For vice magazine. I think the first thing I ever saw you do, you were tripping somewhere in the jungle. I don't really remember what it was, but you, uh, you had taken some trip to hang out with some indigenous people. What did they give you? It was the Myruna Indians and they gave me a, well, they actually didn't give it to me. sort of a complicated trip to find them, but they traditionally use the venom of this frog called fila medusa bicolor that produces a venom that's rich in all these different psychoactive peptides and specifically contains this substance called dermorphin that's a super potent opioid, but they kind of, well, yeah, but it doesn't have any sort of like a classical opioid effect. Like it's not really a sedative and people claim that it gives them. everlasting energy. They're able to hunt for days. So that's sleep and to go days without eating and all sorts of supernatural feats. Hmm. Wow. You have a great voice. Why do I come in? Yeah. I use that very mysterious voice and it's very interesting. It should be really, you know cool shit. Yeah. If you know cool shit and you have a voice like that, yeah, dude. Amazing. All right. Yeah. Please. Sorry. So what is the effect? I would go days without requiring sleep and I'd be able to hunt all night for animals in the jungle with these Indians. Jesus. And so I was expecting more of a stimulant type effect but then it's chemical dermorphin. There's no real reason you should expect it to be a stimulant. It's an opioid. There used to be a theory of autism that was based on them detecting dermorphin in the urine of autistic children. Wow. they thought that there was some kind of bacterial organism in the intestine of these children that was naturally producing the dermorphin. And so they thought autism was this kind of opioid, mediated pathology. Like, yeah, in the same way that you're talking about endogenous DMT and how that can cause a psychedelic experience without ingesting a drug. This was the idea, was that there's an endogenous intestinal opioid bacteria that produces dermorphin. But it's never been demonstrated. Anyway, so I try to- It's never been demonstrated. So how did they come to this conclusion? Is that sound so fascinating? Yeah. It's amazing. Yeah. I never heard that theory before. Well, there's all kinds of psychoactive substances that have been detected in the urine of people with different sorts of mental illnesses. You know, there's five MEO DMT detected in the urine of schizophrenia and- Whoa. Yeah. That totally makes sense. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. I mean, take it. Well, it totally makes sense if you think about it. Because we all have bodies, like people's bodies go haywire. You know, things go wrong. I have vitiligos. I have spots on my hand where my pigment doesn't grow anymore. So it's like weird shit happens to bodies. Weird shit easily could happen to your bodies, your brain's ability to produce psychedelic chemicals. Can you imagine if every day was just tripping all day long? Like, you couldn't get out of tripping? Instead of looking frogs, you're licking this guy and paying him $20. Just to get off. What? I don't know what you're talking about. Look at your body, what's producing a drug? Like a frog. Oh. And the other thing you need is that way. You know? I don't think it's that way, Brian. His body's not producing a drug. He's ingesting his body's producing a drug internally. You silly boy. I know, but whatever he's secreted out of this. Who the fuck is secreting? The guy who- if you were producing this drug inside your body or secreting it. If you're urinating it. Yeah. If you're urinating it. And then you get a frog. How do they get it from- do they actually get 5 MeO from frogs? Can they do that? Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. That's real. It's some toads, right? Yeah. Yeah. Football variance. Yeah. And how do you do that? There's different techniques for doing an acinogized raised, beautiful, various. And he lives in Boston. His tagline might not show. Yeah. He has glands that you did. I just squirt it out. Yeah. Yeah. Collect it. Yeah. At least for two on the neck and two on the legs. And he would grab it by the scruff of its neck and then take a cat and show it the cat. And it's terrified of cats. And then that causes it to secrete the venom. And then he would pinch all of the glands onto a glass sheet and dry it. That's fucking wild. I tell you the secret's cat, Joe, in life. Everything seems cats. Do we think I've got feral cats? These cats make in drugs. Yeah. That's incredible. Yeah. So you just scrape it up and smoke it? Yeah, but it's not just by the MiODMT. There's also apparently some quantity of buffotinin and also a bunch of other things. That's why it's not really safe to eat it. Phew, phew, phew, phew. Damn. The things people were risk to get high. No, it's actually worth checking out. Really? Yes. I actually used to shop for it. And before in the podcast, I was doing a lot of research and buying them in mass quantities when I lived in Ohio, I think. Yeah. I mean, maybe invest in a few frogs and cultivate a relationship with that. I mean, is it illegal? Maybe illegal. 5M MiODMT was recently scheduled. So yeah, it used to be you could get 5MMO DMT on the internet, right? Absolutely. That's incredible. They just didn't know. I don't think it really poses that much of a risk in terms of, I doubt there's very many 5MMO DMT hospitalizations compared to even things like LSD. It's just such a rare thing in the last for such a short period of time. You could just make it like a frog kissing boot to get around the law. You know, just say, like don't say like this is too lick or too get the drug off of it. You know, if you want this drug and you want to kiss it. All right. I'm going to bring you to a doctor. I'm going to bring you to a doctor. I'm going to bring you to a doctor. And he's going to find out what the fuck is wrong with you. Too many hits. You went too deep in the mouth at home. Yeah, I went to deep. Well, you know what? When a guest like Hamilton Morris is here, I could see where you get a little carried away. He just wanted to perform on his level, right? No, I just wanted to get out of here. I was just going to play around to my stoner. I was playing around too much. You're not even a professional stoner. You're like a professional psychoactive expert. You're like one of those dudes who you could say, hey, man, what is it about that lotus flower? And you go, oh, well, the lotus flower. And you'll explain it perfectly. Yeah. How do you know so much about all this stuff? Well, I've studied it in school for years. I started out studying neuroscience. And where'd you go to school? The University of Chicago. So this was just something that was just always pulling at you. Like how the mind works in various chemicals. Um, yeah, not necessarily with the drug connection, but I was always interested in science and neuroscience. And then once you understand that area of it, it becomes even more interesting. And then also medicinal chemistry, pharmacology, it's all interrelated. And now how did you start putting together these videos online? Um, well, I left Chicago and moved to New York and a friend of a friend worked at Vice Magazine and told the editor that I had been. I was interested both academically and in terms of writing about all of these psychedelic drugs. And they wanted to do more informed drug related content for the magazine. So, um, so they asked me to start writing a monthly column. But this is, you know, vice used to have a totally different attitude towards drugs in terms of, uh, you know, did give someone like an ounce of mushrooms and put them in a hotel room and just record everything they did. What was happening? They weren't really interested in the science of it. Not that that's a bad thing. So they used to have that attitude? Or is it yet a used to have that attitude? And now they're more open minded to discussing the scientific aspects. So do you think the scientific aspects for the longest time were it? Was it like, I think it was like maybe Hunter S Thompson that maybe fucked a lot of people up because his thing was just sort of take them blast off and enjoy the ride of it. Yeah. You know, and that you were kind of a fool to try to quantify it and package it all together. Yeah. Sure. Yeah. Do you think that that kind of like set that kind of mindset sometimes? I mean, it's that it's a fun mindset when you talk about like, you know, eating some mushrooms, going to football game. I mean, some people who like look down upon that. Oh, yeah. But there's other people that, you know, that actually enjoy doing something like that. It's not the spiritual thing. It's not the full blown psychedelic connection that you can make. Yeah. But it's fun too. Right. Look down on that. No, I think anyway that anyone chooses to do it is perfectly fine as long as they benefit from it. They don't hurt, don't like stab people in the process or kill a dog or something. If it was legal, it would be great because then you would know like what everything was. That would be the best way to deal with it. The idea that you just buying stuff from people you don't know. It's so hard to cultivate a friendship. You know, you're trusting someone to sell you something they're not supposed to be selling you. You get into a tricky situation. We say don't pull the parts of the time. Yeah. Like LSD, or who knows, or it actually comes from with something like mushrooms and maybe your one degree of separation away from the source that's producing the material, but with LSD, it could be 20 degrees of separation. You don't even know what it is. You got to be bold as fuck to eat mushrooms in the wild. Because just to be like you're sure. Oh, I see. I mean, there's a few psychedelic mushrooms that look like really similar to things that are like super poised. Yeah, there are. Definitely. A bunch of the Galarina genus mushrooms look a lot like the slosobes and massively poisonous. Do you imagine how many people died from that? I don't know. That's terrifying, right? Yeah. Come on, camera guy. You're in this room, dude. You can't just observe. It's just too weird. How is seat, man? How is seat sit down with us? We got to include your camera guy. Otherwise, it doesn't feel organic. I feel stared at. This is Matt, everybody. Matt, the camera guy. He's here as well. Because Hamilton is doing something on isolation tanks. And we're going to check out the float lab tomorrow in Venice where crash. My friend Craig aka crash is the maginius putting together the baddest float tanks in the world. We're going to go check out his stuff and his crazy cellular influence device. When did you start first learning about the floatation tanks? Is this something that you knew for a while? Yeah. I mean, what gave you the idea to make this project? I mean, I've always found them interesting. I think they're pretty fascinating for anyone that studied the history of psychedelic drugs just because John Lillie used them in such interesting ways. And also at the very beginning of psychedelic research, there were always these attempts to try and isolate the experience from the environment in some way when they were trying to quantify the different effects of new drugs in the 60s. And because it's a class that's so much based on the environment, they wanted to try and figure out a way to remove subjects from the environment and test them in some kind of unbiased setting. And the two ways they had were sensory deprivation tanks in these Gonsfeld devices. Yeah. So you were talking about it earlier. You've only had one of those. Yeah. And it was quite a while ago. It sucks that it's not more readily available. I think if you could just get into it for a little bit, you know, if you get into like a regular thing, like even just once a week, it's great. Man, if you could find a place and has it. It's like a massage. I bet like I just recently got my first massage and I always kind of went shung it, shunted off just because it seemed weird to me. And I forgot my first one. Now I get it. You know, just nice relaxation. It's not that expensive. It's really good for you too. I think it's really good to have someone that being affectionate to you. Even if it's just, you know, even if it's just, you know, someone rubbing you with their fingers, like that's really, really intimate. Yeah. You know, we're pretending that it's not sexual because it's not touching your, your growing. Right. But when some big fat sweaty woman who really knows how to rub a neck, what she's getting in there with lotion and everything. Yeah. That lady's fucking tie one is what they're saying. You know, affection. They're giving you affection. They're rubbing your legs when someone's rubbing your feet. Yeah. And it might as well be blowing you when they're doing their heel into the, we're just little children, their little children to leave the genitals out of the picture. Because that's the person's doing their, being affectionate to you. You're paying them to be ultimately affectionate to you because, yeah, it works. The muscles and yet increases, you know, blood flow and yeah, it breaks up scar tissue. It's great therapeutically, but it's also great because it's affection. What if they like, like, finish that off with like, like rocking you in a chair where they held you for like 20 minutes at the end. And you were just like playing with your hair at the very end, like a baby or so. Yeah. That would work. The ad-roll, loneness is like that, you know. That's what you're going to do. Exert 10 dollars, they'll do that. Yeah. They should do it, do the whole thing. I remember there was a place I used to go to and they, they arrested one of the dudes there because he was, he was giving dudes massages and blow jobs. Wow. He was like blowing a lot of the gang guys. Can I hear him? And so they caught up. And I'm like, look, he's just trying to make his customers happy. Yeah. You know, that's what his customer wanted. Exactly. I mean, that is what the guy wanted. He wanted to do it too. Who got hurt there? Yeah. It should have that for everything. As long as it's like really clear that that's what you want. Right. Because if you're like a straight guy and all of a sudden he's blowing you and you're like, dude, wrong signal. Yeah. But if you're a gang guy, there's a fuck. Really? We try to stop that. Why would we try to stop that? Hamilton Morris in 2012. Why Matt the cameraman? Matt the cameraman? You can talk, brother. You'll have to talk. So it's crazy seeing the internet all blacked out today. Like, think you can go and read it in the media. We can do this. Hamilton? Yeah. I noticed it. What did you think about the soap of thing? I haven't read enough about it. I mean, I think it's horrifying if it is what I think it is. But I'd like to do a little more research. Well, you can read about it Wikipedia was blacked out. It represents a trend. It represents an attempt. And whenever it is, it's trying to control or having the ability to control the internet. But the reality is they can do that now. If the government wanted to step in, like, if you had some crazy al-Qaeda, pro-Qaeda website up, they can shut you down. It's trust me. It's not going to do anything but create an underground tunnel that we're all going to use. And it's going to be really, you're just, you're going to lose against the internet. If you tried to do this anyway, if you tried to start banning websites, if you tried to start monitoring people, the internet will find a hack for it just like they do every single iPhone a day before it's released. Maybe. Maybe. I don't know. I mean, who is that? Then who's ultimately going to be control of it? Is it really, is that what's going on? I don't think there's a thing. I think what's happening is people are realizing, as more people get more access to information, that they're not buying a bullshit anymore. And the only way to stop that is you're going to have to limit their access to information. You're going to have to be able to control them. You're going to have to be able to somehow know the box them up. You're going to have to be able to somehow know the trend is giving information freely through these fucking cell phones and wireless internet connections and they're coordinating meetings and then people are setting things up and they can't stop it. They can't control it. And that's driving them crazy. But they can also work through the system. Like when you think about how many Wikipedia entries are written by the pharmaceutical companies that are doing how much Wikipedia material is actually advertising in one way or not? Really? I mean, of course, if anyone can edit it, who wouldn't take advantage of that. I would imagine the incredible resource. Yeah, I would imagine. I mean, it's not all good. It's not perfect. But it's the best way. The best way is let the internet sort it out. The best way is not the government controls the internet. That's the worst way. That's the worst way possible. A bunch of people are willing to go to war. They get to control the internet. Fuck you. No, you don't. That's crazy. You fucking resource hogs. You can't control the internet too. Jesus Christ. You're stealing minerals in Africa and stealing oil in the Middle East and trying to jack the internet to say motherfuckers. Got damn it, Brian. I blacked out my website today. Did you? Yeah. Really? Yeah. What did I have to do? Yeah. I did it really poorly and quick. I just changed the logo. I made all the text great, dark gray. Do you feel like you're a part of the movement now? Yeah. I feel a little left out. I feel a little left out. Well, NBC would probably be pissed off at you if you did that probably. If I blacked out my shit. Yeah, because I mean, the people that are acting so but it's all the big media giants, you know, on a Darwin's set of one to Google's not back. Wikipedia is not back. Not me entertainment. Oh, okay. It's like Disney. Disney and NBC. Well, yeah, I guess if there would be the ones who could benefit from a crackdown, you got to think about how much money has been lost. Now, there's my question. A lot of people have gotten things that they didn't deserve because they kind of downloaded them illegally. Maybe. But how much money was lost? Was it really any money lost? I wonder. I wonder if like, I wonder if it didn't exist. Would those people have gone out and bought it? Is that what you're saying? Or would you say maybe they just downloaded it for a on a whim? And maybe if they like it, then might tell somebody else and maybe something else might buy it. Like it's possible that it's not causing any loss. You know, I mean, I don't know. I think it's definitely a loss. If you look at GoToA Movie Theater nowadays, it's not like it used to be. You think people are downloading shit? You think that's what's going on for real? Hey, I hate to admit it. I used to do it. I used to, you know, I downloaded every single movie, allegedly, that came out that weekend. What's going on? I'm so glad you're going to be here. I mean, I might be playing with this character. I'm glad you played with character in idiot. I'm just having to make a typical guy on the internet, you know. Okay, yeah. I don't think it's, I don't know. I don't do that shit. I don't think it's that. I think if the movie theater is your updates, because of the economy A and because of the movie's suck. Yeah. A lot of movie suck. Yeah. It's hard to find good movies. And that's the problem. Like it's weird going to the movies nowadays and taking a a girl on the date and spending $80. You know, it's like, wait a second, what happened to like $6 movie tickets instead of $20 movie tickets? It's called inflation bitch. Yeah, but that's what I know, but that's one of the reasons. There's a movie theater that's in Pasadena by the ice house that we walked by. And yeah, the movies were like one or two weeks old. They weren't first week movie. They weren't old yet. And they were like, I think $3 tickets. Yeah, yeah, that place is cool. Yeah, it's the name of that place. I can't remember it's off of a car or whatever. I love when you find a place like that. Yeah. Like in cool like that place like just slightly old movies are really cheap. Super cheap. That's how it's going to wait. Yeah. I can wait. I'll support your cool business. And it's kind of a retro movie theater. It's not new at all. Like it's old school. What you remember in the 80s when ET came out and you're like, oh, cool. Some movie experience ever, man. We were playing at the Houston, Houston last stop. And what was that stupid movie that they made about some kids in the woods? And it was like a movie for a witch. Blair Witch Project. Yeah. Right? Isn't that it? Yeah. Was that it? It was like a fake documentary style. Yeah, we won't be in Chris McGuire. Watch that these guys came down to the show. And then afterwards, one of them worked at a movie theater. And he said, you guys want to go see the Blair Witch Project? Like right now, just us. I was like, oh shit. So it was me and him and my buddy Chris and a couple of his friends. And we just alone in the theater. He turned the thing on. Like he literally had the keys. And we watched the Blair Witch Project alone. Wow. That was fucking awesome. Yeah. It's like the only way to watch that thing. It was the perfect way to watch that movie. And I tried to watch it again. It was fucking terrible. Second time it was terrible. I tried to recreate the moment. Did you hear McDonald's has to now put up signs saying that their French fries cause cancer? That they're, whoa. Yeah. It's in, it's something that's in French fries potato chips, coffee, cigarettes. The chemical is produced through the browning process. You know, like when they, you know, fries in the fryer, it causes cancer. Like that browning the browning process of, I guess, the oils that are in it or whatever. And so they have to put up signs. And I guess there's ways around it. Like they don't have to use do it the browning process or they could do it the baking process. You know, but that of course would take long. The thing with fries, it probably makes it super clear. It's interesting. There's the browning process. And it kind of makes sense because, you know, they say that if you eat meat and you eat it like, like, well done, like the carbon, the outside, like really not good. It's like that, that, that, the black shit that people love, the crispy outside. Right. It's like really bad for you. Yeah. That's the worst part. Yeah. I think it is. How fucking weird are people, man? But there's, there's, there's a delicious, that's the most taste, best taste in cancer ever. Well, you say that's the best taste in cancer. Oh, by the way, a lot of people got mad at us because of this last podcast. I had a fucking, a bunch of annoyed people with me on Twitter. Why? I don't know, man. There was a couple of people that were annoyed that were vegans and one guy might have overreacted to because I just get tired of people with their hashtag. I'm vegan. Like they say something and they go, I'm vegan. It was a, say, because we were talking about animals getting killed in processing plants. And it does happen, you know, ground hogs, all kinds of animals die. It's not, it's not, it's not, when you buy plants from a store. I mean, unless you're, you know, you're own organic setup and you're doing it all yourself, chances are in the harvest thing in the plants, some animals are going to die unfortunately. It may be the more. What's that? Maybe even more. I don't know if it's more. But it's different. It's like mice. The, the, you know, the area is going to be devastated unless you have like some like really good setup or it's like, you know, great composting. I mean, unless you're doing it all yourself for your own food. That's one thing. But if you're buying some shit from Whole Foods or from wherever it's coming from a farm somewhere, you've never started getting it growing. You don't think some animals are getting jacked. Oh yeah. It doesn't fuck it up. There's an article about how in Australia at least it's a greater total loss of life. But it's a different type of life. If you're a vegetarian than if you're on the floor because, because of all the mice that are killed in the process of harvesting grains. But I don't know. It's totally makes sense. But I guess on the grain. I don't think we need this is what they're not ridiculous. They're sensitive people. And I can understand where the whole shit is. Excuse me. I can understand that. I appreciate it. But it's, it's just, it gets annoying that I'm vegan. I'm, you know, it's like, it's a self, there's a self righteous heir to it. And there's a weird thing that it's okay to live to eat some living things. It's okay to kill trees. It's okay to kill plants. It's okay to kill plants. It's okay to kill plants. It's okay to kill plants. It's okay to kill plants. It's okay to kill trees. It's okay to kill plants. It's okay to kill fruit and vegetables. It's okay to kill that. You could kill, you could chop that fucking lettuce right out of the ground and it's dead. And then you eat it. That's okay. But it's not okay to kill an animal. Like what, when do you, when do you draw a line? Is there any distinction? Like what if the animal was just meat? It was just meat with a heartbeat. And it couldn't think. And it just sat there. If you needed somebody else would. Is that okay? Like what, what point is it okay to eat an animal? Another life form. Is it, only stuff that can't move? There are these services that people would use. There are these services that people would use. There are these services that people would use. They would be asking for kids. Like even responding to that. Because who cares what other people eat? I formed. Is it only stuff that can't move? Who are these other stuff that can't go crazy? What you should be asking for? Like even responding to that because who cares what other people eat and what their views on? Well, I think there's a certain cruelty associated with factory farming. And I obviously gross. It's horrific. You know, I try to avoid, uh, I try to avoid cheeseburgers, except in and out, and then out's pretty fucking spectacular. Yeah. Five guys burgers. I hope those cows were treated well. If I had known they were treated well, I feel much better about it. But, you know, the reality of, you know, you buy a Kentucky Fried Check-In or you buy any sort of, you know, meat product from any fast food, anything. You're buying something that did not live a happy life. You know, it's going to be the cheapest meat they can possibly get you. Right? I mean, isn't it? Right? Half of it's fiberglass, right? Like, look at Taco Bell's meat. I don't think, you know, I don't think... vegans are silly. I just, I don't agree with it. I don't agree with it. And I don't think we should be... I don't think we should be treating animals the way we treat people. I think we should be kind to everything we can be kind to. And I definitely think factory farming is fucked. But I think regular farming is pretty goddamn natural. I mean, it's what people have been doing forever. Yeah. As long as you're not abusing the animals, it's, it's what people have been doing for forever. And those animals, I mean, who's to say that we're not supposed to take out cows? That's silly to me. Someone's going to take them out. Is it a Jaguar? If a Jaguar doesn't take them out, can people take the cow out? We can't... You're talking about extraneous, though. Like most people don't believe that even even most like normal anti-curity animal, you know, companies or whatever they're called charities, even them, they still believe in, you know, humane killing of animals. But what you're talking about is people that are just like nothing. No, you can't... Well, there's definitely grades, right? Yeah. Yeah. And that's only a small amount of the people, Joe. Like you're talking about like the three Twitter followers or whatever it has to do. But it's, you know, it's a significant chunk of the population. I think there's a lot of people that are really upset at any idea of any cruelty whatsoever to animals. And you know what, man? It's because they love their animals. I totally get that. Right. I did love their animals. And I totally get loving wildlife. But, you know, the idea that they're going to live forever. If you don't eat them, what the fuck's happening here? No, don't eat animals ever. Okay. Who's going to eat them then? Block them. The fuck's going to happen here. Block these people. You know, you're going to go around and gilding them. You're going to make sure these elk don't fuck. Because otherwise they're going to be everywhere. You ever go to... There's a town in Colorado called Evergreen. Beautiful. Beautiful place. It's amazing. It's up in the mountains. And it's... There's a certain part of town where you can't go anywhere. During certain migrations, because the elks will just walk down the main street, it's fucking amazing. There's like 100 elk. There's a photo of them. And there's like a herd of them. And they're walking down the middle of the street. It's like, wow. What a crazy place where you live, man. Yeah. A herd of elk just walked... But, you know, if it wasn't for people shooting those elk, the herd would be 200 the next year. It'd be 300. There's not enough predators. Like, unless you want more mountain lions, unless you want to start bringing mountain lions in your daily equation, you've got to do something to get rid of those elk. Like, they have to shoot those fucking things. If we want to live there, you're going to have to shoot them. Deer are fucking terrifying. If you're in a place where deer are like super plentiful and you can't drive safe. Yeah. Ohio. It's ridiculous. There's deer flying all over the place. And there's... You wake up... Normally, I would wake up at my dad's house when I lived at my dad's house and see a deer like every week. I would see a couple in my backyard. Yeah. And if you're driving home at night, that's what it's near. Main streets are right next to my dad's neighborhood. So I mean, obviously, that's dangerous. Yeah. Somebody's got to eat them. You got to eat more of those. Yeah. I've never actually had deer. I've never had any of that craziness. You've never? Yeah. I don't want to tell you a vegetarian or anything. I am. Oh, yeah. Yeah. How long have you been a vegetarian? Since 2009. But I eat me occasionally. Yeah. Is it a health choice or is it a... I think it just generally encourages me to be more conscious of what I'm eating because otherwise I'm more inclined to eat just gross fast food and things like that. Right. And I think my diets improved enormously since I became a vegetarian. Yeah. The more plant matter you can get in, it seems like you just feel better. You feel healthier. But goddamn meat is delicious. Eat fish occasionally. Do you? No red meat or anything like those? No. I have my theory that the... I've said it before, that the stuff that's the quickest is the best for you. Like deer. Deer's really good for you because they're hard to get. Motherfuckers, they run because they got like really good meat. Cows. It's a pretty good meat. What's pretty good? It tastes like, I don't know, because it has to be the best. But that's too delicious. You get a cheetah burger. Oh, damn. People would be like, no, don't eat a cat. Yeah. Isn't that funny? I bet you. Cats eat you, but nobody wants you to eat a cat. You can't go hunting tigers and eat the tiger. Like what if tiger meat was fucking delicious? People'd be like, you dick. But meanwhile, that tiger would hunt you. Yeah. You dummy. I'm not saying tiger should be extinct. I'm saying if I lived in India, I would think tiger should be extinct. Not necessarily, but definitely if I lived in the Sundar bands. I say they've cats in a lot. What about big ones, man? Yeah. Wait a moment. Fuck that, bro. You ever see a real one? You just have like a cat thing that you would have to do if a tiger's are about to attack. You just throw like a piece of paper the other direction and run, you know, or something. Yeah, that would work. It probably does. There's probably like in their instinct that they would do that. You do that. Yeah, I wonder if there's like any people that's ever tried that. Dude, I can't even believe you're asking that question on the end. Well, I mean, it might be DNA stuff. You know, you might be you got too high before the show. Just a red ball when the lines come in. You see what happens. Hamilton Morris. This is a ridiculous show I brought you on to. I apologize. But then again, I don't. That's fun. I'm just kidding. Um, so you've been doing this, uh, vice dot com thing for how long, man? Since about 2007, 2008, is that full time your thing? No, I work for other magazines as well. Right. Writing and stuff. Yeah, writing for harpers as well. But vice is the main. What was it like when you sat down with that, uh, a shulgun character? What is that guy's name? Alexander shulgun. Yeah. And he's like some crazy super chemist. Yeah. Right. It's really brilliant. Yeah. That was an amazing interview. Yeah. And that was really different. You know, people had like writing saying, oh, you're so lucky. You're so lucky. But it was incredibly difficult to get that interview with him. And it took a year. So it wasn't like a luck thing. Like by just like, hey, we found a cookie guy for you to interview. Go visit him. I had to actually bend to his house a couple times beforehand. I had to be vetted by his family and all of these things. Because a lot of people don't understand what he does. And, uh, and he's harassed by people. There's this ridiculous idea that inventors are somehow responsible for what is done with their creations. So people think that if somebody dies of an MDMA overdose, that he is somehow responsible for it, which is of course totally ridiculous. Wow. But you know that mentality. Yeah. There was that mentality, which is pretty silly. You know, the legalization of any of this stuff would require people to go over dosages and be scientific about it. And if any of this stuff was legal, you know, look at his legal, if you could just be prescribed for big prescribed, if you could have a doctor that would say, you know, you're pretty sane. I think you could handle ecstasy. See, prescribes you a little ecstasy. Go have a party this weekend, you know? Yeah. Well, I don't know about that, but I think using it as an adjunct to psychotherapy is not that far away. Well, do you think so? You really think they're going to accept that? They're certainly trying to. Yeah. The organization maps. That's pretty much what they do. Yeah. I'd rather they've made great strides with people as well with post-traumatic stress disorder. Yeah. Which is not surprising. I mean, I think a lot of the stuff that maps does is just proving these things that most people understand intuitively, but it has to be demonstrated in a rigorous scientific fashion before any before the university of the season was accepted. Yeah. Wow. It would really help a lot. No doubt about it. It would restructure society if people would allow, we're allowed free use of psychedelics. Everyone looks at it at such a frivolous issue. Like it's so silly. You know, like why, why, why, why even concentrated on such things? What are you trying to do? You're trying to get high. You know, if you talked to most people about psychedelics, you feel like you're stuck in the 1950s movie. What are you trying to do with your life, kid? What do you want to do? Mess with those mushrooms? Put that stuff down. Get yourself square. Get on a straight narrow. Put the mushrooms down, boy. Yeah. Isn't it? I mean, doesn't that seem like that? It's a, it's not a subject that's easy to be approached seriously with adults. There's not a lot of them that'll engage you in it. In the regular world, you want to talk seriously about psychedelics and seriously about positive effects of them mushrooms and who wants to talk to you about that stuff? Yeah. I mean, now most of it has to be shrouded in scientific research. What if you were working for an insurance company and you were like, one of their top sales guys, but you're running around the office, tell them they're, what do they got to do, acid? You know? Yeah. I guess I don't even really know what public perceptions. I mean, I have an idea, but it's so hard for me to go until like to really understand what it would be like in middle America or something if you worked at just an insurance office. Well, I think it's different now everywhere because of the internet. I don't think there is necessarily a middle America. That's the same middle America. There were, there were some innocent parts of the country where countries were things were a little quieter or slower. But I think because of the access to information that people have today, I don't, kids can learn a lot of shit online. Even if their environment sucks, they can develop and be engulfed in whole communities online and they can evolve like so much quicker. So this is like groups of people that evolve like in small towns now that would have, they wouldn't have existed two, three decades before. You know, I think that's, that's like one of the big differences between now. And, you know, I try to think about what it must have been like to be my parents to grow up. You know, the internet doesn't come along until you're like way too old. You barely get into it. You just go on CNN.com and check things and weather. I've never been to the big thing. I remember going to library all the fucking time. Like that was like the cool thing to do. right a movie, go get a book. Libraries must be fucking hurting right now. Yeah. No, no, they're not doing as well. They've been doing before. My library library libraries are doing great. I think so. Really? Yeah. I mean, because these, yeah, I would just think that it's easier to get information without going to the library. Yeah. My mom doesn't even go to a library anymore. And she would go like multiple times. Most people have access to a computer. Yeah, but then there's all these subscription only services that are too expensive for people that are individuals to use. So it's like if you want to use factiva or sci-fi and or Lexus Nexus or any of these databases, scientific databases, you have to go to a library. Or a wiki. Oh, right. Right. Of course. So if they're always going to exist in some form, yeah, it would be too expensive. There's reading books is a different experience in the reading, lurking Kindle. I don't know why, man. I don't know why. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of better. I don't know why though. I don't know why I'm like turning pages. You know, I don't know why I feel like I'm actually not with me. I think it's softer. I think what's then the technology gets upwards is already is here. But once again, the technology because where you can kind of feel like a cottony feel or, you know, I use a Kindle. I use a Kindle. Right. I mean, I do have one of those things. But if I had to choose between that, like if I had the book and it was on the Kindle, I would take the book with me. I don't know why. Do you smell your books before you read them? No. You never, you never smell your book before you do you ever smell your book? I have no books before. Yeah. I like that. Like I shouldn't say all books. Smells like little musky. I shouldn't say I've never smelled like that. I like to smell what I'm reading. But yeah, it's cool. Until Kindle has that ability to like hold in your hand and it's its own thing. Like that book was great and it smells a little weird until it has that kind of, you know, real feeling to it. Because right now it's just like you're looking at a piece of glass. Like a words are on a screen. It's you disconnect from that. The last used book that I bought was the sacred mushroom in the cross. The only way to buy it was used until young urban just re-released it. And that, uh, did you, you've read that right? I am familiar with it. I've read part of it. I haven't read it covered a cover. And I've read part of the second book as well. So was that the end of the road or something like that? It was the sacred mushroom in the cross and there was the other one was God damn it. Turn back time. Something in the sacred, see, see scrolls in the Christian myth. Something along the. Yeah, yeah, I do hope. Yeah, before a sacred mushroom in the cross is just a, yeah, it's Bible scholar. Yeah, that's, uh, that's the idea and that he, uh, he was the only one who believed that it was all about mushrooms. That the entire, the Christian religion, like a big part of it was about fertility rituals and mushrooms. Yeah, but even that's, you know, and if you're familiar with the book, Shroom by Andy Lettchner or Lettner. No, what's that? Oh, it's good. But you should definitely check it out. It's really true yet. A pretty impressive piece of research, but he in the book and that he goes through all these different mushroom myths. But he talks about the sacred mushroom in the cross and claims it a leg or an everyone believe that that he was just so he hated Christianity so much at that point in his career that he just was looking for some way to disprove it or dismiss it or make it look ridiculous in the public eye. Whoa. That's awesome. If that's true, holy shit. Damn. For part of me doesn't want it to be true because it's such a great story. I really wish you could say, look, dude, the Bible was about dudes tripping on mushrooms. And I really wish it could say that. And that's what Rick Strassman is trying to do now, with at least with the old testament in DMT. Where it really, what did you say? I saw him speak relatively recently and he said that he his new career goal is to go through all the old testament looking for instances of altered states of consciousness that might be indicative of some kind of a DMT type experience. Well, yeah. Yeah, there were some recently there was some guy, uh, scholar from Jerusalem that was proposing that about Moses and he was, uh, that the Moses is encounter with the burning bush might have been some reference to the Kisha bush, which is very high DMT content. Right. Absolutely. Yeah. That's how we saw God. Yeah. I'm like a legit scholar. I forget the gentleman's name, but he was a legit scholar who was bringing up this connection to possibly, you know, psychedelic experiences. Yeah. And then I've also heard a theory that the Ark of the Covenant was a meth lab. That's awesome. Yeah. That's a fucking great quote. That's a kind of quote you hear and you go, damn, I wish I wrote that. Yeah. You're a Ark of the Covenant. It's a red lab. Do you ever hear those people that believe the Ark of the Covenant actually exists? And it's in what part of Africa is it? I don't know. I only know about it through Indiana Jones. Yeah. I've seen the photo of that temple in Africa. Is it Ethiopia? Is it Ethiopia? I'm good. I can't. Yeah. I can't. Graham Hancock was one of the guys who, uh, that's what got him interested in, these, uh, alternative views of history. There was, I believe it was Ethiopia. And they have this area that's guarded and these, these monks that's guarded. Right. And it's supposed to have like a 20 year lifespan. Yeah. Because the rain is shit. Yeah. Powerful. Yeah. It's, it's so sexy. Yeah. It's really good. It was true. You know, I really, I don't know if it's true, but I don't want anybody to disprove it. I think it's been investigated. I think the Discovery Channel or someone did especially really. They haven't. I wanted to do a BBS thing. I would, what Hancock had said was that no one was ever allowed to get anywhere even close. Maybe it's false. That's what he said. But there's a map of it on Indiana Jones, too. During one of the cutaway scenes, it was just like that, the plane, you know, right, dotted line. Just find it there. I don't think it works that way. Could you just completely interrupt my trader thought, I don't know where I'm going. You know, Lynn, Ian Ling have you ever heard of Ian Ling? What is Ian Ling? It's America's oldest brewery in Pennsylvania. And it used to be this beer that living in Ohio, people I know would go to and stock up with truck folds just so they could have it for like a year. Why? Because it's, you know, it's really good. It really is. It's older than Budweiser. Budweiser came out supposedly stole their eagle logo. Is this a new sponsor? No, no, no. No, you came and buy it here in California. So they stole the eagle and Budweiser stole the eagle and used it in their logo. And now, you know, this side had come to Ohio. The first week sold out the entire like iPod style, like they had to build a whole new thing on their factory just for Ohio. Now, because I had and everywhere you went, beer that that's all everyone served. I don't know was drinking that. It was like the craziest thing seeing in Ohio went and went back home. Everybody was drinking this beer and it's fucking pretty good for just a, like a shitty cheap light beer. But everybody was drinking. That's how bad Ohio sucks. They get excited about some shit beer. Budweiser's heard me so fired up and they band together to support some shit beer. Budweiser's hurting from it. How bad is that beer? It's really good. Come on. I wish I could give you some. You could probably get a Chicago. No, you probably can't get a strong. I like Sam Adams. Is it like that? They, yeah, they have different kinds. They have like lights. They have loggers. They have, I mean, it's, it's really good to work for them. No, but it's the oldest brewery. It has to be the best. They're going to fucking like the first one. You know, I don't know what's going on here. I think he's, I think he's broken into an impromptu commercial. No, you're like it. You're right. If you ever get the chance, alright, Pennsylvania. But finally, this is a impromptu commercial. It's not. I'm gonna, I swear to God. Here it is. Did get the fuck out of here. Don't play anything from it. No, no, that's just, that's the beer right there. Okay. I believe it. I dare you. Never heard of it. I know either. Did I? I don't give a fuck. I'm just saying he's a fucking hundred billion beer. It's crazy though. But the, the Budweiser story was really interesting. I thought like how they took the, the logo. That's the American Eagle dude. Everybody wants an American Eagle. What about goodier tires? Do they have an American Eagle too? Wasn't that an American Eagle in there somewhere? What about them? No, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It's the same as Budweiser. Wow. It's pretty close. It's crazy. I mean, there's a slight difference. Budweiser is the Led Zeppelin of Beerus. Is that what you're trying to say? Yeah. Maybe they stole it from Budweiser. You don't know. Yeah. They've had it longest settled. Budweiser wasn't even a company when they came out. Settled down, son. Hamilton Morris. I apologize for everything. Everything you've experienced so far today. I'm in this strange ride. So you want to do this thing about isolation tanks. What's your role when you're trying to get out of this? Well, at least you use one of the tanks myself. I want to try specifically those tanks that you were talking about earlier that have some kind of an auditory and visual component. Yeah. He's got that all set up, man. Yeah. He's got it set up where he's got videos of it, where they're using the sound and they're playing like music. And you can see the waves in the water. Because the speakers are actually floating in the water. And they're like set up right by your head. And the waves are like making the water splash and jump and wiggle. It's pretty fucking trippy, man. Yeah. It's pretty trippy. That's going to be also affecting your body while you're in there. You know, you're going to feel the sound on your skin. Yeah. Fuck out, you will. You're going to hear it in your ears. And you're going to feel it in your skin. Because it's like moving, man. It's moving through all the water. The whole thing is rippling while they're doing this. It's really interesting. And wait, and you hear it because your ears are under the water. Okay. Okay. Here's under the water. And it's not distorted by the water. I don't know. It could be on big notes. It's possible. Things like really splash around. Yeah. What does that feel like? That's got to feel nutty. Yeah. I'm curious. Yeah. His idea is that he's going to develop like how to tutorial. He's going to do tutorials for sports and for all sorts of different things. Music, language. He'll be able to teach people languages much quicker. And then in the sensory deprivation environment with the lack of external stimuli, you'll be more focused. Yeah. It sounds like the lawnmower, man. It does sound like the lawnmower, man. You're right. It does. Does he do these new tropic injections beforehand or something like that? That's what he should do. Right? We've got to give him some fucking nuclear shit. It's like an X-Men type of situation. Yeah. The idea behind it is fascinating. The idea that you can program the mind better inside the sensory deprivation state. It really makes a lot of sense. It seems like it would work that way. If you really get someone really new with their dealing to design like some cool programs. Yeah. You know, we think that would be like the best way to learn ever, especially if you learn something cool. It seems like it would be distracting your concentration. I mean, if you got that, I would think. Not if you got comfortable with it. See, the thing about the tank is once you do it for a long time, you know, you do it a couple times just like four or five times. Once you do it, you know what it is, you can just settle right in. And once you settle right in, then it's not going to be distracting at all. It's going to be wild as fuck. Floating there, watching some image appear right in front of you because you can't really see that the light is so dim that all that comes through is the actual image. You can't see the outline of the box. Have you ever been to one of those group massages where there's a shitlet of people in one room and then they're playing like a movie that's on the wall of like a house, you know, in Asia somewhere. Right. Like a bird's flying. Yeah, bird's flying. See, I find that distracting. If it was just pitch dark, I think I would be better for sure. And I think that's how like when you're relaxing in one of these isolation takes it. Any kind of, you know, sound or anything like that. It seems like it would be distracting. You're absolutely right. It would be. And I have never gotten into the video or audio thing. That's the sky crashes thing. I like to go in and just chill in my own. But I think it's fascinating. I mean, I'm not opposed to trying it. It sounds really nuts. And if he could ever figure out how to really hook it up and do it right. I mean, what a great way to learn a language or something. What a great way to like, you know, could you imagine if you took like, if you found out that you could develop a course specifically for use inside the isolation Pankley, the optimum way to learn things and memorize things and put them to use. And you show that you could make people learn Spanish ten times quicker or something. Fucking nutty like that. But I'll show you wolves on loop at night, like walking slowly. Just to go against your fears and stuff like that. Yeah, if you could really get it to the point where it becomes a hologram, that would be the ultimate entertainment experience, dude. You're living in a hologram. You get in the isolation tank and they just put whatever hologram you want on. Okay, let's do the Amazon jungle. Boom. That'll be wild. It's way to be wild. And you get to watch like a movie. You get to watch a life take place in front of you. Sister Act two. That's someone talking about you. You're jumping bitch. You're not even paying attention. That's what reality is going to be eventually. It's going to be, you know, you're going to have options. You're going to be able to choose what you want to do today. It's going to eventually get to a point where we can construct reality. I mean, I know that they've devised artificial realities for video games. It looked pretty f**k at Spiffy. You know, when you're watching a good video game, like what is it? Like metal of honor or one of those games. Is that the name of it? Metal of mine. That's one of them, right? Call of Duty. Call of Duty. You watch those video games like that's the graphics are f**king absolutely incredible. How long is it before they can project that into your head? How long is it before instead of looking at that amazing thing, someone figures out how to project it into your head? That's going to happen. And when that happens, that's going to be an alternate reality. They're going to be able to program an alternate reality. And if you're consciousness, if they can figure out a way to lock your consciousness onto that alternate reality, it's almost like putting you in another world. It's almost like putting you in another dimension. Yeah. Is that possible? I think it is. Yeah. That seems like what's going to happen. Right. Right. It's like, you know, there's implants for blind people that allow them to see with the camera, the code. Oh, yeah. I don't know about that. I think they're brain. Jesus. You can input visual stimuli. It's still probably far away until everyone could do like Xbox 7, 7200 or something. It's like how we look at like the old cowboy style photographer dude who had to throw that thing over his head. Remember and he had the big torch on his hand and it would go off. Do you remember that? Like when like all the wild west movies, the guy would like have to get under a tarp and shit to take a picture. Do you remember all that? And think about what that was. There was like, there was no fucking movies. Like shut up. They could barely get an image. Everybody had a standstill. You know, you had to like really wait. How long did it take to take that picture? Yeah. It took a little time, right? Yeah. You couldn't just move around. It wasn't like instant. Think about that was only 200 years ago. Right. That's amazing. That's fucking incredible. That is 200 years ago. And now we're complaining. I wonder all the shenanigans that happened. Like having to sit there with your family and then like when the kids would fart and back, don't move. You know, like there was probably all these like little things that always happened during those photos. You know, standing still. There was probably some humor that was lost. And that we didn't have to do that anymore. Yeah. How long did they have to hold their face? I like to hold a blurry pictures from the old. Oh, yeah. Usually the kids. That's why the kids are always the blerious. No, those ghost photos as well. Oh, that's a great idea. That's a great idea. Yeah. These people would walk into that frame. Usually just know. Nothing drives me crazy with them fucking ghost TV shows. I watch those ghost TV shows and I just go, you're not going to find anything. Are you fucking with me? Yes. You never find anything. Yeah. There's never been a bigger cock tease than the ghost reality genre. And they're on like season three or something like that. Like look, and you see this ectoplasma enters the room. It's like a speck on the screen. It's like this is where the ectoplasma enters the room. This is where the what the fuck do you say? Like you asshole. You know that I'm a fucking ghost. You're ghost hunting. You're not finding shit. Shut up. Every fucking show is the same thing. There's some people in a dark room watching something through night vision. And someone goes, what was that noise? And then they go to commercial and they come back and it's nothing. It's ridiculous. My mom, I just got back from Ohio. My mom's house is supposedly haunted. Like my sister used to always talk about it. And then my mom is now talking about it. And my stepdad, he's like a, you know, owned an architect firm. He's a really smart guy. Huge corporation this guy had and then he retired. And he's a farmer. You know, he's just a very intelligent guy. And he said he saw it the other day. Whoa. And then so it's just like, all right, are you guys stupid? Maybe he's fucking your mom. Is it a gas leak or a mining leak somewhere that's giving you some to your own life. He's fucking your mom. Right. That's not if you came to me. Okay. There was like sour well in your mouth. It's not sour. What's going on there, man? Well, she's probably a little wacky. I think there must be something, some kind of feeling. alone would have rate on gone bad. That might be, man. You know, you never happened to rate. You grew up in the desktop. Yeah. You had to rate on, yeah. Rate on test. You said you were based much. Yes. Do you remember how much the shit that was on apples? Oh, yeah. What was that? What was that? That chemical that used to spray that fertilizer on? Is that what you're talking about? Remember, there was something that was on apples that were saying it was dangerous for it. Right. Do you remember that? No. Fuck. What was it? And I was, I don't remember what the fucking chemical was. I'm sure Twitter will let me know. Right. Twitter, somebody, please tell me what's the fucking chemical. What was all something or another? Oh, all something. Do you remember something like that? I know exactly what you're talking about. Whatever. My dad actually has a patent to get rate on out of your basement. That he used to build these machines for rich guys that like only he sold like maybe 50 of them. No, rate on gas is totally not legit. No, it is. It is legit. Yeah. It's definitely an element. I'm sorry. Sorry. I should have created this guy. In people's homes, is it a health issue? Is there something that you really have to worry about? I don't think so. I don't know. I've never heard of anyone I knew dying of rate on poisoning. But how did it get brought up? Do you know? How did it become an issue? I guess some people died somewhere. At some point they must have. And it does exist. It is a element that leaks out of the earth and is a radioactive gas. Manisha, I guess some people died somewhere. Wow. At some point, they must have. And it does exist. It is a element that leaks out of the earth and is a radioactive gas. That's nasty. So it's just a natural part of... Yeah, no, it's not a result of nuclear testing or anything like that. It's a totally natural. Wow. So do you think that people died because there's just some areas where it would just come through and heavy doses and no one anticipated it, is that what it was? I think it's heavier than oxygen if I remember correctly and sort of like settles on in basements and even your floors and people sleep in pools of it. And just... And you can get rid on poisoning, but you know, it starts in your respiratory system. And then you just start like wheezing and coughing a lot and shit like that. Wow. And it's actually pretty crazy that it was so popular, but then it just died off. Like they were still probably getting this. They did, did they find something new? Like, oh, by the way, right on poisoning is actually just... How's it? Wow. And that's all about carbon dioxide. Yeah. Well, you know, all it takes is like one death somewhere and then all of a sudden everybody starts chasing after it. I mean, it could have been one extreme example that was very, very rare and then everybody started chasing it. And it's sensationalist stories. If you have one good story about someone dying from some invisible chemical... Or even a drug. Yeah, or there you go. Even a drug. I won Pennsylvania too. Hi, everyone. That's why that beer is so good. Isn't it amazing, man? And when you stop and think about that, so many of the different things that you've talked about are not legal. You know, different psychoactive substances. Like when you were talking to that Shogun guy, like the different things that you was talking about, the different trip to means and how many of them are legal? A lot of them are illegal, right? Illegal? Yeah. Five M E O D I P T D M T D M T. A lot of them are maybe 11 or 12 of them. Maybe more. Probably about a dozen trip to means are illegal. Schedule one. Yeah, I know it's ridiculous. And a lot of them never had any real popularity in the first place. Drugs like D O E T or something or TMA two were never particularly popular substances. Could you imagine if something like five M E O D M T killed as many people a year cigarettes does? Wouldn't that be amazing? Could you imagine how people would react? What a crisis they would be. We've got to get this off the streets. Could you imagine? But meanwhile when cigarettes do it, it's like, well, you should have been smoking. Yeah, whoops. Whoops. Yeah, I wonder if nicotine would be legal if it were recently discovered substance. Probably not. I think the nicotine is not as much of an issue. I think there's no, I think a lot of is all the other shit they put in them to make it even more addictive. They say that if you smoke cigars, you know, people that smoke cigars the year, first when you're not hailing it, but you're getting like a real pure type of tobacco. It doesn't have chemicals on it. And it's supposed to be not nearly as bad for you. It's not great for you. It's not the best thing for you. You're sucking on a crazy fucking plant that gives you nicotine all day. But what it is is a better, healthier version of that tobacco and that the 599 different additives that the food and drug administration allows cigarette companies to pump in the cigarettes to just to make them mostly make them more addictive. I think you can believe that movie with what's the same. What's home, boys? Fuckin' Gladiator dude. That's so cruel. Remember that movie? I would. A dude who was like the scientist who knew too much about cigarettes, that's in a real story. That was terrifying. If any of that stuff in that movie was, I could even remember the movie's name or the actor's name. But they don't even need to. I mean, nicotine is incredibly addictive without any kind of mysterious additives. But there's also the beta carbolines in tobacco that may give it an additional addictive component because they may improve mood. In that movie he was talking about, and again, I don't know how much that movie's dramatically. I think it's based on a real story though, is it? I'm going to him. I remember a being based on it. It's terrifying to think that a company would be so evil that they would go out of their way to try to use chemists to make their shit more addictive. And you're like, wow, that's a really nutty choice. 599 is a lot. You finally have 599 different chemicals they add to cigarettes. Yeah, a lot of that. It doesn't really make sense. I've looked at the lists that I don't understand why they've used some of these things. Like, like, pyridine or, yeah, pyridine would be an example of a whole. It's a pyridine. It's an aromatic six-membered ring with a nitrogen in it that just smells really bad. And you wouldn't think that it would have any, maybe a counterbalance. It's just tons of stuff. It's like all these different- It just smells bad. That's all it does. As far as I know, in the quantities that they would be using it, I mean, maybe it's like in a really, you know, in the same way that like, endole and very, very, very small quantities. Smells like Jasmine within a large quantity smells like shit. So some of these things that smell bad. It's probably used for smell to sell a cigarette. Like when a smoker doesn't smoke and they smell a cigarette, you want to cigarette bad. What? Yeah. Really? 100%. It's like having an apple pie when an apple pie comes out of the oven and you smell apple pie. Like, fuck, I want that apple pie. It's probably making a smell. Well, I don't know if they're making it to attract other people, but they're probably making it more attractive to the people that are smoking it. Right. It's weird that it'd be a stinky thing. You say a stinky thing. It's right. It's a mixture of different kinds of stinky things that make the smell. So some of them were just smells and so who the fuck knows? You know, like I said, according to the Russell Cromwell, we didn't remember the title. Right. They like done some deep research on hooking people and deeper and deeper with all these different 599 chemicals. It's just ridiculous. That's too many. Yeah. That's a lot. It's very complicated. It's ridiculous. Even when you're looking at the interaction of two chemicals in once it becomes incredibly complicated. How do you think they constructed that? You understand that field. How did they do that? I mean, I'd have to look through the list of all the additives, but I don't know. I mean, it could just be, you know, even things like any candy that any child eats probably has an equivalent number of different chemicals in it. You know, people, the word chemical always sounds bad. Like there's 599 chemicals, but there's I guarantee 599 chemicals in this. In everything. Yeah. So it depends on how you want to phrase it. I'm sure the majority of those chemicals are benign, but maybe 11 of them do have some malevolent function that are based on some tobacco industry plan to addict people. But I really do think that nicotine in and of itself would be enough, I think. You think. People that smoke those natural cigarettes, those like what do they American spirits? Do they experience less addiction? No, I think those hit me harder. Like I wake up spitting on buckets of goobs. You know, like just like, I have a room and folks. Then is it just a major plan producer? Maybe it's like maybe some chemicals that cigarettes make it so that burns easier. Oh, yeah, definitely. Most people have smoke, I would say is Marlboro lights or chemolites or a light cigarette. And it's more like having a diet coke. It's just like, you know, you just want a little taste of the chemical and a little smoke, but you're not, but then you get these guys that are smoking Marlboro reds where it's like having your little cigars. You know, it's like harsh. It's have you ever seen the wonderful whites of West Virginia? No. You've never seen it? What is it? It's a crazy documentary that they did on these people that live in West Virginia that have been this notorious family of outlaws and wild people. And there was a woman and her name was Sue Bob. And I swear to God, those are for us. I was always been a sex. He wanted a family and just go, and you just stop and think about that. That's a what did cigarettes do to her, man. What did cigarettes do to her? Nobody sounds like that when they were women without cigarettes. Like it's only cigarettes that give you that. I mean, maybe some crazy exotic disease. But yeah, let's see. That's what she sounds like. It's amazing. Have you never seen it, man? If you just want something silly to watch, it's so well made. It's a beautiful documentary. It's pretty good. Johnny Knoxville's production company put it together. It's really awesome. It's about this family. They're just awesome characters, man. They just live in West Virginia and they sell pills and they're just always getting arrested. They're just wild, man. It's so crazy to watch. It's really, really fun. But cigarettes fuck that checks more so. We didn't talk about that guy that was his McFanny, McFanny, whatever that guy's name is that's running for president in the marijuana. Mitt Romney, Jesus Christ. What's his name? Mitt Romney, man. All right. Yeah, about him in the marijuana patient. Remember we were going to talk about that. Yeah. That's crazy. I talked to you about it before we even did the show. It was so sad to watch someone that could be so calloused about his ideas like that. And if you haven't seen it, Mitt Romney, a guy is running for president, a very, very wealthy man. He's standing in front of this dude in a wheelchair. The guy's like 80 pounds, man. I think he said he had muscular dystrophy. I apologize if I'm wrong about that. But he said to Mitt Romney that he needs medical marijuana and that medical marijuana is the only thing that helps him. Mitt Romney said, have you tried the synthetic form? And he said it makes me vomit. And marijuana is the only thing that helps me. Would you put me in jail if you became president? Do you want to hear it? Sure. Let's play it. Let's see if it sounds good there. Let's see if it sounds good there. It's really depressing. It's an old video that just really became popular. Really? OK. It's so different. I saw the program on the very tight post. And I have to take many space games for all dollars right now. I've been taking my help. All my life, my house, four or five of my doctors saying that I am a medical marijuana work. I am completely, you get a sleep-closying it for everyone. My theory is kind of perfect. And you have synthetic marijuana that's available in another case. That makes me sick. I have tried it and it makes me grow up. I have tried all the medics and there are. And all the forms that come in after I stimulate it are the steroids. I have muscular dystrophy that's completely against my DNA. I'm sorry to hear my question for you is, will you arrest me and my doctors if I get medical marijuana? I'm not a, I'm not a favorite medical marijuana based. So, will you have a right eye? How are you? I'm just trying to wave from the lid. Did the politicians smile? How are you? I don't know. You asked you how dare you. You asked if you were going to arrest patients like him governor. You're going to just ignore a person a wheelchair? I spoke of them. They'll be didn't answer his question. All right. Well, this is going. So disturbing. Yeah. This is what we're getting. Hamilton Morris, I think you got a good voice and you should run for president. Yeah. I'm pretty sure you could pull this off. Yeah. Why not? All right. I don't feel he's enthusiastic about it. I didn't say that. I'm feeling nice. I'm not. It's shocking though. Isn't it that the person like that could be like even close remotely close to being able to run things? The bit that you would be so cold harder to just walk away from that dude like that. It's like a serious issue man. You got to address that issue. This guy's telling you there's something that helps him and he's obviously in terrible, terrible straits that guys fucked up man. He's can't move his bodies in a goddamn wheelchair and he's telling you there's something happens against this against his, you know, a will. You know, this is something that he's saying it helps him make some feel happy against his pain. And he even said I'm not for legalizing it for anybody. Yeah. He goes not for everybody but for people that you can use it for medical purposes it works. that I can't just walk away from guy like that. You know, it's just disturbing that anybody would be so flippant with the idea that it's so it's so preposterous it's so gross to them for some fucking reason. I don't know what it is but the idea of altering your consciousness any way other than the sanctioned ways that we've prescribed to for the last, you know, several decades. Anything that steps outside of that becomes a danger. I don't know why man. Why? You told me, man. I don't know. So I mean it's not a majority view I don't think. I think it had to do with a few people who, you know, when you think about it it only takes a few people to make these enormous changes in drug policy. I don't know all that much about the history of marijuana specifically but it was like that one guy primarily and then with the psychedelics it's the same kind of deal. It takes one person to die at the wrong time and, you know, one person dies after smoking salvia, the guy Brett Chidester and then it's illegal over 10 states. A dude died smoking salvia? No he didn't even die. I mean there was a teenager named Brett Chidester who wrote in his diary, I love salvia. But I also understand that life has no meaning now or something like that and a few days later he killed himself and his mother looked in his diary and said, oh it was the salvia and made him suicidal and went on this crusade to have it banned in every state that he could and was successful in something like a dozen states. It's called Brett's Law. Wow. But that's the way it always is. It's always one person that there's like that act based on the person that bought more fiend on the internet and overdose. It just takes one promising, all the mushrooms in the Netherlands are now illegal because of Guy L. Cara off the girl that jumped off the bridge. Just one promising person whose photo looks good on the news dies and that's the end of the day. So what did she do? She got mushroomed up and jumped off the bridge. Even that's unclear. I mean that was the official idea that was written in the news but then when I was in Holland recently working on this new project for VBS we were at this place called Magic Truffles which is the largest mushroom or was largest mushroom farm in Holland. They make metric tons of mushrooms in this factory and but then mushrooms became illegal so they converted their entire operation to producing psychedelics, chlorocea. They say the whole thing is a scam. They think that she wasn't even on mushrooms that the entire thing is based on a friend seeing her with the box of mushrooms in her hand but on the day of the death and then they put two and two together and decided that she must have been on mushrooms when she died. Oh God so she could have just been depressed. Yeah I don't think there are any toxicology reports that confirmed she was under the influence of any psilocybin at the time. I can get not wanting to give it to everybody. I just think there should be places where you can get it where someone can walk you through it and you should be able to make an educated choice. There's just so many people shouldn't be denied the experience because I think the experience makes people more aware and more sensitive and I only think that that's good. I think the world can use a lot more aware and more sensitive. So why aren't their centers set up? Why is it still illegal? That's where it gets completely totally ridiculous. It gets to the point where you keep you something that might be beneficial to a lot of people because some people might fuck it up. Some people might fuck with it and do something crazy. You know what I supposed to do with fashion and science and medicine became very unfashionable in the 80s to do psychedelic psychotherapy and there were only a number. Even places like certain parts of Germany were any psychiatrist that wanted to could and they chose not to just because most people weren't interested in it for a while. They thought it had limited potential and now I think the potential is the... Renewal of all the psychedelic research but in the 80s people didn't think it was even people that were pro psychedelic drugs. They just didn't necessarily think that it was a viable road to producing important neuroscientific research or in terms of psychotherapy to drugs. Yeah, I'm a recall hearing a McKenna interview where he was talking about that, about how scientists were often discouraged from going down those paths. It's not really nothing there for you. Well yeah, it's hard. It's difficult to quantify the benefits of psychedelic drugs. There's a lot of anecdotal evidence that they have lasting effects on people's lives and that they have relief from depression or alcoholism or things like that. But when it comes down to really putting it down on paper, it's been difficult and often it's things like the Johns Hopkins study where psilocybin occasions, long-lasting mystical experiences or that famous paper. That's the really reason why. Yeah, the reason why it's getting a huge amount of press but it's amazing. Yeah, but they said they did improve their personalities. Yeah, but even that is kind of slippery when it's mystical experience all the terms are slippery and when you look at a neutral quickly, these very defined studies of how something does it aid rodents in navigating a maze, does it allow them to... Does it prevent the formation of certain types of... The disease is a whole protein. ...croteins in the brain or things that are indicative of neurodegenerative diseases. But there isn't anything like that for psychedelics. There's no single benefit that can be quantified and I think that's one reason that it's difficult for researchers. And there's ways around it now a lot of people try to emphasize the positive effects that are not necessarily psychoactive. So maybe they have some kind of an immunosuppressant effect that would be useful for arthritis or some kind of inflammatory disease or something like that. That's one of the reasons that because there was something that was reading just a couple of days ago about people juicing cannabis and that it doesn't have any psychoactive effects but there's a lot of great health benefits. Absolutely. Juicing it. The non-psychoactive terpene, one of these THC and CBD are the two main chemicals. So would you juice it like a smoothie, like blend it up? I don't know about this specific technique but CBD is not psychoactive and has all kinds of medicinal effects. It's currently undergoing clinical trials as a treatment for schizophrenia. So in addition to the psychedelic effect, there may be all kinds of things we can. It may be neuroregenerative, maybe synaptogenic, maybe all sorts of different things. The marijuana one is the biggest trip because it's got so many excellent properties. Yet it's illegal. It makes the best paper. It makes the best clothes. The fiber is excellent. You can make wallboard out of it. It's like four times stronger than plywood. It's like a really incredible plan because it's super strong. Like if you ever picked up a hemp stock, it's really weird. It's like from another planet because it's really fucking strong but it's light as shit. Like you pick it up and it's like this is a weird kind of wood. It seems strange and it has so much fucking potential as far as like you could grow like a massive forest full of it. Chop it all down and then have another massive forest like six months later, a year later. I mean it's renewable. You can do it over and over again and all the health benefits. It's like it's from another planet. It's really crazy drug. When you think about all the good things it does. It's great. It had the seeds or awesome source of protein. It has all the essential amino acids. It's actually good for you if you juice it. If you smoke it you get high. You feel amazing. It's like it couldn't do anymore for you. Come on man. You can make paper out of me. You want to make clothes out of me. Dude you can eat my oil. My oil is really good for you. Ooh it can power cars too. It's like I'm renewable every six months. It's like it couldn't be any nicer to you. It couldn't be any more of a productive plant. As far as society just uses as a quantity, as uses as something that you could sell. Absolutely and it's the same thing with mushrooms as well. They have so many benefits beyond just being vessels for carrying these psychoactive drugs. I think Paul Stamets did a lot of experiments with the defense department using either P, cyanescens or azure essence and using them to defoss for late. Sarin to break down nerve gases because in the same way that all these enzymes in the mycelium that are able to break down the cellular components of the substrate, whether it's wood or grass or some kind of seed, it's able to break it down and extract all these amino acids and then biosynthesize chemicals out of it. They can also break down all other kinds of substrates. There's all this bio remediation where these mushrooms clean up oil spills because the mushroom mycelium is able to break down the aromatic hydrocarbons in the oil and to totally detoxify it. You can even eat the mushrooms afterwards. Wow. I had heard about something like that that they'd use things like that in Alaska. Is that what they'd experience that? That was before the Gulf incident, that was like the last big one. But they tried about it and they wanted to do it in Japan as well to clean up radioactive waste because you can create the mushrooms to bioaccumulate radioactive fallout and then pick the mushrooms and slowly decontaminate an area. I mean, it's an extremely slow way to do it, but it also effective. Wow. It would take hundreds of years. Well, what other options are there? I mean, that's the thing. You imagine that's the best way to do it. But then once you get the mushrooms to eat it and then you have to pick up the mushrooms, the mushrooms are still radioactive, right? That's right. For how long? Until the decay of the radioactive atoms and whatever they're. Hundreds of thousands of years. Yeah. So it's essentially just moving the problem to another area. Yeah, but at least you're concentrating it. It's better to have like a 20 drums of radioactive mushrooms in a concrete vault somewhere than to have it covering 100 miles of land. Yeah, that's your pan thing. It's so terrifying to me because I have no understanding whatsoever how nuclear power works. I just always took it for granted and never even thought about it. And then I just recently found out that it's about making steam. It's about like the somehow or another nuclear thing. It's like the power comes from steam. Like power things. Yeah, steam turbines. Yeah, steam turbines. I'm like, wow, that seems like so old school. You know, it's just they're using this super powerful fire to boil water. You know, I mean, it sounds ridiculous. I mean, my simplification of it sounds ridiculous. But when you find out that there's spots now where there's just it's no one's ever going to be able to go there. Then when you can't go there, you can't go there. That's spots fucked forever for we probably won't even be people anymore. Because you know, 100,000 years ago we weren't even this, right? We were like barely this as an organism. We're essentially a little bit more of a monkey than we are now. But the time that shit's done, what are people going to be like? But the time that's not radioactive anymore. We're not going to be people anymore. We'll probably be some new shit. We all have autism and it's probably just like the greatest dude. Just crazy. Something connected to the great trip he's going to happen. We're going to be assimilated with the machine. Yeah. That's my my conclusion. Yeah. I've simulated with the machine. What do you think's going to happen? Something's going on. I don't know. I mean, I don't think about it. I do think about it. I just don't. It's difficult. Right. Anything seems possible. It's just like with any any issue where it seems to if it could go one way. I certainly am a pessimist ultimately. And I'd like to be an optimist. Are you a pessimist as far as the potential that the human race can reach? Or is you put about the possible outcomes? Are you a pessimist about people in general? I mean, I got into an argument with Daniel Pinchback recently about. Really? Yeah. About about aliens. And he has this very optimistic idea that if aliens. He told me goes definitely exists. He believes a lot of things that I definitely. Yeah. He's very open. I enjoyed talking before we say it further. Oh, yeah. I enjoyed talking to them. Just playing. So what happened? Aliens. Well, we were talking about Stephen Hawking and how Stephen Hawking has this idea that if we ever do make contact with aliens, the best move would be to ignore them. Because if they ever come to our planet, the chances are they're not only going to exploit us, but destroy us. I mean, you didn't say that exactly those words, but he generally has a pessimistic view. And I think that that's a well-informed, intelligent view. There's no reason to have an optimistic view about that, but Daniel Pinchback seems to have this idea that, you know, altruistic aliens, friends, and all drink. Oh, that's so sweet. Yeah. That's so sweet. I don't think so. If you look at every single organism that we can observe on this earth, it takes advantage of the weaker organisms, including the most intelligent. We take advantage of dolphins. Absolutely. We put them in a few examples of things as well. Yeah. We look at killer whales. We're like, we put them up in tanks. We know they're intelligent. We just can't understand them. And so we force them in a slave. And it's not mentioned humans to humans. Right. The killer is the human. Right. But with animals that we don't understand, intelligent animals who understand, we regularly enslave them for people's enjoyment to watch on television. And then we believe somehow or another that some super intelligent organism is going to show different behavior than what every single organism on this earth, including the highest us, the most aware of us. We do it worse than any of them. We do it worse than dolphins. We do it worse than killer whales. We have chimps. We lock chimps up. We don't give a fuck. We mean, you mean people, people that love the chimps, they'll keep them in cages. People who have dolphins keep them in tanks. They don't really have to solve them in the tank. Yeah. So even if they were trying to be nice to us who's to say that it wouldn't be some night marriage. It's fucking hell for that dolphin, man. It's got to be hell. They're intelligent. They just can't change their environment. We know they have dialects and they have crazy like societal rules and dolphins have, there's there's there's a huge attachment to their family and their loved ones. It's just snatch one up and stick it in a fish tank. It's fucked up. But we do it. Why would we think that aliens wouldn't do that to us? We are crazy. Could you imagine if you came down here and you watch all these little pink monkeys with their fucking bank sticks and nuclear weapons, you found out that people had nuclear weapons. You know, you see them at home, Slack, jod, watching the Kardashians. They have nuclear weapons, the same animal, you know, the same animal and it's all going on right now. If a can answer is probably cute. You can't hear any of the aliens. You would you would want to shut this whole fucking show down. You'd be like, you're going to ruin this whole planet. You stupid fucks. You would want to come here. We would for sure shut this planet down. If we came into an area and there was a bunch of chimps and the chimps had machine guns and tanks and we would shut that fucking place down. There's no way we're going to let some chimps start running shit. We would take all their weapons, we would go, Jesus Christ, we give chimps this fucking tanks. Why did what are chimps doing flying around in jets? We would totally steal their shit. We would never allow that. Imagine if chimps started coming into our towns and stealing our cars and shit. That would be a real issue. We wouldn't allow that. We would take our shit, take from those dumb monkeys and that's what they would do. They would come down. They would steal our cars. Or iPhones. And give me that. How'd you figure this out? You fucking dummy. They would take your iPhone. Oh, check you out. Look what you did. Did you figure this out? Think about the average person I was stupid there and they have an iPhone in their pocket. Boom. And they don't know how to use it. Yeah. So, pinch back things. They would all go Iowa's Gestile. Yeah. They would have a song prepared. Hello, humans. We want to prepare this for you. Let's watch that we will eat at the buffets. The daily earth stood still the other day. Have you ever seen that? I have. That was a child. Wow. It was amazing. It was like I was watching a movie. It was kind of cool. You know, it's kind of cool because you put yourself back in that sort of like old school comic book style of storytelling. They did in the 50s and the innocent days and they made that movie. But the other thing was like, how naive? Like the portrait of like an alien when it would be. And you know, just how naive the situation was. Military and this is an obvious bad guys and good guys. How naive but yet how, you know. Well, even now there's really no impressive concept of aliens. That's what, you know, I don't know if you're familiar with the science fiction writer Stanislaw Lem, but he wrote Solaris and his master's voice and all these books and his main idea is that humans can't conceive of anything that is truly alien. We're only looking for ourselves in the universe and anything that was truly unlike us. We couldn't even imagine. Right. So even like the movie alien still isn't thing that even looks like us. You know, could be a living ocean. Right. Yeah. Or a living planet, right? A planet with consciousness? Yeah. That's always been a fascinating idea that everything has some sort of consciousness. You know, whether or not it expresses pain or even feels it or can't communicate that everything has some sort of a type of consciousness. Well, definitely our idea of life is generally very narrow. You know, there's like a budding field of astrobiology, which is just a speculative science. But even in astrobiology textbooks from a couple of years ago, there would be no mention of the possibility that arsenic could replace phosphorus and biomolecules. It didn't even seem like a possibility. And now we know that that can happen. How does that work? What happens? There was like a lake, I think it's in Nevada that had extremely, extremely high levels of arsenic in the water. And this researcher, his last name was Feliz, I think, collected bacteria from the lake and found that they were producing DNA and amino acids where the phosphorus atom that's present in a lot of these molecules was replaced by arsenic. Whoa. Yeah. I had arsenic poisoning from eating sardines. That's... The phosphorus atom that's present in a lot of these molecules was replaced by arsenic. Whoa. Yeah. I had arsenic poisoning from eating sardines. I told you that, right? Yeah. I ate too many sardines. I was eating like canno sardines a day. You're so funny. Who does that? No one... Why? You're the only person like sardines. Like sardines. Wait, are they a good source of arsenic? Well, apparently. Apparently sardines, they feed on heavy metal. Well, they don't feed on heavy metal. But they feed at the bottom of the ocean. And that's where a lot of pollution is. A lot of heavy metal pollution. And they get a concentration of arsenic. Not enough to really make you sick, but enough that shows up on tests. So you get your blood chugs and you say, oh, shit, there's some arsenic in there. What the fuck is going on? Is someone trying to kill me slowly? Or is it sardines? Turns out it was sardines. I wonder if you could get turquoise poisoning. Like constantly ate a little bit of turquoise every day. Like if that... Is turquoise toxic? I don't know. It's just stone. Yeah, but if you shave it down into a powder and put it in like some proteins and stuff. I don't know. I don't know what the chemical composition of turquoise is, but... You just don't study shit that doesn't get you fucked up. No, I do. How do you know? What is the best thing ever? It's so pretty. Maybe that's a terrible question, but at least to a half-case one. Have you think they've discovered all the psychedelic substances on Earth or do you think that's absolutely not? No, not even close. When I was in my first saw Alexander Scholgan's work in Top He Call, I was discouraged by it because I thought that it had all been done that every single possible psychoactive trip to me and Penathlomian had already been sent to me. For people who don't know, Peacoll is the phillomian. What is it that I've known? Then that's Lomian's I've known and loved and trip to means I've known and loved and there are these two enormous thousand plus page books written by a chemist in California named Alexander Scholgan and they contain at least about a hundred drugs that he's synthesized in these two chemical classes in each volume and it looks pretty comprehensive. It looks as if he's evaluated every imaginable psychedelic, but it's only a fraction of what's possible. I love that interview that you had with a man because I had never seen a guy like that in the wild. You know, I'd never seen some super chemist dude who's created like God knows how many combinatori, I mean how many times has he created something, some new cool thing or discovered some new cool things? It's hundreds. Yeah, how many has he documented? It's amazing, right? Enormous enormous number. Incredible. And then he's sitting there just rattling all this information off to you and you were like a fucking kid in a candy store. They could tell you were like wow, like you couldn't believe you were hanging out with him. Yeah, no. You're so cool. The enthusiasm, like it really came through. Like the you're honest enthusiasm to be hanging around with this guy. It really you had an educated sense of reverence about what he's done. So it's like when you addressed all these things, like you could tell that you had like this great joy in getting this opportunity to talk to that guy. Oh yeah, it was really cool. Yeah, no, I love him with the passion. He is one of the most amazing scientists. How can people watch that? What is it? How can they find that? What is it? If you type Hamilton's Farmucopia, that's the name of my show on VBS. You can find it on vice.com through the video section. If you just look for Hamilton's Farmucopia. But yeah, I mean, he's in it. And I've seen him quite a few times since then and it really is a privilege because his entire methodology is one that's not followed anymore. It's like it seems very antiquated to most young people and even pharmaceutical researchers. The idea that anyone would take a drug that they synthesized is ridiculous, but that used to be totally normal. They used to be the way drugs were developed. The chemistry invented Ritalin took it after he synthesized it and tried it and didn't really get much from it. Then he gave it to his wife Rita and she loved it and said that it improved her tennis game. And so he named it after her Rita Lin. Oh wow. But that kind of thing was calm. And it improved her tennis game because it's essentially like speed, right? Yeah, it's like cocaine or... How does that work with kids where it makes them, you know, kids who are really rowdy? It calms them down. How the fuck does that work? I mean, there's a bunch of different proposed mechanisms that are kind of complicated, but I don't really know how it works. That's always been... I've met a couple kids that are on Ritalin. It's always been a very dark sort of a moment when you realize that these people are drugging their kid, you know. I don't know if some people need it, but I know some people don't need it. I've seen some kids that are just a little bit rowdy and they need attention and not getting it. And all of a sudden they're peeled up. That's a disturbing thing to watch. Yeah, I think it's bad. Especially with very young children around high school college age. Especially when the mom crushes it down, they snoree. Like in the wonderful whites of West Virginia, the wild and wonderful ones, they were snorting pills as after I never had to get birth. She's in the hospital. Remember that? Yeah, it's ridiculous. Maybe I have seen something. Dude, it's fucking fabulous. It's like watching if you, you know, turn monkeys loose and let them live amongst people how they live. They would live like these people. These people are wild. They're fucking wild. They're like a different breed of human beings. Here, you're in here rattling all the scientific knowledge, neuro chemistry, and pharmacopia, and there's people that could breed with you. And they're my name's Sue Bob. I'll also it is exis one in the family. It's amazing. It's all going on right now at the same time. We had a guy on that was talking to us about, about hunting. His name Steve Renella. He was on the last podcast and he was telling us about he was in Africa. And in Africa, he was hanging out with these people that have to hunt for their food every single day. And he was out to go with them. But they have an internet connection. They don't really have electricity. They have a generator they can turn on for like an hour or two at night. But they can't keep it on the camera. Afford it. It's hard to get gas out there. They have arrows and bows and shit. They've made themselves. And yet they check their email and you can friend them on Facebook. That's all going on right now at the same time. Yeah. It's amazing. Yeah. Do we get you too high before the show? Because I think I got too high. I was high for a while. It's grandpa. I was just like, why? Well, it's also I'm so fucked up because I just got back from Brazil. So my brain is on total auto hold. Joe, I am one of my babies was throwing up last night. Yeah, that sucks. All nice. Yeah. So sad. I fucked up. I flew Southwest, which usually I love Southwest. But they have that whole number thing. Like if you check into late, you either A, B, C or D or whatever. How many people get on the plane? Like first they put the A's on then the B's. And I did one of those things where you sat in the disease. Yeah. I sat, I was Columbus to LA. Well, Vegas till LA. But I sat between two of the fattest people ever. And I'm sorry. But they both took up 90% of my seat. So the whole time I'm like this. You're in the middle. Yeah. So that's like a movie. Yeah. It was, I was holding myself like this. And you know my elbow pain that I've been in. Wow. Dude, I am so jacked from that flight. That was the closest thing to torture. I've ever been and I couldn't do anything about it. You can't. Well, didn't they kick Kevin Smith off? Yeah. How big were these people? Pretty big. Pretty big. Kevin Smith? Well, the guy was bigger than the girl. But the problem was the guy, he had so much room to lean on the window. But he decided to lean on my side. And so the whole time he's like, he's on my lap almost. And the woman was trying to be a little bit nicer about it. But she was still pretty big. So she was like on my space. Like our, see, that's a human rights issue. Yeah. It's fucking seats with two goddamn small. They need like a race whistle for him. I want to Mars with slip right in. That's where a place to slender. Yeah. You can just go sideways and those fatties couldn't even touch you. You'd be like a sheet of paper between pyramid rocks. Yeah. You'd have no problem. There should be a whistle for that. Well, it's something. We have an issue. People are getting too fucking fat. You know, and it's been going on for a long time. There's a, there's an image once that I saw online from early 1900s. And it was one of those carnivals. And it was the fat man in the carnival. Like there would be a guy that was the fat man. And he was barely fat. I mean, in comparison to what we consider fat today, like some of these people that you see that have to get moved out of their house. They have to cut a hole out and they're attached to the couch because they haven't gotten up. They've been shitting where they sit. And their fiber, their skin has like melted into the fucking chair. This is not just one person. This is many, many, many people have done this. It's been a bunch of people. They had to cut their fucking house open so they could pull them out, attach their couch. You know, and this was just, you know, 1900s, 1903 or something. So fat man, it was like barely fat. It was like barely. He was a guy who should go on a diet. You know, he was like not, you know, Joey Diaz when he was not even at his heaviest, like halfway there. So it's like, that's just a short amount of time ago where it was really rare to get that fat. It's amazing. It's amazing how far society is slid or how far humanity has slid when it comes to that. Our bodies are exploding. It's so common to see people just overflowing out of their clothes. You know, fat's fed. It's corn. It's a lot of it. Corn syrup, right? Is there a documentary on that? Yeah. That corn is really terrible for your body. Difficult for it to break down. So why they feed it to cows and shit and get them fattened up before you, before you slaughter them, makes them more delicious. Yep. I don't know. These few diet drugs were easier to obtain as well. Oh, yeah. Really? Yeah, definitely. So you think when, well, I know one girl, I saw one girl, who was a shitload of weight. She lost like 50, 60 pounds. She went from being kind of chubby to like really hot. And it was like, whoa, and it happened so quickly. And she was on something called Fennafen. Do you remember that? Sure, yeah. Yeah. That stuff. Jack, though. He just totally short-circuited her. Yeah. It's pretty cardio-tongue. Dangerous. That's crazy. Yeah. So she went right back to her normal weight again. She was like, she's a hot chick for like a year. That Fennafen kept it rocking for like a year. But it was just too nutty, you know? The long story that was to every stimulant they've used as a diet drug. These two's methamphetamine used in the ketamine. They used fen matrazine. They've used anything you can imagine, any stimulant. There's anything that they could sell you to make the word. They weren't a loose one. But the stimulants do work. And Fennafen worked, I'm sure. And do those things that you see, like, you know, ripped fuel and all that shit? Are those diet pills, are those things affected? I don't know. I mean, if they're some of them have a weird derivatives of Fennafelamy and, you know. Yeah. What is all that stuff? Those are just amino acids, is that what it is? No. They're just probably really weak stimulants. Like, Fennafelamy is a close derivative of amphetamine, just missing one carbon atom. And it's illegal. So you can just put tons of it into dietary supplements and it produces a short lasting stimulant effect. It's amazing that that's one of the number one concerns that people have, getting rid of fat. And it's a very strange statement when you think about how a society becomes so successful that even when people are down in the dumps, they're still fat. They're still fucking, it's like normal. It's normal to have excess energy stored away under your skin. It's normal to be prepared for, for, for, so your fucking stocked up, you know. In the wild days, so rare to become a fat person, you know. It's a fucking terrible conversation. I'm not saying so. You guys checked out a long time ago. I smelled it. All this talk about fat. You know, when you have friends that are overweight and you worry, you know, after Patrice died, especially our friend Patrice O'Nills and stand up comedian and start recently, you know. You see, your friends that are overweight and it's just, it's like a bomb, you know. It's gonna go off eventually. You don't know what you can do. You gotta try to diffuse it. Try to lead them in the right direction or just enjoy them until they blow up. Did Patrice O'Nill think that his fatness aided his comedy as well? I've never had that conversation with him. So I could never speak of him, but he was really analytical about his comedy. I just think he was also like a guy who wanted to do whatever the fuck he wanted to do right then and there. Some of the best comedians are also very impulsive people. And, you know, it can be good and bad. I know comedians have become impulsive gamblers and they can get addicted to drugs. Like a lot of them have a really kind of wild and impulsive instincts. And that's what makes them funny. That'd be the first person to say, it's been shut to fuck up. And that was Patrice O'Nill. He was the first guy that would say, you call you on your bullshit. The first guy to say, shut the fuck up. And to be that person, it doesn't really worry about how this is gonna come out. Just fly with it. It's like it's a very specific type of personality. Not that many people do it. And that personality is prone to doing a lot of other crazy shit too. That personality is prone to just eat until they're fucking pass out. That personality is prone to do 15 shots on a dare. That's a wild personality. That's a personality. It's gonna go with you to Mexico. It's like that's the reason why they're funny. So it becomes, you're sad. Like you see your friend who's really big and you see him eat himself to death and you're like, oh, shit, fuck the fuck. And I say, you can't say anything. There's nothing you can do. Anymore than you've already done you're an asshole. You tell him you love them. You give him a pat on the back. If you need help, come to the gym. I'll work out with you. But other than that, what the fuck else can you do? It's a weird world we live in. People eat themselves in death. Hamilton Morris, you don't have to worry about that shit. You stay slender with your vegetarian lifestyle on your basic alanines, whatever various substances you choose. Do you, are you a multivitamin guy? You seem like you know so much about the body. Do you take supplements? I do, yeah. What do you take? A big list? Yeah. What do you do? I knew you motherfucker. Are you concerned about your liver? Oh, yeah. Well, I mean, it depends on what supplement and not all of them have plateau toxicity issues, but some of them do. No, no, no. You have plateau toxicity is something I was just about the movie. Imagine it's an inherently bad trip liver to take vitamins. But it's part of food, right? I mean, that's essentially what it is. I mean, everything has to go through your liver. So yeah, I don't, that's not a huge worry. Unless it's something. Are some in super high doses toxic? Like what are the ones who avoid with fat soluble ones or like vitamin E? Potentially vitamin A as well. I don't know. It's not something I've done a huge amount of research on. But now when you say fat soluble, like somebody said that once for someone who got caught taking a performance enhancing drug and one of the people that was in his camps that won the things it fucked him up was that he's too fat. And so he can't get it out of his system as quick. Sure. Yeah. Is that really true? Like it stays in your fat. Like if you were a lean person, you would get it out of your system. Whereas if you were a person that had, you know, a high percentage of body weight, it would remain for longer. It's possible. Yeah. I mean, that's one of the main physical properties of any molecule is that it has different solubility and different chemicals and some things are lipid soluble. And if it's something like THC, and you have a huge amount of fat tissue on your body that the THC can stay in. So you just fucking high all day. Certain people. But you're not getting high off of it. It's just lingering in your cells. It's not doing anything for you. Unless it's in the central nervous system. What if it's just giving you a very mild high, just a mildest, just cooks in. Well, then it's a point where the claim that there's like some reservoir in your spinal fluid or something if you crack your back the right way, that it will. Really? I mean, if you're a blast of cannabinoids or LSD or something. Really? Wow. Yes, it's people that say that I don't think it's true. Well, there's people that say that Kundalini yoga practice can lead to psychedelic experiences. Sure. Yeah. Have you ever experienced that? Yeah. I studied Kundalini yoga for a while. And you're a trip? No. No. Try? I mean, I was one of the ways they tried to sell. I had to take it as part of my sports requirement in high school. You did Kundalini yoga for sports. That's awesome. That is awesome. Holy shit. That's amazing. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. And they tried to sell it by equating it with a drug experience of some kind. And that's why it was so popular in the 60s for the same reason. But I don't really, I never achieved any profound state of altered consciousness. I have one friend who had a girl that he knew that was a friend of his that he actually won a trip with her. They were actually just platonic friends, but they would travel together occasionally. And she was into like serious Kundalini yoga where she would get up every morning at a very specific time. And she would have to face a very specific angle. I don't remember what it was. Was towards the sun or away from the sun. I don't know what she was doing. But she would do these very intense Kundalini exercises for like an hour, an hour and 15 minutes, an hour and 20 minutes. And she did it every day. And she claimed that when she did it for long periods of time, because she did it so much, she could get into like an astral traveling sort of dimension, traveling state of consciousness. Well, she would have psychedelic experiences. Yeah. Actually, now that I think of it, I did have some. How did you forget that? Well, I mean, they weren't exactly the same. I wouldn't really forget that. You've had so many psychedelic experiences for you to have one in yoga. You're like, oh, yeah, I have one in that too. But it wasn't really good. It was like, you know, they do these breathing techniques breath of fire. And for a normal person having an experience like that would be something they would never forget. Oh my God, did yoga? And I had this most incredible transcendent experience. I left my body. I became one of the universe. For you, you're like, oh, yeah, I did that during yoga too. So how did it happen? How did it go down? You have to follow these different breathing techniques. And then hold yourself in some kind of a weird stress position that's extremely exhausting. And then all of your muscles start to vibrate. Like I was on that machine. A turbosonic. Yeah, like the turbosonic. So it's like a turbosonic type effect. I would say, I would compare it more to the turbosonic than to LSD. Wow. Yeah. That's interesting. What's the number one thing that if you had to do it again, you would approach with more caution. Is there any one psychedelic experience or building through your for a loop? I mean, yeah, many have. But I think drugs like there's certainly our drugs that are more friendly than others. And I think five of me of DMT would be an example of something that has the capacity to be extremely unpleasant if you take it under the wrong circumstances. I had a friend completely flip out taking it. Because he had to eat and eat and so he had to throw up. And he got up to throw up. And he got to the sink just in time to throw up. But then he was just going crazy. Talking about rape, talking about all kinds of crazy. She took his shirt off. Yeah. No, I had a friend lose consciousness and started vomiting. Look, as if they had died. I've seen my friend Doug Stanhope, comedian. I thought we lost him. He was going like this. Ah. And little bubbles were coming out of the corner of his mouth. And I'm like, shit. And I'm hanging out with Doug. And I was thinking all the chemicals that Doug throws into his body cigarettes and beer and fucking mean, Doug, shit's on multivitamin. He's not taking a multivitamin. We have to fuck out of here. So I'm like, we might have redlined his body with this shit. I was like, he just took a big hit. And he might be a goner. But he came through it. But it was terrifying for a couple of minutes. Yeah. He did map them out then. Yeah. I almost did. Make it. Man, I'm OK. That make it. Make it, Doug. What were you saying about that? Just that you were asking me if there was one that I would approach with caution again. Five of them. That may be, oh, you think it would be this, it was scariest one? Probably. I mean, there's also just isolated experiences that you can't necessarily connect with this substance. In Pecal, there's like, Ann Shuligan takes this oxygen-less mess going derivative called dysoxy. And has this goes into a fugue state where she has prevailing sense of unreality the last for months or something. And just totally feels like she's in a dream. But then I've had friends who also have used unusual substances that have been tested very much and have weird reactions. But even if you ingest the same substance over and over and over again, you really don't know exactly what's going to happen with the psychedelics. Taking the exact same quantity of synthetic silicide then over and over and over again a year apart every year will feel completely different every time. So I'm always skeptical of people that deal as if they really know the effects of any substance. Because it's always completely different. Well, DMT, I always seem like there's so much coming at you. And it was coming at you, throwing like 15 minutes. Like it was almost impossible to bring back anything. It was almost impossible to record any of it. You know, I mean, to say that you know that experience, my God, you'd have to do that experience so many times just to get a general sense of just looking around and just relaxing and trying to absorb it all, trying to like figure out what the fuck is this. Can I move this around myself? Like what is this? Is this an organism? Is this the universe? Is this the wiring of love? What the fuck is going on here? It takes so long. Like you do it and every time you do it, you come back and then you go, what the fuck was that? And then you go back in again. And it's still the same thing for 15 minutes. It's just like it's too alien and too crazy. There's no way you can have a really truly get a grip on it. It's not like you can go in a vacation to DMT land. If you could take a trip, you could go somewhere for two weeks and in that two week time, you would in the entire time you would be going through a DMT trip. Right. Then maybe you would kind of get a grip on it. Then ayahuasca is some intermediate between smoking the MT and not an intermediate. It's just the longest that you can have that experience. And even then, you don't really, it's not as a lengthening experience gives you some greater understanding of what it is necessarily. I don't think it's really any less or more confusing than smoking it. It's just a longer duration. And then you have people like Gordon Todd Skinner who are hooking themselves up to IV bags filled with DMT. Right. Now this is the guy that you wrote about in the crib. What is it called? Crystal? What is it? Crystal call? Yeah. But your article was called? Hi, I'm Crystal. Yeah. Hi, I'm Crystal's name and video. What a fucking crazy story. Yeah. And if you haven't read that, this is a must read. The other one, the other thing where you were interviewing Shulgun was amazing as well. But you have to see this. This girl was a stripper. And she meets this dude who's like this big time LSD manufacturer who has a fucking house in a silo and millions of dollars, right? Yes. Rich is fuck. And he's like the number one LSD guy in the country. Or so, I mean, it's also unclear. And it's another example of a story where a lot of people talk about it within enormous amount of confidence as if they have not understanding of what happens. Oh, it's all Crystal calls, Walter. It's all X's, Walter, why is that? But if I've learned anything from researching it over the course of years, it's that absolutely nothing is certain about the story. It's incredibly complicated. And there's so much conflicting information for absolutely every element of the story that you have to be very careful about talking about what happened with certainty. But there was this lab. And they did wear Crystal cold into it. Then she did become a part of it. She took DMT Ailey, dude. Yes. That's amazing. Yeah. What everyone was. Raisy girl, shamanic colonic. Woo. It's just 100 that she did it. Yeah, it's way harder that she did that. I don't know that. That's what he was fucking her stuck it up. His ass, I don't even care about that. Why did it cool, Joe? Actually, how I did it. I don't care about that. It's an amazing story, though, man. This girl escaped, right? And then the dude came after and kidnapped her and some other dude, they escaped together to get away from this fucking crazy guy. And then turns out the guy was working with the FBI or the DEA. So there's number one LSD dealers working with the DEA. Yeah. And had been for quite some time. Damn. Yeah. You know, that reminds me of a story. Do you know who whitey bulge is? Yes. You know that story, that. Yeah, I'm from Athens. That's right. You're from Massachusetts. What an amazing story for people who don't know. Whitey bulge was the head of the Irish mob. And he was also working for the FBI. So if you turned whitey bulge, and whitey bulge would know from the FBI, first of all, they wouldn't arrest him. And then he would kill you. And that's really how it ran. I mean, they really did run it like that. And you find that out. And you go, that is amazing. This is essentially along the same lines. Yeah. And things like this have been happening for a long time, both in the US and internationally. Yeah. You know, there's the Iran countries with this whole scandal of them pumping cocaine into ghettos in America to create the crack problem. I don't know that it's necessarily true, but it's a theory that a lot of people have. And same thing happened in South Africa with methaculum with quailudes. There was this whole project called Project Coast, where they were synthesizing massive quantities of MDMA and quailudes in order to weaponize them for crowd control, supposedly, for them for pumping them all into the streets and now the only way. The MDMA weapons? Yeah. Is a crowd control. Oh my god. So you blast the crowd with ecstasy? Yeah, it's called Project Coast. What a brilliant idea. Where do I sign up? Dude, that's like my bid about how to calm down the Middle East. I had a bid I did about sending crop to us to play. It's just fucking cover the Middle East with chronic smoke for just weeks. And then come down. I mean, they did that as well actually. Weaponized THC. They did at that. That's the craziest same catch-ins. That's the craziest sentence ever. Weaponized THC. Yeah, they called it like red oil or something. That was like the code name for it. And what does it do? You spray it on people and they become high? Yeah, exactly. That's hilarious. Edgewood Arsenal, that's the name of it. Yeah. And it probably, I mean, that was the, it was thought of as an improvement because it's a non-lethal and capacitating agent. And if you have a choice between shooting someone and dusting them with THC. That's amazing. I can't believe that was a real product. Absolutely. What else can they dust you with? And the M-A-T-H-C. And the dry LSD as well. I mean, the problem is also that there are physical properties of these different drugs that limit their ability to travel through the air to maintain their potency when they're laid on surfaces around the soil, LSD is a pretty, it's not a stable molecule. So when they were trying to weaponize it, one of the problems is just it didn't aerosolize well. It didn't last on surfaces well and they settled on BZ because they thought it was a better chemical weapon. BZ, what is BZ? It's a anti-colonergic drug and like Jacob's latter the movie Jacob's latter is a real. So they really were trying to make LSD and use it as a weapon? Absolutely. Yeah. What was the idea? What was it gonna do to the troops? Should they make them disoriented? Well, you just take them. Well, yeah. I mean, can you imagine if you discovered, if you didn't know anything about psychedelics at all and discovered LSD, and they tried absolutely everything they could with it, they tried to see if they could use it as a truth. They said, you know, they tried to, they tried to see if they could use it to, you know, they tried to both good and bad uses. Their scientists using it to increase their intelligence and then there were people trying to use it as to make people insane to reprogram people's brains. That was the large part of MK Ultra was about, you know, manipulating people's minds using psychedelics and sensory deprivation and things like that. And it was just crazy trial and error by murderers. Yeah. That's how they did it. Trial and error by like Nixon's people. They should make it into a steam. Did you imagine, man? Trial and error with LSD by Nixon's people? Yeah, supposedly the word trip comes from, that's like FBI lingo from when they were doing the experiments that they could. Really? Wow. The scariest thing that I ever heard connected to any psychedelic experiences that was that Timothy Leary was connected or not Timothy Leary, um, the Unibower Ted Kizinski was connected to, some studies at Harvard and he had done like some classified LSD studies. Oh, yeah. And they, you know, they tweaked a lot of people's fucking hands. Yeah. And then he went back to Berkeley, taught math for a few years, still got enough money to buy that cabin, take on the technology. Yeah. They might have fried that dude's brain. One of they were lobotomizing people. They were doing just unbelievable. I don't know if you're familiar with the book acid dreams, but yeah, they did every imaginable thing. They'd hook up people to IDs with the stimulant, like amphetamine in one wrist. You're the second person in a week that's where recommended acid dreams are. Oh, yeah. We'll have to go get that in there. Yeah. At least read the first half of it. So it's all about MK Ultra different experiences that they tried to impart on people with LSD. And it's about yeah, all these attempts to weaponize LSD and to use it as a truth serum than MK Ultra. I'm buying it right now. Choose a script. It's, you know, it's an old book. It's around the 80s. You've heard of, there was a, it's supposedly an urban myth, but a French town that they dosed. Absolutely. Is that true? Yeah, I do. So they did do that. I think that's true. And that's more recent research that came up in the last, maybe in the last five years. Yeah, I read it and then I had read a counterpoint that said it was bullshit because you can't even get acid to work in bread. recent research that came up in the last maybe the last five years. Yeah, I'd read it and then I had read a counterpoint that said it was bullshit because you can't even get acid to work in bread like that. That it wouldn't maintain itself. Is that true? Yeah, it wouldn't it would not survive the heating, but they could have added it afterwards. And they're supposedly they. I mean, you know, short. So wouldn't they have to be, I mean, how would you go about getting that acid into the bread? You'd have to get a CIA guy who works there and just just fucks with everybody's bread and squirts it out. Go ahead. I guess so. I mean, you could spray bread with LSD. Yeah, it was an interesting argument when I heard because I had assumed that it was true. And I was like saying like, wow, look what they found. And then I saw this counterpoint and I was like, oh, okay, is it possible that they could have created more stable form of LSD or could it be some other psychedelic that would have similar effects that would be stable? Sure. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, there's plenty of psychedelics that they were testing at that time that are more stable than LSD. LSE is unusually in stable. But yeah, I think that I think that they recovered some communication between two operatives and they said like, did you finish the mission with the diaphyl amide or something? They didn't specifically say LSD, but they used some abbreviated form. So it's not conclusive, but I think that there's strong evidence that that happened. You would think that if they knew that it would have monstrous effects, it would have to know whether or not there's something that they can monetarily. Well, I think they did know that they wanted to know what happened. Yeah, they wanted to know what happened. It seems like such a powerful thing to have. You're going to find out what it's capable of. Yeah, I'm going to just let it go. You're going to have to like try to crack the code. Right. And apparently they were like spraying it into the New York subway system. Yeah, that's crazy. No, it's that entire CIA whorehouse where they would take it. Oh, yeah, that's Operation Midnight climax. Yeah. Cisco and New York. Yeah. Two different whorehouses. That's an amazing story. Yeah, that story. Yeah. You got a Google that folks because it's amazing. They ran brothels when they doze dudes poor guy just killing him there for some sexual relief. Just take his mind off his horrible day. Would you like a drink, honey? He's like, yeah, just a jack and coke would do me great. Jack and Coke with acid. Oh, no. What the fuck, man? They really didn't know that. I mean, they probably had an idea. There was the anthropological reports of what Indians do when they take pay-o-ty, but they had no idea how just some business man. Well, apparently they started doing it once they stopped getting people that are willing to sign up for the voluntary tests. That too many people were getting fucked up by the tests. So this is what I had read is that they switched to dosing people when they ran out of volunteers. Huh. I would imagine they would have had volunteers, especially later on in these programs, when they were becoming publicly known substances. But yeah, a lot of the early research, there's a book called Drugs and Fantasy where it's just people being dosed to PCP. And I think the France one was like 51 or something like that. Wasn't it? It was something something I was about. Yeah. It's really terrifying to think that they actually did do that. You believe it though? Yeah, I do. Oh, that was the whole town. Let's see what happens. Yeah. Not, you've seen you've seen the videos of dumb dousing soldiers, right? You've seen it. Yeah. I believe it was the English army. Yeah. They just wandering around. It's amazing. Yeah, people died in that French town. It was, didn't they commit suicide? People jumped off bridges. I mean, I guess it's the same kind of stuff that happens today with psychedelics for certain people respond badly and want to jump off of things. Do you support the theory that that was the cause of the Salem witch trials and all that stuff that it was an ergot infection? You know, that story? Do you know that story? I know that they claim that witch brooms were an implement for vaginally administering scapolamine and atropine and all of these kind of stelieries? Jesus Christ. Vaginally distributing with a pole? Yeah, that seems so crude and uncreative. That's one idea. But I don't know about ergot in which is no. Wow. What is it? It's, it's, it's a fungus apparently. Oh, yeah, I know about it. And apparently it has some psychoactive effects. Yeah. It's like a poisoning from it and it gave you some sort of a psychoactive effect. And they thought it was responsible for witchcraft. Yeah, they thought it could have been responsible for people that thought they were experiencing magic and they were hallucinating. They were, you know, getting fucked up and, you know, and they could have sort of blaming it on women, which is what you do and you know, you can't get laid. So you're all fucked up on this crazy bread. It's ergot, you know, apparently you've never heard of ergot being psychoactive. Oh, absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. And that's where. What is the effect? What contains just a variety of these different ergalines substances, but there's licorgic acid, amide and, and, and they were used medicinally for, for a very long time. That was the reason that LSD was discovered is because they were using these isolating different alkaloids from ergot's cloroshia and trying to see if they had some use in, in preventing postpartum bleeding in pregnant women. Wow. Yeah. They weren't investigating psychoactive drugs that some interest in using them as potential anoleptic. Like drugs to reduce fatigue and that was this one, neutropic hydrogen was produced by Albert Hoffman in the course of that study. But they certainly weren't looking for anything like LSD. Wasn't LSD? Yeah. There was, there was some, some people that were looking for something to make women more fertile or something like those lines. The fact that I read to, to, to something that would encourage women to ovulate, is that true? Did I read nonsense? I don't know. I mean, it happens all the time inside of my head. I hate that. I hate when I have a thought that I can't wrap my head around. There's too much goddamn information online. Yeah. But that happens all the time in, in medical research. So there'll be 20, 28, one thing. Right. Wow. It's a very Viagra. Probably a drug to keep them to stop them, bitchin. What? I mean, yeah, Brian. That's what it is. Let me ask you this because you're a rational guy that does this stuff. You're obviously very well read. You know what you're talking about clearly. When you have an intense psychedelic experience and when you experience what seems to be something that is not you, something that you're interacting with that does not appear to be the imagination. It could be. I don't know. But a lot of people, a lot of people have interesting opinions, a lot of people that have seen real intense psychedelic visions have very interesting opinions. And you, you might be the most psychedelically traveled person I've ever met in my life. So that's a perfect accommodation for you to be the guy that answered that question. What the fuck is going on when you have an intense psychedelic experience? Is it just chemicals, perturbing your natural rain state? What do you think is that? I think it is, but seeing just chemicals is already problematic because chemicals, everything is just chemicals. Just chemicals is absolutely everything you ever experience and remember and have ever lived. So everything is a chemical phenomenon. Consciousness is a chemical phenomenon. The fact that we're able to perceive any of this, the way we'll have this conversation right now, it's all an amazing chemical interaction. So I don't see the need to bring in any kind of supernatural interpretation of the phenomena because it just is not necessary. And it's not necessary in the same reason that I don't see the need to bring in a supernatural interpretation of the universe or of anything else or even ghosts. You know, you can look at it if you look at a ghost haunting. You can look at it two ways. You can say, oh, this was a weird supernatural experience or you can say this was a really weird moment of psychopathology and what psychological mechanism made this person so afraid that they hallucinated and thought they heard something or thought they saw another being, which is equally fascinating. It's not more fascinating. Or there's a dude who didn't need enough attention from his parents, pretends to see ghosts in the basement watching show with night vision. That could be the case too. Yeah, I mean, I almost feel like that's the like the lesser interpretation. It's the easy way. Yeah, it's much easier to say, oh, they're aliens. It's very simple. Whereas if you actually wonder what is the true biochemical basis of this phenomenon, it's an incredibly complicated question. It won't have a simple answer. Right. That's why it's a worthwhile question. Do you believe that it's possible that taking something along the lines of DMT or any really intense psychedelic actually opens up some sort of a door to another dimension, another place, another existence, something you can't experience, another frequency, another station on the dial? I think other dimensions of yourself, certainly. I don't know that there's another physical dimension that you are accessing. I wouldn't, I don't see any reason to believe that. I think there's enough inside of all of us to account for that. So you think that when you have this incredible, like massive visual experience, it's all an imaginary thing. It's not like your consciousness travels to a place or tunes into a frequency. No, I don't think that. So you think it's just a chemical reaction, but an incredibly fascinating, complex -ish-ish-ish-ish-ish-ish-ish. I'm not, I'm absolutely not arguing with you. I'm not sold on what the hell it is. And I've had that argument with people that are really almost like, they almost proselytized about the experience to the point where they're, you know, they're talking about it like as if it's a religious definite. This is what happens. This is what happens. And I've always said, you know, maybe it's possible, but it's also possible. It's just crazy chemicals. But it doesn't mean it's not spiritual. Right. People have spiritual benefits that's fine. It doesn't mean that they don't have, they can't have a religious experience or they can interpret it however they want. But I assure the interaction is beautiful. If the interaction is beautiful, it doesn't have to be otherworldly for it to be divine. You know, the interaction is beautiful. It could set you off on another direction, rewire your board. I mean, how many people have you ever talked to that have had a big psychedelic experience and totally stopped doing pills or totally stopped smoking cigarettes, which is completely rewired their life because of one like emphatic psychedelic rewiring. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. And, but yeah, I just think that you think, I'm sorry. Well, anyway, just the just chemical thing. It's just something to be careful with when interpreting things. No, you're right. It's just chemical. Everything is just kind of. I'm too dumb to be talking about it in the first place. So I'm just trying to skate by limited knowledge that I have, but I want to pick your brain. So when you experience like really profound wisdom in psychedelic states where you have like, you know, this almost feeling of being analyzed and like seen through and showing all your flaws and all your craziness. And then you have this sort of like a reset thing. You kind of get a new fresh perspective of your place in the world and how you're, what kind of an energy and what kind of vibe you're putting out. You think that that's all maybe internal. That's all maybe imagination. Or is it, there's there the potential that there is some sort of another intelligence out there. There's some sort of a thing that you can tune into. some sort of a, well, that we're connected to, but we don't access on a regular basis. Is that possible or is it silly? I don't think that it's, there's no reason for the evidence that is possible. But I think that there's all kinds of things within us that we don't currently acknowledge and understand. I mean, Sheldon, both Sheldon and Timothy Leary talked about this idea. Yeah, there's all this non-coding DNA that's sometimes called junk DNA or in Toronto DNA. And although it doesn't, they were probably wrong with it. It doesn't contain any kind of like instinctual evolutionary knowledge. But there was, they were using it as an example. Like what if all this non-coding DNA contains instinctual ancient knowledge that we're able to access for on psychedelics? But maybe not with specifically with the non-coding DNA, but with parts of the brain, who knows what sorts of things are stored within us that we don't know how to access. I think that this is actually a Scientologist idea. But I think that there's some truth to the idea that we remember absolutely everything that we experience. That it's all in there somewhere. You just need the right catalyst to remove that piece of information. Wow. That's amazing. Well, sometimes someone will bring something up and then all of a sudden the file will open up in your head. And you're like, yeah, that guy. Where is he? What has he been doing? Like, all of a sudden, some person who you, I could have come up to you, do you know of Bruce Bababa? And you'd be like, no, I don't have to deal with that is. But then somebody shows you a picture and says, remember this guy? Second grade. And you're like, whoa, yeah, click like all of a sudden the file's open. And you'll remember several experiences you might have had with that person. It's almost like we don't have enough room for all the shit we're saying. We'll just put stuff in shitty hard drives and stuff it in the closet. And then every now and then it comes out. Right. I mean, it's like an indexing problem. The information is there, but we don't always know how to access it. You remember that show, Taxi? I'm familiar with it. Mary Lou Henner, remember the very attractive Redhead woman that was on that show? No. Some crazy memory things. She was on Stern show. She can remember everything. She has an insane memory like she can tell you like you can tell her you know June 13th, 1976, what were you wearing? She was like, I was wearing a blue dress and because I was on my way to this and that it was and she, she can tell you like what temperature it was outside. She can tell you everything. She remembers everything. Yeah. No, it is possible. It's very much in the size of a normal head. Those things are possible. We don't need giant brains. Yeah. The sides of a normal head. She's not even a nut. She's a normal person. Like if you talk to her, she sounds normal. It doesn't sound like some maladjusted person with some incredible gift. She's not like a rain man. It's like a normal human being. Yeah, there's lots of these new monests that are capable of those sorts of just mind feats. But one interesting thing about the new monests is they all seem to have synesthesia, at least ones that I've read about. And so when they remember something, it's a visual memory and an auditory memory and all of that, all of their memories are cross-linked over multiple sensory modalities. So it's like, uh-huh. And then there's a lot of research in the 70s about potentially using psychedelics as cognitive enhancers. And I think that's one way that they could function is by encouraging the type of synesthetic thinking where you're experiencing everything through multiple senses and indexing information through multiple senses simultaneously. What do you think about the controversial stoned ape theory? Oh. Well, I don't think there's any evidence for it. But it's like a lot of tarrance. We kind of stuff. I like it. I think it's interesting for why- Fine. Why- And funny and sexy. Yeah, it's good. I'm glad that he said everything that he said. I don't agree with it a lot of it. Some of it's a little wonky. Yeah, a lot of it is. But it's not- Not much fun. Yeah, it's good. It's all good. Yeah. And even the stuff that's wonky, I'm always like, willing to give them the benefit of it doubt that I just don't see how he's saying it. And that's, you know, that's the most science anyway. Just people coming up with theories and models and trying to improve the model. So you came up with a model or theory that was wrong. There's nothing bad about that. The stoned ape theory is it wrong as far as like the time frame of history and development. Like, because that's what I think I read that. I think that I read that he got his errors wrong or something. I don't think there's any evidence that primates eat mushrooms. Maybe I'm wrong about that. I don't know that I don't think that- I think the evidence that he was relying on for that theory that either was LSD or psilocybin increases visual acuity. I don't think that that's been definitively proven the science that we've noticed published in the press to just journal at the time. I'm not sure that all that research was methodologically sound. You know, how the study worked. You know, they had like two sticks that were in parallel lines and then they would have someone turning one stick on the other side extremely slowly to the point where they would not no longer be parallel and it was who could recognize it the first and the stoned people recognized it more than the non-stone people. So his joke was that maybe being stoned you see the world better than it really is or better than you can when you're sober rather. Yeah, I mean it hasn't really been studied very extensively. So even though it was published it could have been horseshit like you- we'd have to be replicated a few times. Yeah, I think it would be. Yeah, that seemed like a weird one too because like who's going to take a little dose? If you're going to have mushrooms you're going to blast off. I just- I don't see it being like to the point where you're going to take like little tiny doses of it so you can see better. You know, if you have the blast off thing you're not going to be saying like well what if I just don't blast off? What if I just nibble nibble nibble so I can barely feel it? Who's going to do that to go hunting? That's ridiculous. Or maybe they didn't even know that you could blast off for a while. Yeah, I think with salvia people they would realize until the 90s until they started extracting it and making those extracts publicly available. People didn't really know that you know they'd chew it and say oh yeah it is active but they couldn't really characterize the effect until they had concentrated the salvia nor an A. It is a trip that they look like dinner plates. It's a trip that they just grow out of the ground. They look like hey look at me! You know when mushrooms grow I mean like there's a green field and it's green grass and this white thing just like here I am it's like asking you to eat it. I mean if there's anything that's ever asking you it's a polite and subtle color I'm white I'm so bland. Don't even worry just come over and take a bite. I mean and the idea that they might have actually not even been from this planet they might have come here and asteroid will impact. Sure, you know that's my favorite one. That's my favorite sexy theory. Yeah, that's another mechanic theory right? Or he supported it. The idea that he said you would know this. He said that Silasseinben there was no other plant that had the four in the phosphorus position or no other life form fungus that had that. Yeah that was the only one. Yeah the four hydroxylation is unusual. There's a lot of five in the plant kingdom but the four is unusual. Is there other ones besides? Not that I can think of off the top of my mouth. So his theory was mushrooms or space in an orbit of size ten things like that. His theory was that that had come from an asteroid will impact that spores could survive in a vacuum when we know the building blocks of life and amino acids possibly came here from outer space. Yeah maybe mushrooms. Yeah. That was the thing. When you eat them they're communicating with you. That's why God. Yeah, he would buy the guide totally. He means that's what made him right the time wave zero novelty theory. They told him that he had to do it. You know, could you imagine how annoying it would be every time you went on a trip? You know, you got some fucking alien mushroom people telling you you got to write a theory. Ah ha. You got to write some biological theory. Brian you could not look anymore bored. Who's listening? From now on four hits and that's it. You're talking you off and four. You went to five and you can't handle five. You think you can. So we got over the stone date theory. What else I want to ask you? Alien life. Yes or no? Again, I mean all these things there just isn't enough evidence either way. And I know that it's like a boring answer in some ways. But I just you know people say like it's always huge news when they find an extra solar planet that might be able to support Earth like life. But so far they've never found anywhere in the known universe a single planet that we could live on without a suit for a minute. So that's not really that encouraging ultimately. Like but then when you also factor in the enormity of the universe then of course I think it's possible. Absolutely I think it's possible. I just don't see at this specific moment in history any reason to think that in the part of the universe that we've observed there's any life. What do you think of the theory that life does not come here in a physical sense but it comes here through your mind and that what psychedelics are is real like gateways to communicate with other life forms and that we were hung up on the idea that something has to actually be right there to talk to you. It's something. The theory is that psychedelics open up some sort of a gateway that allows you to communicate with aliens. That's the only aliens that there are. The aliens only exist in this when you take a psychedelic you communicate with it. You can enter into some sort of a frequency that the alien is on. That's the only way they get here. They don't get here through metal ships. That's all just craziness. Alien contact only comes through psychedelics. I mean it's an interesting idea. To what end? When you take these hands like this. It's very dismissive. That's an interesting idea. I forget who's idea that was but there was a god damn it. Wouldn't the aliens be murdered by whatever they watch when they're in their bodies? I don't know. That's the idea as well. He had a lot of 90-wence about mushrooms. Pretty sure it was him. His idea was that it was an alien life form and that that's how you would communicate with it. He didn't think it was going to come here in metal ships. He thinks it was going to come here through the frequency that you would achieve. Oh yeah. A heavy duty psychedelic state. He believed he was really encountering something else. You don't believe that. You don't believe that. You believe that it's just the deepest facets of your imagination. Is there a cashing record? Do you believe in any of that? What is that? The cashing. The cashing or the cashing? The idea that there's knowledge and information out there and you just tune into it. There's a record of information that literally exists that you can just tune into and this is where creativity comes from. You know, in creativity when you achieve the zen state of being completely in the moment, these ideas would just come to you. The ideas that these ideas are not just the firing of your synapses and the accumulation of your life experiences. But in fact, you are pulling from a well of information that's out there that you can't quite recognize on a regular basis and that there's knowledge inherent to the world. Yeah. And I think it's called the Akashakar Akashakar records. It's the idea behind here. It's almost like taking account to... It's almost like a crude way of explaining why we don't understand creativity. Wow. You know, we don't understand the state of mind to achieve the proper creativity is like this zen accepting sort of like when I'm in the zone, like when you're writing something, you know how, you have great writing. I read a bunch of shit. You write some really beautiful lines. You know how sometimes they just, sometimes you're banging them out, but sometimes they're just flowing. It's almost like they're coming out of you. Like you go into like this zen state and like, oh, that just came to me. Like here, here's this thing. Some people believe that what you're doing is by being really creative, you're tuning in to intelligence. You're tuning in to ideas and that the human body and it's managing its consciousness is really just managing a radio. Right. I mean, yeah, there's a lot of that, but I find all those ideas kind of hokey. Well, just ultimately disempowering because they deemphasize the agency that human beings have in creating. We can't create our brains or not sufficient to create. We need to tune into some kind of a record that creates for us. Right. It's like sort of a religious idea as well that there's like a God that gives us some kind of power. I think a pattern and a lot of these ideas is that they try to remove power from the individual and place it in some kind of intangible realm that we can access through being pious or through following some set of rules. But ultimately I don't want to buy into any of those ideas. Right. I find that I completely agree with you and that I think that a big part of it is that people do better with creative endeavors when they're humble. And so it's sort of a way of not taking credit for what they're doing and just tuning into the right creative frequency. And sometimes that creative frequency, the best way to do is just give it up to like a higher power. Sure. And that's not to say that it doesn't help people in the same way that religion, even if it's wrong, helps an enormous number of people. Well, I've always said that it's a great operating system for a lot of people. And it really doesn't enhance their life. There's a lot of people that for whatever reason, I don't know whether it's their uninspired or whether they have brains that don't function at the right RPMs or whatever it is. But if you give them some sort of an ideology, they can live a happy life. But if you left them alone in the sea of doubt and in the unknown, they could go down any path. They could wind up a mess. They could wind up depressed. They could wind up fucked up. They could wind up in a cult. You give them a happy religion. They'll just live 70 happy years. Die. Be happy that they know they're going to go to heaven and everything's cool. It's almost like it's an effective operating system. And at the end, we're really not exactly sure how much of this fucking thing we're controlling with our mind. We're really not. There's a lot of doubt in that. There's a lot of doubt as to how much of life is truly random and how much of it is really created by the energy you put out, your imagination, your actions and your deeds, what the fuck is really going on? Is it 100% physical or is there some manifestation that the imagination takes part in? We don't really necessarily know. There's people that always good things are constantly happening to them. They're always in great moods. They seem to perpetrate that same energy forward. You look at people like that and you wonder how much of that is that. How much of that is they just figured out how to roll this thing and figure out how to create reality. Have they figured out how to just ride this thing correctly? Is it possible? Yes, it is, right? Absolutely. Yeah. You're one of the most experienced guys I think have ever come across in as far as altered states of consciousness. And you're not an old guy. How old are you? We eat 34. 24 Jesus Christ son. I was going to say you're 30. You're a hard 24. You see them on the Apple commercial? You were really young in that one. You just sent me that. That's crazy. Dude, you're way too smart to be 24. That's scary. It is. That's fascinating, man. When I was 24, I spoke in Grunts for the most part. That's amazing, man. Wow. You have, yeah, you must be the most experienced person ever, man, right? I don't know. I don't know. I actually don't know that all the stuff he's really done. What do you take out of it, man? Are you happy that you had all his experiences that changed you who you are? Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. That's good. I think just experimentation in general is important. Can everybody handle it? Probably not. Probably not, right? Probably not. How do you fix that? That's a very, very complicated question. It's a good one though. It is. You got a problem with some guys, a good worker. Right. I think it requires a question. Johnny was good with the landscape and business. So that fucking Hamilton Morris got him on acid. Sure. Yeah. No, and I've had close friends that dropped out of society for whatever reason because they started to find a point less than it's difficult to argue with that if someone really genuinely feels that way. But I think there's just an infantilizing, generally disempowering, idea in psychiatry and throughout society that we are not in control of ourselves. We probably see a doctor, the doctor is the expert on our mind and our body and they tell us what's wrong. They know us better than we know ourselves even after only talking to us for five minutes. And so if you go to a psychiatrist and you say, I'm having trouble working and maybe depressed and they have ADHD, what do you think I should do? I think that Adderall would help me. That's immediately suspicious because you think you already know too much about what you need. They want you to go in as an infant. So they can tell you what you need. Right. I believe that you have some emphasis or some impact that the imagination and you're thinking and your energy has on life. But I also believe there's a lot of random shit too. I don't think it's an either or. I think it's a combination of you interacting with all these other people that are also creating their own realities at the same time and that you can have, you can all tune into a good frequency and perhaps create a good community. And I think that's what people try to do in tribes and shit like that. But at the end of the day, you're still dealing with a random shit. Like the idea that you blame people for fucking diseases or for being attacked by barbarians, you know, is that was that in the secret? You know, the secret work back then did they manifest these barbarians to come over the hills and chop people up with swords back in the Conan days? No, right? This you can't say it's completely. Nobody would ask for that. Nobody would create that in their own imagination for themselves. So it's not that you are completely in control of your destiny. But it seems like you have at least some sort of influence with energy and with your imagination and with, you know, the things that you create and the environment that you set up, I think that's one of the most important things that I've ever learned from psychedelics. Absolutely. Yeah. And just being in a mindset to try new things, whatever, whether it's chemical or experiential or whatever, like cautiously tried. Colliniously. You're, I mean, obviously you didn't find out all this information about it after you've tried all these things. No, no, you knew that going in. Yes. What's the one thing that you ever did? We were like, oh boy, here we go. In one way. This might be a slippery one. Oh, God. A slippery one. I mean, I've had a few slippery ones in my day. One. Oh, God. A slippery one. I mean, I've had a few slippery ones in my day, but I think a lot of the really potent psychedelics have the ability to induce terror. If you're too high of a dose, I've had that happen with both the MT and still aside. And so just so many different occasions, but I've never had anything where I actually have. Yes, I have. I've had a few close to what I would consider overdose. So psychedelics with a dose is just so highly that I think there might be some physical toxicity. Whoa. But with those sorts of cases, it's very difficult to differentiate between what is motivated by fear. A lot of people, even when they're sober, the panic or being uncomfortable and think they're having a heart attack, but it's just a panic attack or it's not even a panic attack. The mind is so informed by the body that especially in a psychedelic state that it's very difficult to say what if you're drinking ayahuasca and suddenly your heart starts beating fast as your heart being fast because you're scared or you scared because your heart is beating fast and which do you concentrate on the heart or the fear first in order to calm yourself down. Wow. Yeah, and you might be throwing a puzzle that you can't wrestle with. Yeah, I just runs you over. It's just too much and you're just there and utter fear and terror until it slowly leaves your system. Yeah. And I overdosed when I ate that one bad shrimp chirping, you know, like six months ago. I mean, I couldn't walk. My legs would not work. They would they were failing. Well, yeah, that's how he got over seven grams. Yeah, it was a lot too much and that's just a guess that was over seven. It could be way more than that. Yeah, you're silly. You went too hard son. Doesn't son necessary. Yeah. Did you come back well? Would you come back for a while? It took me a while like a day. A good 24 hours after until I felt 100%. But didn't you learn something from the experience? Yeah, my wall was like or my bathroom is like Tron the original Tron. If you two had a conversation, it's a which one of these is 24 and which one of these is almost. It's almost ready. Yeah. How old are you now? 37? 37. 37. He's 37 and you're 24. You see that? And he votes too. I took Molly the other day and Molly. Molly inside the MDMA. Yeah. And it was very I've noticed something recently doing shrooms and it happened for some reason with Molly this last time. So it makes me wonder how much of it was really Molly. But I could see so much better when I'm on a psychedelic. Like it seems like my eyes work. You know, because your pupils are bigger. So you're probably having more vision? No, I mean like brighter. I mean, everything's a lot brighter though. Like I can almost see in the dark. Yeah. And it makes me and I had this thing I was thinking of like it would be weird if like all the shit that you see when you're shurming is there all the time. But your eyes adjust to the certain lightness or the certain level of being open that you see it more when you're on shrooms. So like when you're seeing like you're looking at your hand you're seeing like this crazy shit all around it like these like minds that are growing over. What if like that shit's there all the time but you're just like focusing in on that layer of you know brightness or if it was more as we throw to you. Is that possible? Survey only one here qualified to answer that. I would say if I had to answer for you. Poppycock. Yeah. I was just one of the things I thought of wow on Molly because I was looking like jeez I can see in the dark right now. Before he enters. Let's make a bet. Let's make a bet. Because I say he says it's bullshit. What do you say? It's just a theory to what if. No, no, no. I would probably say you might know it's your brain just shutting down going crazy if I had to. Might you get a support your own thing? No, no, I'm just saying it's a what if. I'm not. I'm just saying what do you think you would be doing. He would think. Oh, I would say he's even right. I would say he would be exactly what he says on everything. He's a bullshit. He takes the safe. Well, which is what I do. I think I'm even a fucking guy. Well, he takes the scientific. I think the scientific way more. I go angels and unicorns. I'm looking for Bigfoot, bro. I'm always looking for Bigfoot. But I know I'm looking for Bigfoot. I know I really want Bigfoot to exist. But I don't think he does. Right. But I really want him to. You know what I mean? Right. I mean, you don't see anything exists in the first place. None of this is colored or has any. nothing actually looks the way we perceive it. Really. It's a sensory phenomenon. And so to say what things are actually like is already problematic because it's a sensory experience. So how you? Yeah. That is fascinating, isn't it? And it's almost impossible for people to really wrap their heads on that your mind puts that red in that picture. Your mind puts the dark in someone's hair. Your interpretation of the world. And then that's the total stolen talk. A wonder man. It's like the color blue. Like what does it look like to you, man? When you see the sky, what does it look like you? Do you really don't know? We do know that it is different for some people. Really. Yeah. How different. Well, I mean, there's this colorblind. And it's just like linguistic relativity and color naming. There's been a lot of scholarly research into the issue where certain primitive societies have fewer names for colors. And so they'll only have black and white. And that will encompass black and compass like red. And blue and white. Wow. Yeah. So it's not cross-culturally defined in any way. Dude, it must suck to get your car painted there. Can your car painted in the jungle? I think I asked for a blue. This is red, you fuck. They're like same shit. The chitty end of the podcast right there. We just all lost complete total enthusiasm. I don't even know how we got onto the subject of the color. Where'd that come from? You were saying that he saw vines crawling all over. Oh, yeah. The interpretation of things around us. I love moi, though. And I think it's one of the most beautiful drugs ever. Is it illegal? Yes. Totally illegal. But, Joe, have you done it? No, I've only done MDMA, and I only did it once. You take your wife to Hawaii. You sit on the beach. You do two each. And you just sit there. And you will fucking have the most beautiful time in the whole entire world. And you're going to have a reset. You're going to be so you and your wife are going to connect in a way that you've never had some of the things that never had since you started dating. And it's going to be amazing. Well, it's highly recommended more than anything. Wow. You look a little lovely. I love it. You're like a little love bug. You're so happy. You're Molly. You will have the time of your life. How much more is your young fellow? How do you find a mate that can deal with any of this talking and conversation? How do you, how do you, 24 years old, die or girl, I don't know if you get her straight, but how do you find anybody anybody to hang out with that you would, you know, I mean that you're age man. You start off looking in trees. Or do you just do? 24 year old chicks, but I'll tell you right now. It's going to be a tough conversation at dinner. Yeah. Well, I don't have a lot of people that are interested in the scientific element of a few close friends who are scientists, who I talk with about this kind of stuff. So when you date, how do you, you know, what did you do at work today? And you start talking about found out alanines and all those different crazy shit. Do you have girls do their eyes glaze over? Or do they, do they look to you for God? I mean, it depends on what their academic background is, but yeah, I would say most people are not interested in that sort of thing, unless you, I'm trying to phrase this as high as possible without actually saying it, but you must get mad amounts of stoner pussy, at least thrown at you, at least. Come on, man. You're an online stoner and hero type dude. They must just check my salon, you don't use the Twitter app. I don't. Yeah, maybe today is the day that I start. Hamels Amoris won that letter, one name. No space. Yeah. Yeah. He's got one tweet. But if you're going to have one tweet, this is the fucking tweet to have. What was your tweet? You have one amazing tweet. What is your one tweet? Do you remember? No, at the top of my head. It's a pastor. I'm trying to find it, man. Brian, why don't you talk while I'm from the front of the house. Hey, please vote for me on the shorty word. You're going to go to the subscribe.tv and at the top of it. Click on your support for me. I'm getting beat by a WWE wrestler that has half a million hits. I won't win, but it just makes me feel happy that I'm in second place. Hamels Amoris only has one tweet. And this is it. In the realm of scientific observation, luck is granted only to those who are prepared for magic. You can have one quote, by the way, I think that quote is kind of hacky. There's a couple versions that are out there. You know, somebody, somebody fucking ganked this quote. You know, luck is only granted those prepared. Success is when luck meets preparation. It's like an oldest, the oldest quotation ever. They just doctored that shit up and made it fancy. Yeah. They made it sound a little profound, a little more profound, but really basically they ducked, they doctored an old saying up. This is a fox. But if you're going to have one quote, that's it, dude. And I like how you didn't even use quote marks or did use a period, though. Maybe shouldn't attribute it to someone, but it's easy enough. Yeah, they should figure it out. Right? You didn't write that yourself. Did you ever learn how to fade away? Like, deaf leopard? I don't know. What did you say that? Hamilton Morris, this has been their worst podcast you've ever had, but it's only because of us. Really, you were amazing every time we called upon you. Your questions were great. We just got Brian a little too strong. Hey, it's on my phone. I got a little too strong. And it threw us off a little. But it was fascinating, man. You don't have to turn the music off. I'm kidding. What an impump of his ship. I know. I was going to continue. So if people want to watch any of your stuff, it's Hamilton's pharmacopia. That's right. That's what it is. Invites Magazine. Invites Magazine. It's in one site. That's the best place to access all your stuff. The most likely place I usually post new things on my blog also harper's magazine. So they should Google it, right? Yeah. Google's down, bitches. Is it? No, it's up. Look at the videos down. Look at the videos down. Look at the videos down. They're trying to take it, folks. They know. They know the end is near. Good for them. They know. It's good for who, bro. People are rising up. Big corporations like Google and Wikipedia for standing up for this shit. Well, I heard it's dead. I heard the bill's dead as it stands, but they're going to try to rework it. I don't know. It's terrifying. This is about it. It must terrify you. You're on the internet constantly and you're doing a legal shit. Yeah. I mean, it could have some niblet. Fuck yeah. The idea that they can just come in and take down your site at their discretion. This is right after the NDA national defense authorization act passed, which is another terrifying thing that could just arrest you. They don't have to have a warrant. It's just we're in weird times, man. They're coming after your dual cassette recorders, guys. They're coming after your flush slide. So buy another one. Go to choburgen.net and click on the link for the flush slide. Answer on your code name, Rogan, and you'll get 15% off the number one sex toy from it. Hamilton Morris, if you want, I can have some shipped to you. You don't have to say anything on air. Just wink twice. You're good. Okay. Shipmen on the way. No worries. It's an effective masturbation product. Ladies and gentlemen, it's a weird subject. It's much like psychedelics. It's really underappreciated. It's physical maintenance, I think. I think it's good. The body needs to be able to breathe as often as possible. And that's too distracting. You don't want to involve all these different people in your life and have sex with them. Get yourself a flush like kids. It's not that expensive. They last a long time. As long as you don't do what Brian does them and fist them. Turn them inside out. It shows going on. Anyway, go to choburgen.net and click on the link for the flush slide. And enter in the code name, Rogan, and you'll get it for an offer number one, and a fresh store from him. Thank you to on it.com, O-N-N-I-T. Makeers of Alpha Brain, New Mood, Shroom Tech, Sport, Shroom Tech, Immune, all that good shit. If you go to JoeRugan.net, click on the Alpha Brain logo. Enter in the code name, Rogan. You get 10% off. Thank you, Hamilton Morris for coming down. Please start using Twitter. You're too fucking cool to not be on Twitter. We want to pump you up. Please follow Hamilton Morris, H-A-M-I-L-T-O-N-M-O-R-R-I-S, on Twitter. And make this motherfucker tweet. You need to contribute, bro. You're part of the hive. You're a valued member. And people want to watch his stuff, any of his stuff. He's Google, Hamilton Morris. That's the simplest way. Because vice, they do awesome shit, but it's crazy trying to go to that site and navigate it and try to find anything. If anybody wants to come to Chicago, tickets are almost sold out. That is the 27th. And it's with me, Joey Diaz, and Duncan Trusel. That's the Chicago Theater Friday January 27th. That's going to be fun as fuck. Because then the next night is you obviously on Fox. Hamilton, thank you very much for being on one of our most awkward podcasts ever. You were the light to talk to. You're a wealth of information and a cool motherfucker. Thanks a lot, buddy. Thanks for having me. All right, folks. We will see you next week. That's it for this week. I read it some fucking sleep. Oh yeah. And the ice house. I've had no sleep for days. I'm so I've never been more out of it doing a podcast ever. My little girl's been throwing up and no sleep at night. And coming from Brazil, I'm a mess. So if I sound half retarded today, I will bounce back. I promise you. Next week, I'll be strong. I'm going to take some alpha brain and some fresh squeeze juice. I want to get the party started. So we'll see you guys next week. I think Greg for Simmons is doing this. And I think Brian Kalamazoo as well. I'm working for Brian. We're going to do Brian's. We have a new podcast thing Friday, Brian Kalins, new podcast pilot. It starts at 7 p.m. Pacific. And then right after that we have an ice house chronicle. We put the tickets on sale. Take a try and sell right now at icehousecomedy.com. And we just have a great crusher and it might have Duncan Shostle. It's going to be a big surprise, but it definitely has Brian Kalins. It's whoever's in town. We're all over friends during town. We just decided to do this show yesterday. So if the tickets are not on sale, they will be soon. So that's Friday night 10 p.m. 10 p.m. podcast starts at 9. All right. And then the podcast, the ice house chronicles. You could watch it here on ustream slash Joe Rogan, ustream.tv slash Joe Rogan. Or you can get it on iTunes, but only on the death squad label. So you have to subscribe, death squad, get that. There's a lot of the cool podcasts on that. Sam Triplety's show, The Naughty Show. One of the funniest naughty shows I've ever had last night with the penthouse pet 2012 by all. Hold on. Oh, and Brad Williams. Brad Williams was fantastic. Oh, Larry. We'll get him on. If he can get a permission. All right. Thanks, everybody. We'll see you soon. Bye bye. Hamilton, smile. Smile.