Rick Sanchez ladies and show them. Thank you for doing this. Oh, it's a pleasure Did you wind up at RT and what did you think Larry King gives me a call one? Larry King by the way Larry's a great man. I totally agree. I love Larry He was kind he says Ricky you ought to really look at this and I'm thinking Larry the Russians Come on man. I was born in Cuba. It's a communist country. I mean just in case you want you know, but heat But Larry says to me let me tell you something Ricky, let me tell you something. This is the way Larry. It's so sad. You know, they don't tell me what to say They don't tell me what to do. They don't tell me who I have to interview They let me be in control of my show and I guarantee you They really like you. They really want you if you come here and do this Show that they want you to do they're gonna do that for you as well and I said really Larry you sure and Finally I came to terms You know at the time I'd been fired by CNN. I went to Miami I decided to leave television altogether television news and at the time I was I had started a new health care Company in South Florida which we took public for a couple billion dollars and it was a great story but as the store as that That company was growing. I started thinking to myself, you know, I miss my calling my calling is this Yeah, what you do was it's fun. I love to tell stories I like finding out things that I didn't know when I love sharing them and doing that for a living I think it's just a wonderful thing totally agree so because I was kind of missing that when I got a call one day from an Agent saying, you know, there's this group that wants to hire you and there are real network Would you come up and talk to him and then subsequently I had the call with Larry King? I said, you know what I might want to do this sat down with my wife and my family and I said, you know what I'm gonna put the health care company aside I'm gonna go back to what I what I really want to do. So I joined our tea. I said yes What year? I was five years ago. Yeah, yeah five years ago 2020. Yeah way before 2019 2019 way before like this war and yeah Yeah, yeah, and then with the footing between the United States and that Russia at the time was not Hostile it wasn't necessarily overly friendly. It was just kind of muddy in the middle muddy exactly. Yeah at the time Yeah, so what was it like? It was everything Larry King Senate would be really surprisingly so I'm not surprised But it's interesting, but I think others would be surprised so like you I like dominion of my product right? Of course I want to I want to be a writer I want to be able to talk to my producers. I want to know who my other writers are yes and So I picked my staff. I wrote my entire show. I pick my topics I led the editorial meeting every morning discussing what was gonna be on our news agenda of the day and Can I tell you something? I never had that opportunity at CNN or Fox I'm sorry to say I've worked at all three and I can confirm that yeah I mean you do have some sense or some liberty or journalistic Independence when you work at those places, but not like this I'll just say right now and I hope I'm not breaking anybody's heart out there who's big CNN fan or any cable news fans out there but if you decide you want to interview somebody and he's not on their list of okay interview ease They're not gonna let you interview him and if you want to go down a certain path He's banned. He's banned. Oh, I've run up it against that many times And you're saying this is a good man with interesting things to say where he's in the news like this is a relevant person Or viewers need to hear about this sure the Jeffrey sacks of the world the mirror shimmers of the world the Colonel McGregor The world they're not allowed to be on those rats. We're up. Yeah, right? It's crazy. So I started seeing some of these things when I was at CNN I saw them as well at NBC and Fox, you know to be fair maybe sometimes coming from a different direction and and sure I was allowed to have some You know say in the editorial decisions, but not as much can I just ask since I worked at the same three companies that you worked Yeah, well you and I worked at CNN together exactly um, I would say the one so people look at you know seeing that in a master on the left Fox is on the right, but the but there's also this sense that like wait Maybe they're telling versions of the same story. Yes, and I found over 25 years at the one thing that none of those networks would accept Was anybody who questioned the neo-con story line correct? So I actually did have Doug McGregor to Fox's great credit They allowed me to have him on um, but I think that I don't think he's been on the side left and I think they're They didn't but I think Doug McGregor is as offensive to Fox executives as he is to see none executives as he is to MSNBC Exactly, you know, I think it's very fair and kudos to you for being the first person to put his thought process Yeah, well, I mean, it was it was off and that is really the credit goes to The Murdoch so let me do that, you know, a lot of things to criticize, but they did and your message was simple We're being told we're winning this war and Ukraine. We're not. Yes, and here's a man who's gonna take a certain I don't want to make about me I just want to say I think we have the same experience which is the red line at all three channels is exactly the same question neo-con foreign policy and we're done. So as a journalist working at RT going back to your question Was almost Nirvana for me. Yes. It was fantastic. I Revelled in this opportunity. I would get up with a you know with a little skipping my step every day Thinking about what we can talk about and how we're gonna explain it and who we're gonna talk to as difficult as it was Because a lot of guests wouldn't want to come on because it was our G You know, but it was really a great experience especially Comparatively speaking to what I had experienced in the past and my old friend Larry King was right They generally did not mess with me and when they did when we had normal editorial Arguments which happened in every newsroom and sure of course We would talk it out and sometimes I would win and sometimes I would lose but it would be a discussion It wouldn't be like this is what you're doing So it's fastness a great experience that you felt that RT from you know internal editorial perspective obviously you're the anchor So you yeah, you see what happens you felt that it was freer than Fox NBC or MS I wrote my entire show from top to bottom and nobody looked at it until it went on the okay How's it there you go there you go can I you know can is there anything more than that Nobody looked at my script before I went on the air Except except me and some of the editors who had to put pictures. Well, of course right Yeah, but nobody was looking at it. Oh, no, this goes out. You can't say this you can't say that amazing because they trusted me I mean look man. I mean I've got I've been a part of two Peabody award winning teams I've got a duPont. I've got five Emmys. I've interviewed for US presidents I've sat down with Fidel Castro and Mackell Gorbachev and yet There's not a single entity in the United States who seems to be interested in hiring me why Well now I would say I mean there may be a lot of reasons, but now that you've worked in RT I think it's illegal to hire you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It is Yeah, it's something so how long were you there? I Worked for the first three years and then left prior to the invasion. Yeah, cuz my friends back in South Florida Who were now building this four point four billion dollar healthcare company? And I was one of the original partners of it said Can you come back and help us handle the marketing? I mean we need you to just jump back in there and there's some things We want you to fix and I was like, oh Yeah, so I left and I said, okay, I'm gonna go back and go back and do the You know the the job building back this healthcare company that I had built with my friends and And while I was doing that I then got a call from another dear friend Ben Swan who's a really good journalist and He said, which you want you want to do a show? I said, oh my god I'd love to do a show I missed doing a show so after taking a little hiatus for about a year and a half I went back and started doing a show He said it's not allowed to air in the United States But you get to produce your own show and they air it all over the world and you get to do it in Spanish and in English so suddenly I started doing the show again Tucker and When would that was after the Ukraine War started that was after the Ukraine War started correct? How was I mean that must have been because that was the moment when well that Ukraine war is not the Ukraine War it's a war against Russia led by the United States. Yeah, and you're working at our tea Russia today Yeah, so what was that like it was tough it was tough but after reading enough and knowing enough and Hearing some of the people that we aforementioned the McGregor's and yeah, I started thinking to myself, you know I should do this because we need to have a conversation with these people exactly we need Journalists and others and academics and whoever to start engaging with the journalists and the academics over there So we can have discussions and work out a solution before we start another freaking world war here I mean that so this will be a good thing I can make the world a better place by having a show from the United States That shares the American perspective from a person who loves America Of course a guy who was born in a communist country and spent all his life Listening to his parents say we're in the greatest nation on earth and sharing that with people around the world and our tea was gonna Give me an opportunity to do that. They weren't asking me to be a Russian They were asking me to be a journalist who happened to be American and why wouldn't I tell that kind of story? I totally agree and that's what we grew up with. I remember as a kid watching Phil Donohue Interviewed Brezhnev in New York surrounded in a studio when Brezhnev would go to the UN He would interview him and here he was in the studio with all these women asking this man questions I remember I remember that was Phil Donohue. I remember Ted Comple once a week having a a Soviet Reporter on his name escapes me, but he became very famous. Awesome time. Yes And they would go back and forth and debate ideas Suddenly we're living in an era where our president hasn't spoken to their president for almost four years This is in right. It's lunacy and it's we're so diminished by it actually and imperiled by it I would say I've had every thought that you've had That's why I've been to Russia a couple times for that exact reason as a proud American who's never leaving doesn't have another passport Hasn't served in anyone else's military. I've never been to Russia right well you should go It's a wonderful place, but but it doesn't make me less American. I love my country more than anything But anyway the point is I can understand and empathize with and so strongly agree with everything you said But I wonder for that first year or two years Um, you know the anti-Russian Histeria in the United States was that like a comical pitch like I don't think the US open put Russian names on the screen of the Players like people were not allowed Russians were allowed to compete in sports. It really became pretty evil actually I would say and But you you signed back up with RT like what was that like with people you know? Who did they say to you I? Tried not to bring it up in polite conversation It would get in play really fast It's like You're doing what I would you know people would ask me I say oh my god Rick Sanchez I grew up watching you on TV. You know in Miami. Yeah, yeah Where I used to be on local television and I say so what are you doing now? I'd say well I'm doing on to global stuff Because you just unless this unless the person happens to be if I recognize that it's someone who's astute and has some kind of Geopolitical observations or knows the world or is kind of smart then I tell them and they go oh my that's cool That's great, but you just don't want to you know have a an argument with people during the day. So what is your kids say? They were perfectly fine with it. Yeah, we totally understood. We've taught them Suzanne and I have really taught well, she's a much better parent than I am But I've done my part as well in making the kids understand that we live in a world where there's a lot of different Opagions and a lot of different ways of looking at this right so you couldn't talk to my kids and come away thinking oh They're liberal. Oh, they're conservative or they're this or they just they're smart enough to understand and recognize things for what they are Yes, and I think that's important. It sounds like you've done a great job. I couldn't agree more. She did she did I believe you was there bloke was there blowback though at all to your personal life um Yeah not to mention you always felt like if ever You wanted to do something outside or let's suppose Fox News would call one of your ex You know colleagues would call it say hey Rick We were thinking about inviting you because I remember you used to talk about such and such and they'd want to book you and you'd think They were booking you for something and you go sure I'd love to come on and then I'll send you get that famous phone call that all bookers had to going in a different direction Yeah, we changed the show we're not gonna do that story and actually was they found out that you work in our tea Now they're not gonna have you on simply because you're working our tea which is so prejudicial It's so small-minded and childish like these are these are children who don't know anything about the world at all Rick Sanchez we want you to talk about the new elections in Mexico But we're not gonna get you on because you work at our tea what the hell does one thing have to do with the other? Of course and by the way, let me back up a bit you said that by the time So you were there from roughly speaking like 2019 to late 21 and of 21 or something like that and then you come back in say 22 or 23 correct after the war begins Yes But by that point you can't watch our tea in the United States Our tea is not available in the United States. It was totally banned So the problem there. It's not really about Russia who owns our tea or it's agenda It's about the United States which has a bill of rights the first Right enumerated is the right to free speech the right to see here and say whatever you choose because that had already been gotten Ritter not a slave you're a free man So no one can control what I hear or what I think right? Well, but by the ban a TV network in the United States That was it that happened after the war in Ukraine They decided that no one in the United States should have the right to understand The perspective other than the Ukrainian perspective therefore our tea Which was possibly going to Share the Russian perspective should not be allowed to continue to operate in the United States They just put out an edict I think they just I think it went through the treasury department once again What happened like your licenses revoked and this particular entity is not allowed to operate? What about civil liberties aren't Americans allowed to hear whatever they want to hear? Well, that's what I thought right Congress shall pass no law Freedom of speech all that jazz where to go But then Biden doubles down right and that that Do you want me to share the the phone call? Yeah, I want to know everything I mean this is but I just want to set the context This is pure craziness and they can say Russia bad Russia bad Putin agent all they want I don't care personally But what they can't do is end the Constitution because that's not their right It pre-exists their rule and it will I hope endure after they're long gone So like I don't really know the part where they were they ended the first amendment. I don't really understand that You know, it's really weird because if you watched my show and many people did And some Americans were watching the show because they'd you know back channel It's somehow through the internet or something my show was very very popular in Latin America One of the most popular shows in Latin America huge in India And in different parts of the world because our tea happens to be one of the most respected You know journalistic networks Content creators in the in the whole world It's a very viable you know They put a lot of money and they've got a lot of smart people working there And I think they generally do a pretty good job with their product I will say this I haven't I'm not allowed to watch it So obviously haven't seen that much as an American. It's forbidden for me to have those ideas or that information But to the extent I have seen it super interesting. Yeah, super interesting. Yeah, it's not just news on a loop Like the channels that we worked at are it's like here the eight stories the day We're just gonna fog the shit out of him and you can't hear anything else They have tons of interesting stuff. Yeah, and my show was not necessarily every day about the Ukraine war Nor was it about Putin or was it it was us politics It was a little bit of India. It was about the South China Sea You know, we covered all the interesting things that we're going on out there with interesting people from around the world Who would love to come on and talk to us? And a lot of people founded and Vigorating and interesting To watch a perspective that was different than the normal perspective you get here in the United States Only agree and to hear an American perspective which as an American you brought Is I think really cool and important and it's good for us and it's good for them And it's just for just talking and by the way even if it's not good or you think it's not good You're not allowed to you're not all to get in the way of it because that's against our Constitution Which is the basis of our civilization? So back off a government is not allowed in this country or so we're told to tell us who we can work for who we can watch Or what news entities can deliver news and which can't you probably haven't forgotten the image of empty grocery shelves during COVID lockdowns and out of control mandates made that nightmare hard enough and not being able to get the food You want for your family was just too much So the people who run this country should do everything possible to make sure that never happens again One small business called Maryweather Farms is doing everything it can to help The founder of Maryweather Farms was so alarmed by this country's dependence on foreign meat That she left Washington abandoned her career there and came to the great American West to begin a company that created American-grazed beef And she has and we eat it every day If you sign up for a subscription today you will get Maryweather's best offerings 10% off plus free shipping every month Your first box will be filled with 20 of their premium beef sticks plus another special offer for more 100% of Maryweather cattle are born and raised in the US Brought up right in Wyoming Colorado and Nebraska. They're all American all the time Go to merowether farms dot com slash Tucker shop all products and save and by the way the meat is excellent So then I'm sorry I just wanted to get that as a sort of foundation for the story you're about to tell so then what happened So this last year sometime around August I come home And I'd had a great newscast last year. So 2024 correct 2024 so right in the middle of a presidential campaign That's correct. Okay in the middle of a presidential campaign keyword presidential campaign I get this interesting phone call. I just come home from working. I get a phone call and it's an old friend Who used to work with me in mainstream news? He was a manager at CNN as a matter of fact Ricky what's going on? Yeah, hi. Oh my god. What are you doing calling me? Because I just wanted to check up on you see how things are going. I said good. Yeah, things are going pretty really pretty well He says Just calling to let you know that I'm now working somewhere else. I'm no longer in news. I said oh, okay And where I work a lot of people are talking about you And I said well cool. That's neat. Who where are you working? He says like the state department kind of I'm like no, I'm like oh wait You work at the state department Who knows USAID and Or other agencies yes and I the guys are talking about you. I said well good. What are they saying? Well your show is very popular Come on. Yeah. I said well What do you think he goes well? They don't necessarily like some of the things that you're saying I said okay And I said well, they're welcome to come on and tell me whoever they are. Tell me I mean we could have we could have them on as a guest And we can discuss whatever it is But throughout the conversation he was Very evasive But was letting me know that I guess I guess he was letting me know that I was being watched And that was part of his mission And not only was he telling me that he was that I was being watched But he would kind of hope that I would somehow change what I was saying But he wasn't coming out in exactly saying it so when we were done with the conversation I remember I hopped a phone and I thought what the hell was that? Was that a warning or threat Or maybe sure or maybe both And then three weeks later All of a sudden I'm hearing And then it happens The Biden administration has decided to go through the Treasury Department this little Agency called olfactant most people have never heard of yes which controls what businesses in the United States are allowed to exist and which ones aren't and They shut down the place where I worked And not only that they passed a measure within that provision that seemed to say and I'm not a lawyer and I'm not an expert on it But it seemed to say that any American working for this entity will go to jail or be fined if they continue working for that entity So and that's what happened and the next day man I was on the street That's absolutely mind blowing so let's just back up You say three weeks later The state department shut down the place where you work. What does that mean? That means that they officially announced that our tea as an entity And anybody associated with media in Russia. I think is the way they wrote it Is not allowed to hire Or or even contract Anyone in the United States I Rick Sanchez productions my show Had been hired by an entity to do a show that was airing on RT I didn't work directly for RT But I worked for a us company that was doing shows They sold the shows and they sold this show to RT So my show ended up being on RT Well, they back channeled the just the the treasury department under Mr. Biden Decided to follow all those little loopholes or whatever and they went all the way back and said not only Can our t-not exist in the United States RT is not allowed to pay money to anybody in the United States for any product. They can't buy a product They can't contract anybody They can't nobody can work for anybody who contracts through RT And if any of those people are caught in the United States somehow contracting or working for RT I don't care if you're a janitor or a carpenter or a plumber You will be fined or even go to jail That's the new law according to Mr. Biden three weeks afterward and they said something in the Dicta In the explanation about why they were doing this that they thought that the Russians were once again preparing to interfere in our election As they had before in the case with Mr. Trump So they were shutting down RT and anybody who could be in any way associated with RT Even though I wasn't doing pro-Trump stuff In fact, I was criticizing Mr. Trump during the campaign for certain things that he did just like I was Criticizing Kamala Harris It was totally unfair that here. I am just doing a basic newscast every day Sharing it with them that was getting garnering tens of millions of people around the world and a lot of people thought it was fair And it was sharing a perspective that Americans needed to hear And the Biden administration said no you cannot practice your craft as a journalist if you're in any way associated with those people But it wasn't airing in the United States. No, it wasn't I was that's just pure crazy. Well, that's what happened and it happened in America And it hurts being guy who was born in a communist country and has spent his whole life saying we are so different Than the rest of the world because we allow people to say and think and work wherever they want And all of a sudden here I was being told I couldn't work or think Or or say whatever I wanted That's that's like unbelievable. Did anyone from the US State Department? Reject you after No No, did you speak again to the sinister CNN Colleague who called you from the State Department after this happened he he sent me a a Christmas card and Recently did he leave like a horse's head on your bed or anything like that he did we did have your no actually We did have a this mafia behavior I mean, we didn't have a secondary conversation and interestingly enough He suggested that he would help me if I wanted to maybe go to work like At Fox or someplace like that that they could make some phone calls. Oh, we could So well, well, can you back into neo-con world if you'll just? Bow before the throne isn't that kind of a feeling you get is that what they were saying? I don't know that's it's also damn coded, man It's coded, but the message is clear is when you're living it and you're experiencing it and thank god, you know We've done well in Suzanne and I are You know, there's other people who are affected by this, you know guys who were producers and writers They hired teams of people all over Washington and New York and they're good people people who worked with you at Fox and people who worked with me at CNN and people who worked in local news It just regular American people writers producers, you know And they're all out on their ass simply because mr. Biden thought that the Russians might be mean to him and you know But not even in the United States I will say one of the smartest people I've ever met in my long life And most patriotic American. I've ever met in my life Certainly up there worked at RT just effect and I met on a News assignment in a foreign country years ago and just a truly brilliant person But anyway, I found the Russians in general to be and have found them to be since I've been working with them to be extremely transactional and extremely honest sometimes, you know More so than we are Blunt yeah, they they say what they think you know what they want and when you talk to them They're very exact about what they want and I kind of find that admirable It's a it's a it's a nah, you know, we're talking in generalities here. Hasty generalizations are never good There's all kinds of Russians. It's just like there's all kinds of Americans, but but generally speaking I found their mannerism to be very Easy to work with and for so I thought I grew up in a country that took the second reward seriously and its lessons Our whole civilization in the our whole side in the US was based on the lessons We were learned in the world in World War II from the Nazis. That's that's the country I grew up in and the one of the main let you know so what were the lessons? We don't judge people on the basis of their appearance racism is bad Eugenics and all that garbage were against that and number two We don't demonize whole groups of people if an individual does something bad We can say that and we can punish that individual But we can't punish his parents right or his children or his neighbors because they didn't do anything We don't believe in collective punishment. That's immoral. It's into Christian, but it's also the lesson of the second reward And so I totally buy that I still believe that Truly like in my heart. I believe that Call me liberal, but it's so crazy to see like our whole society doing that and it's like you know like Putin That's fine. You've got all sorts of like things. You know like he's that he's doing you want to do things He's preventing you from doing I get it But to turn on say every 150 million Russians are evil or Russia is a Gas station with nuclear weapons like that low IQ buffoon Mccane used to say and all the other low IQ buffoons in the US Senate, which is like 95% of them It's a gas station when nuclear weapons really if you're a red toll story. Yeah been there like you may hate Russia But to say it's a gas station you're an idiot actually and to Hurt like professional tennis players because they have Slavic last names Like I don't want to live in a country that does that Did you know what I mean? Oh? I thought it was first they came for the so and so then they came for the so and so and so and I said nothing It's like we said extends to all human beings if they did that to the Malaysians or the Chinese or any it doesn't matter the Belgians You can't Collectively punish people. Yeah, right? And we did since you made the historical reference to World War II Last time I checked and there's no American who knows this unless we as parents tell them but Hate to break it to you, but the French were not the reason that Hitler was defeated I know we think this and I know every year or every couple of years. We have this you know The resistance did it. Yeah, Norman the thing where we invite everybody but the Russians and the French president whoever he happens to be at the time Whether it's McCraut No, the French distance did it. Yeah, Norman, the thing where we invite everybody but the Russians and the French president, whoever he happens to be at the time, whether it's Macron, to mitter on, such there and says, oh, look what we did in Europe. Look what we did really? No, I know. You lasted five minutes, dude. But yeah, yeah, part of the story. It's just that impulse, the impulse of the crowd to call someone unpopular and then lynch him. Like that's a human impulse. All people have that impulse. It's incredibly ugly. Civilization exists to keep it in check. So I were against lynching. It's why we're against war crimes. It's why we're against like mob behavior in general and to see the US government encouraging that, whether it's against people who don't get vaccinated or Russians or just pick a group. I don't care who it's against. I'm opposed to that, right? Just know this, Tucker. And I think you do. Every time a bullet is spent, every time a helicopter crashes, every time a fighter plane goes somebody somewhere in the United States says, jiching. I hate that. And I mean, you're right, I know that you're right. Fortunately, wars and enemies are chosen for a specific reason and more often than not, it has to do with financial reasons. And it has nothing to do with the good people of this country. Right. Just like there are good people in Wisconsin who don't want to share their communities with tons of immigrants. And it's not because they're bad people or dislike immigrants. And they're not the ones who started the problem in Honduras or Guatemala caused 500,000 people to leave the countryside and come to the United States. So there are some people in our gut. We I love the United States, but there are some people in our government who do some very nefarious things who create bad results that make the rest of us feel it and look bad. That's the shit we got to take and hate and hate each other too. They inspire hate. I don't like that. I don't think a government should ever whip its population into a frenzy of hate. I think it's really scary. Right. Even again, even against the Russians. So I'm hardly an expert on Russia. I've been there a couple times. I don't speak Russian. I don't, you know, I'm not Russian. I'm from Laoya, but might come to understand their perspective. And I think it's a fair perspective. Well, you worked with them. So that's my question. You know more about Russians than I do, just because you worked with a lot of them. What was their perspective on the war? Their perspective on the war was quite simple. It goes back decades where it seemed to them that NATO and the United States, which many people would argue NATO is really running out of Washington, have for years broken their promises. It's almost this simple if we were trying to explain it in very simple terms. After the Soviet Union broke apart, they were desperate for a friend. And we said we would be their friend and we would show them how democracy and capitalism works. And we sent the brightest minds in America. And we even had James Baker say to them, don't worry, because you're no longer our enemy. We're not going to crocheon you. We're not going to point missiles at you. We're not going to continue NATO expansion all the way up to your border. We're just not going to do that. We promise we're not going to do that. And then they found out over the years that that wasn't true, that every single thing that we said we would not do, we actually did. And if you actually looked at Russia and then you looked at NATO now, it's almost like they're feeling a little bit surrounded. Well, because the point of NATO is to surround them from Estonia to Latvia. And there's missiles pointed there and they started getting so now you have this here, which is Ukraine, which is almost the end of the encirclement. And they finally thought to themselves as citizens and their president said, guys, this is too much. I mean, now you want to take Ukraine. We got 4,000 year history here going back to Catherine the Great. And it's now you say not only do you want to take NATO, but you're already putting military hardware in there. And then there was this thing which they believe is very true, which our government under a woman named Victoria Newlin in 2014 helped to foment along with Mr. Biden, who was vice president. A coup in Ukraine that caused a democratically elected president to be removed simply because he was friendly to Russia. He wasn't necessarily a Russian, but he was friendly to Russia. In other words, you want to have good relations with Russia. That's one of the world's great powers right on his border. Correct. Be like, is the president of Mexico generally friendly to the president? And I said, yeah, no choice. Right. Not on everything, but we decided it was wrong for the president of Ukraine to have relations, certainly not friendly relations with Russia. So we went in and we started a coup, which we've been known to do as you know. And as a result of that coup, we had the guy essentially eventually removed. And that finally was the last straw. That's where the Russians, their mindset, their president, their politicians said, this is too much. This just cannot continue. And that's what led to this war. So that's their way of looking at it. Like they were being encroached. Is it right? Is it wrong? Do they have it right to think that way? It's not for me to decide. Maybe historians can decide that. But there's another story besides one day the Russians just got angry and decided to go after Ukraine for no reason whatsoever. Because they're not rebuilding the Soviet Union and they want to take Poland and it's like the hottest storyline I've ever heard. And there's nothing factually to back that story up in anywhere. I'm aware. They have been losing territory, not gaining territory, and they're fine with it. And they don't want to go. They don't want to. I don't think the Russians want to run Ukraine. Do they need more land of the Russians? No, but as part of Ukraine is Russian? No, I'm aware. But I'm just saying the idea that they want to be a Russian. You're like country in the world. That's like extremely complicated. It's what I have noticed and that makes me sad or even than anything. Because ultimately I care about what happens in my country because my kids live here. And so watching the style of debate in America change to a system, an age old system, a western system where you think one thing I think another we like talk it through, the guy with the best point wins. Right? To a system where we just create a villain. And if we don't like with the other person saying we tie him to the villain and it ends the conversation. Shut up, Rick Sanchez, you're a Putin puppet. Correct. Money from Putin. Why should I listen to you? And it's like, at first when this started happening, it started happening a while ago. I was like, that's so childish. I'm not even going to acknowledge it. And then it spread like the stage four cancer that it is. And all of a sudden everybody thinks like that. Everybody thinks like that. It's like you're connected to Russia. Then latest is Qatar, which is country of 300,000 people. It's like, oh, Qatar is running our American media. It's like so floridly insane, but also so like unimpressive. Like, do you really think like that? There's something that bothers me so much lately. I just, well, because I'm bored and I created a new podcast. It's called journalistically speaking. And I named it, journalistically speaking, for a reason. I got a journalism degree from the University of Minnesota. I practiced journalism most of my life. I feel good about it. I think it's an honorable profession. But I'm kind of trying to stick it in the eye of the other people who call themselves journalists to work at all these places today. I started looking around and looking at MSNBC and CNN and Fox. How are the people who work at these places where former spokesperson's for the Pentagon or the State Department or President Bush or President of President this or president that? And I'm thinking, and they say, Russians are state TV. We've got literally the person who spoke for the president of the United States is now the anchor at such and such a network. Oh, I agree. And they're all over the place. And what is more state TV than that? And most of them didn't even study journalism and have never covered a story. And no one wanted to play with him. And so there's this one chick at MSNBC who I knew and I can't remember her new last name. It was Deb Nicole Devanesh, Nicole Wallace's her name. And she was Jeb Bush's like coffee girl and flack kind of like in the 90s. And I covered Jeb Bush. I remember her very well. She's totally incompetent then. But she was incompetent in this very specific way that people in Washington are. She was totally obedient to the message. Yes, no creativity, no independent thinking, pretty low IQ nasty. But man, if you told her to say something, she would just say it. Yeah. And it's so sad to see someone like that rewarded in this great country, which I guess she has been, I think she's a TV show still, right? Nicole Wallace, Nicole Wallace. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. She's still on the air. She worked for McCain. I think she ultimately went from a a thing, but I knew her when she worked for Jeb Bush. And but I just couldn't believe like she's a journalist. Yeah. Like are you joking? She's like a flack and not even a good one. They're either. But obedience was her. Yeah. And that's all the occasion. And that's how they keep their jobs. And that's why the Rick Sanchez's of the world get fired from those places. And the Tucker Carlson's of the world get fired. Oh, I'm so crazy. Whatever happened there's two, you know, I shouldn't even ask you this in the middle on camera because I don't know what you're interested in it. But there was a guy. Well, you don't know what any my answer is. No, but this could be but Dylan. Radigan. Yeah. So I think I was it and brilliant guy. Exactly. Yeah. And he was on the left. And I remember thinking, oh, he's like, someone liberal. He was not a liberal. No, he was on the like traditional life. He was like free thinking left guy. Right. And he started saying stuff. I think I was worked there when this happened, and he went from being like, Oh, liberal guy, whatever abortion abortion abortion to being like, hey, why don't we pay people fair wages, which is a real thing as far as I'm concerned. And all of a sudden he disappeared. Whatever. And so I thought he was impressive. But I knew that his brand of politics was not acceptable. Whatever happened to him. They did the same thing with him that they do. They did with me. I mean, you know, they said, look, I know you've got a new contract. You signed just a little while ago. So we're going to continue to pay you for the next two and I offered through years. And the only thing is you can't say anything bad about us. And you can't really take another job unless it's more money. And, you know, it's crazy. I don't know where they get the money, but they have a lot of money. Those places, they do because they just handed out and they told Dylan Radigan, no, we don't want you working here anymore. And it was like they did it from one week to the next and he was gone simply because he was challenging the status he any was. And I remember like I didn't pay any attention to Dylan Radigan at all. But then one day I heard him say something. I said, well, that's I don't even know if I agreed with it or not, but it was interesting. And I could tell that Dylan Radigan was actually thinking for himself and he's smart. I totally agree. I don't know him. But I remember thinking this guy's smart. And then he was gone. Yeah, I got that same feeling at CNN. As soon as I started challenging certain principles, criticizing, for example, certain things, then the elders at CNN, those people who were in that the the the row they call to remember is thing called the row. And it was like five, six, seven, eight older guys who decided what stories went on the air, why they went on the air, when they should go on the air. And I remember I wanted to start doing certain stories about some of the mistakes and fourbles that we had made in Latin America, for example, that were causing there. This this this immigration thing that was going on. And they said, no, no, no, we're not reporting that. So what do you mean we're not reporting that? I said, you know, to a certain extent, we kind of started a soul war and Guatemala that ended up in the deaths of 200,000 people. And we removed a democratically elected president back in the 1950s, which has led to the problems that have gone into Honduras. And as the only Hispanic anchor in America, working at your network, I'd like to tell some of these stories not to be critical. So we can learn. We make mistakes. It's okay. And they said, no, you will not do that story period. Why? How? I guess it made certain people in the neo-conist abishment look bad. And they were trying to move it for an intervention, especially in countries you don't understand has massive consequences. Exactly. Right. Have have some humility when you act like you bomb somebody's country, everyone's like, oh, just just bomb the country. Okay, fine. You bomb the country, kill a bunch of people, take out a nuclear site. But like what happens then? Yeah. Yeah. And let's maybe there was a good explanation for it. I agree. I was something that was going to lead. But you can't just say, well, the guy that seemed to have some leftist tendency. So we took him out. What? I mean, you know, what's the same? What I see was interesting. And it does make you wonder like the people who remain and I like them perfectly fine. I have nothing. I always like Wolf, what's her always going along with Anderson Cooper. There are a ton of people like that who've just like kind of been there forever. And all the networks, not just CNN. But and I never had any problem with anything. Wolf was always nice to me, for example. Yes. Wolf's a really nice guy. Totally. I completely agree. And Anderson Cooper never had any problem with him. But he's a nice. I did never go. And he kind of human warmth, uh, sense from him. But whatever. But what the, in order to stay at a channel like that for that long, the number of like deep moral compromises you have to make is crazy. Don't you think is that fair? I was watching you and Cuomo the other day and I thought, wow, the questions that you guys were going back and forth on, I was thinking, does he really not know? Does he really think, for example, not the bust his chops? I think he's a good guy and generally does a good show. He's inquisitive enough to ask good questions. But guys like him who you think this guy is really smart. And when he's kind of defending Zelensky as some kind of, you know, novel, perfect leader or something, dude, really? I mean, the information's out there. If you just want to look for it or do you not want to find it? I don't know. Of all the nearest resolutions you're likely to put off the one you're most likely likely to put off and keep putting off is buying life insurance. And you should have life insurance. It's kind of crazy not to because the future is unknown. You got to have life insurance. But you may not have life insurance because it's a huge hassle and it can be a huge rip-off. But there is an answer, policy genius. It makes it very easy and much cheaper. You can find life insurance policies and start at just 292 bucks per year for a million dollars of coverage. And some options, and this is the best part, are 100% online and let you avoid unnecessary medical exams, the guy with the gloves. You don't want that if you can avoid it and you may be able to avoid it. 40% of people wind up looking back and wishing they'd had better life insurance or any life insurance. It could have helped their families enormously. Policy genius can fix that for you. Peace of mind. That's what they're really selling. The address policygenius.com slash tucker or click the link in the description to get your free life insurance quotes and see how much money you could save and how much hassle you could save. Policygenius.com slash tucker. What is that? Do you think that it is a kind of instinctive deference to true power that keeps people in line? Is there some kind of conference call I've never been invited on? How does everybody know what the red line is? When you are hired in the United States of America as a communicator, one of the first things you adhere to is the principle of power. So having access, if you're a local reporter in Wichita, to the police chief, so that you can go out on the by-bust that they're going to do or the investigation on a local politician, you yearn for that connection. Somewhere along the line that never seems to be broken for some people. It's like if all I got to do to be a good communicator is get tight with the mayor's office, the police chief, and then as you grow, maybe I end up with CNN now it's the state department. No, it's totally right. CIA, as a journalist, I represent power. And somewhere along the line, somebody needs to slap the shit out of all of us and say, no, you don't. No, your job is not to represent. Your job is to represent the people down there, the workers, the people who pay the taxes. Yeah, and you're only people. Yes. They are the people you need to work for. Your audience, the average American, and they're not. They're like, yeah, the average Americans here, but the people that I really want to impress are over here because that's what gives me access and access is everything access is growth. And it gets me the next job. And that's a strange little thing that we've developed in this country. Did you ever know Jen Griffin at Fox, the Pentagon reporter? I think I may have met her, but no, I don't want to sing Laurence, perfectly nice. That's not true. Pentagon reporters are usually so whoa. Whoa. And what's interesting is she just carries the she lies and she carries the Pentagon line, not the kind of top. You know, not the defense secretary line. He's a political appointee, but the permanent Pentagon, the interests of this agency, the largest government agency. And she just carries her on no matter what, no matter what, it doesn't matter how implausible it is. And it's a neo-con line. So for sure. And when you challenge her, when she's on your show, which I'm sure you have this happen, because I had this happen at CNN, I'd, you know, have the, the Pentagon reporter on, and I challenge her on a question, she would complain to management and then management would call me in and say, Hey, take it easy with your questioning and what you are doing. Oh, I remember John Klein calling me the president of C and you, you remember John, do I remember John? Yeah. Yeah. We want to go at a rabbit hole here. No, I'm not going to, but John would call me and say Rick, such and such says you got to really back off on this stuff. It's like, why it's a perfectly legitimate question. John, was a test of of my personal decency and religious principles because I was so mistreated by John Klein in the most dishonest. I've no one's ever been that dishonest with me ever in my life that when John Klein got fired, which was of course inevitable from CNN, I called him to say, you know, I just, I heard you get fired and I'm just so grateful that you did get fired because you did it. I didn't. So I called him on a cell. This was your slider. He picks up and then I was like, that's really don't do that to somebody. Like I'm a Christian don't act like that to somebody, you know, kick him when he's down. Don't do that. So I just hung up. He's like, hello, talk her hello and I hung up. And that was the best I could do. Yeah. When I should have done, as a Christian's call them and say, you know, John, I, I've, when we had promised treatments, but I know what it feels like to be fired. I'm really sorry. I could, I wasn't man enough to do that. But I did pull back. What a moment. Well, that, that little moment that half a second on the phone of someone. I want to be that person. I don't want to kick the suffering man. I'm glad about your cancer. I don't want to be that person. But boy, I was tempted because I mean, John Klein is I've never dealt with anybody that dishonest. Like literally I resigned to my job at CNN. I went to lunch with my brother at the palm in 19 street. I'll never forget this is like back when you didn't check yourself on all the time. I get back to my office and I have a call from Dave Bowder at the AP is the AP writer and he's like, calling back right away. He's like, I'm sorry. You just got fired from CNN. We have a statement from John Klein. I was like, what do you mean? I resigned this morning. I think it's fired. What are you talking about? He's like, no, John Klein called me. Why was that lunch? Oh, my God. So I called John, because it was like, is this real? And he said, and I'm quoting as God watches, he goes, it's just business. It's just business. I don't know why I'm telling this to I've never told that sort of anybody, but that was yeah, that's a great story. So John, no, but that's how the business was. Sounds like the mafia. Yeah, well, it totally is. And I'm sorry sorry that I just business now. No, you and I have had interesting 25 years later. It's like, of course, that's what happened. It doesn't bother me at all. But we're both better for you. Oh, I completely agree. And anyone who's shocked by that kind of stuff is it is a naive and I don't want to be nice. So, but um, so you can do, I'm totally stepped over your story, because you trigger no, well, here, let me help you. So, um, after the Biden administration decides that they think this entity, which they really don't even understand, but apparently you thought my show was too popular and they didn't want me to be popular on a network other than the BBC or CNN. And, uh, so they essentially shut it down. They're by shutting me down by penalty of imprisonment. And I was a little angry about it. So I went around and I started telling people about it all anybody who would listen. I would say, look, this, this is the situation I'm in and it's very bothersome. And I got a lot of people including the society professional journalists who said, look, in a country like ours, the government doesn't get a chance to decide who the winners and losers who can report and who can do anything else. So they've invited me to actually speak at one of their forums, which I thought was cool. And then a very large newspaper here in the United States in Washington, no less decided they were going to run a story on this. And essentially they wrote a story that essentially says the headline of, you know, Rick Sanchez, former CNN reporter, challenging the Biden administration, hoping that the, the new Trump administration will change this law. And it was legitimate story telling the story that I've been telling you that one day I was working and suddenly I was, this was taken away from me and it was unfair. Perfectly legitimate story. Um, and it was about to air or part of me be published, uh, the very next day. And I get a phone call. Remember we talked earlier about a a mysterious phone call. Yeah. Now there's this young journalist, nice young man worked hard on the story, smart kid. And he says, Mr Sanchez, I'm so sorry to tell you this, but the story that was going to come out tomorrow that you and I were both excited about it. It's been killed. They're not going to run the story. I said, why wouldn't they run the story? They said, well, because our managing editor, not my boss, his boss apparently got a call last night from somebody and they convinced him in that phone call that we should kill this story. And I said, can you give me more details? Do you know why? Cause no, I don't even know who the person was who called him. And I don't usually work with my man with, with the guy at the top. I usually work with my regular editor. I'm just a reporter, but I've never even heard of a phone call coming from the very top like that and canceling the story. So now not only did I get a mysterious call that led to me losing my job at our team. Now my just trying to share my story with people was being killed by another mysterious phone call. Well, it was in neo-con publication. So I'm from DC or not. So I'm, um, I happen to know the publication very well. And it's a neo-con publication. And we don't want to say it because we don't want to say it. I don't want to never write it. It didn't happen to me. So I don't have the right to divulge it, but it's a publication in Washington, DC that is resolutely neo-con. And they're like, no, this is contrary to the story that we're telling. So, so what you're telling me and what we're coming to realize in this conversation, you and I is that the state department, who I know reached out to me when I was working at RT to kind of threaten or warn me not to work at RT, which is my choice and was taken away from me. Also then followed up by calling a American newspaper to tell them not to cover me or tell my story based on what they needed as well. Of course, this is crazy. It is crazy. This is crazy. And by the way, I don't know anything. No, of course. More mechanics of what actually happened. I can say that there is a conspiracy of temperament and worldview that is not explicit. And I doubt it's even like a true conspiracy and that I don't know if there's communication between the parties. But the people work at the state department, the people who work at the Washington Post, the people who work at, you know, every big news organization, DC and New York have the same worldview. And so they know that, you know, telling your story, explaining how your first amendment rights as an American were violated by the US government, is contrary to their interests as cheerleaders of the war against Russia. It'll help Putin. So we can't say it. It's like, I mean, that seems like deep and all we want to do is engage. I mean, I am not here, you know, being a cheerleader for Russia or any other country. We're allowed to be. We're not at war with Russia, by the way. So we are in fact waging a war against Russia and have been of hundreds of billions of dollars later. Two of the trucks, you know, more than a million people dead later, you know, we're losing. But and it's all very sad. But the truth is, we're not actually at war with Russia. Congress is not declared war in Russia. So you've got every right to go to Russia to take Russia side if you want. I mean, I don't think you are. You haven't been to Russia. And you're not taking Russia side, but just be clear. You have a right to do that. And it's an inalienable right as a journalist. It's my responsibility to represent their point of view. Of course, you put a microphone in front of them and say, what is your opinion of this situation? Right. And then report back, but we're not allowed to do that. I'm being told you're not allowed to get that side of the story. And if you report that side of the story, we're going to put you in jail. So I do think that most journalists obey because they fear social sanction, they fear someone saying you're a Putin puppet or whatever. But in your case, you actually saw an administration try to apply the force of law. Like we'll put you in jail. So that's what I think is different about your story. It's not just like people are embarrassed to be seen as pro-Russia. They were like, no, you violate the order and you're going to prison. That's a different level. No. And I'm challenging it as an American. First of all, just from a constitutional standpoint, I think I have a right to challenge it. And I've talked to enough people in the legal community who are helping me with this, who are saying, if you want to continue doing that, you have a right to petition to continue doing that in the United States. And now that the Trump administration is there, there are we're getting some friendly responses from people in the Trump administration who why has reexanchions not allowed to work? No. And I can't say definitively yet that the Trump administration will undo this because things are moving and there's negotiations now with Russia. And I understand the Trump administration is trying to remove some of the silly sanctions that we have on them that are just ridiculous. But the reason it's so hard to do any of that is because of the leash that remains in place, which is the fear people have, good people, patriotic Americans have of being tied to Russia. So so total has been the propaganda victory. You're connected to Putin, Putin's bat. Whole 100 Americans. 99, I'm going to tell you Putin is evil, which you may be. I mean, I don't know. Yeah. More evil than like a lot of our allies, probably not. But whatever. I'm not defending. It happens to be the president of a country and they have something to say and we should report it. Yeah, but it's like it's gotten to the point where that kind of lynch mob mentality is so entrenched in the United States that even to suggest that someone is close to this boogeyman is enough to shut it down. But here's what that's a leash. What they're doing is controlling your behavior. You're absolutely right. But even on a more pragmatic standpoint, I looked this up the other day. I said, how much money did we spend to rebuild Europe after World War two? 140 billion dollars in today's money. Yeah. We've spent over 200 billion in Ukraine to destroy Ukraine to destroy Ukraine. Well, that's the difference, right? Think about that. If you asked the average American back then we spent 140 billion dollars to rebuild Europe after the Nazis destroyed it. Was that okay? I think 99% of us would say, yeah, we needed to do that. And I'm glad we did it. If you went around America and you said 200 billion dollars of your tax money has been spent in Ukraine. And then you said, can you find it on a map? But would you care? And what could you do to Gary and Deanna and Baltimore and Detroit and Minneapolis, like with that money? In general, I think the destructive impulse is satanic. And I think it really is a dualism, whether you're creating or you're destroying. And if you look around and you're like the outcome of all these different adventures is just purely destruction, I think you can say you're serving evil. I think it's honestly that God creates, Satan destroys. I'm sorry to get all heavy on you. But I think it's just very basic. Yeah. Right? Isn't it? Not only that, but I think it's all about engagement. And I keep going back to this idea that I keep having called me crazy that my calling is sharing stories. And I want the right to be able to share stories. And my parents told me one day when they brought me to America from a communist country that this was a unique place where I would always be able to share any story. And I'm being told that I can't share stories. And if we don't engage with Russia, if we don't talk to Russia or any other country for that matter, even Iran or whatever other countries out there that are supposed to be the boogie men, if we don't engage with those countries, we're creating a path which is going to be so dangerous that we're not going to be able to come out from it. And that's my fear. Well, I mean, that right from a geopolitical standpoint where we've really, really squandered American power to the point where we have less power than most Americans understand. And it's really scary. Right. From a geopolitical standpoint, where we've really, really squandered American power to the point where we have less power than most Americans understand. And that's really scary. I want America to be powerful. I want us to be able to project power if we need to. I want us to be able to protect our interests. I want us to stay prosperous and free. And we, the degree to which we've like kind of wrecked ourselves is not obvious to people. And it makes me want to cry when I think about it. And how is it that we can continue to convince Americans of these things that aren't true and have them buy it? Are they just too busy? Is the money too big? Is the power of propaganda? It's how, you know, the State Department or your CNN former colleague calls you up. It's like, no, what the, the people in charge are terrible at building things. They've built nothing. Our countries collapsing our infrastructure is garbage or population is dying. Okay. That's just a fact. Yeah. I grieve over that. I want this country to be prosperous, free and happy. I want people, I want my kids to get married and be able to afford houses. I want them to have my grandchildren. I mean, these are like basic desires. The people running it have no ability to do any of that and to help with any of that, to actually help the population in the United States. All they can do is destroy. And how do they pull that off without like sparking a revolution? A much needed revolution in their country. They do it through propaganda. And I have been an instrument of that throughout my life unknowingly, a propaganda that lies to people in a way that's so aggressive and all encompassing. You don't know that it's dark because there's no light. You have nothing to compare to. You have no idea your worldview is so controlled. Do you have no freakin idea what reality is? You know, I was just thinking something which is really interesting and that is comparable almost. I was thinking to myself, you had the number one show in the United States of America at the number one network. And somehow that was taken away from you. I happen to have a pretty darn good show that was seen by also tens of millions of people. But mine didn't air any United States. It earned around the world. Both of us seem to have that show kind of taken away from us one day. And I think if I'm not going too far on the perch here that it happened as a result of the same thing and caused by probably the same people. Of course. I mean, of course, I was so grateful by the way because I will always, you know, give Fox. Yes. The credit it deserves a lot of credit for being kind to me, which they always were of not really getting in my business and of, you know, giving me all that freedom for so long. And I'm grateful to the Murdoch family for that. But, you know, clearly form policy, you know, con form policy is the red line. They don't care what your views on transgenderism are. And abortion or gun control or tax policy. Oh, it's stuff that we claim. I think it's important. They don't think that's well ahead and do that. Go ahead and do that. We'll fight amongst yourselves. Yeah. You know, have a race war. You know, you're going to have a race war. You know, you should have a race war. That's so true. It's totally true. Have a race war. And they just don't care what they do care about is the ability to keep the money flowing and, you know, the coffins filling. Like they love to kill and they love they worship money and death. And that's just a fact. And I know that because I'm from there. So anyway, I came to this very slowly just being involved in public policy debates my entire life. I realized, oh, the only thing they really carry about is the foreign policy stuff. And so I'm fired. And that was like totally inevitable. I knew that it was going to happen at some point. It was a shock that morning, but like not a shock, big picture. And I was so grateful for it and have woken up happy every single day for two years because of that. So I'm not complaining in this way. No, I know. But there's like, you're absolutely right. It's the same thing. That's the red line. There's so many fake red lines out there. Like, oh, you know, anyone who's like the race stuff was like most Americans do not hate each other because of race. Despite the best efforts of our leaders to get a state each other, man, they have tried so hard. And most Americans don't want to hate Russia at all. It's north. But it's like you have to. You don't even know what you don't know. Right. And I didn't even know until like I'm a huge believer in like just looking at stuff and like smelling stuff and like what's the obvious reality. You can tell me any story you want, let me go see it. And that's why I've traveled so much. And it was just so clear when I went to Moscow. Like I don't want to move there, whatever. I'm not Russian. But like you've been lying to me about this in a really big way. And if you've lied to me about that, what else have you been lying to me about? Anyway, whatever. But we should. And I now feel compelled. And that's one of the reasons I'm telling this story. I don't need an amazing story. I don't need to work because thank God I've done fine. And you know, I'm in a good place. But I want the opportunity to continue to help engage and tell the stories that bring us together as a people. Russia's story, the American story can be one story. We can share our stories. We can disagree. We can hate each other. We can love each other. But this whole idea that we have to be like this is just crazy. And it's going to lead to a bad thing. Well, it's just so. And Trump's instincts are correct on this. I hope he can fulfill them. And the real battle that has, you know, it's never changed for the last two thousand years was between East and West. It's between worldviews. And you have the Christian West and you've got the non-Christian East. And the truth is Russia is really part of the Christian West. And so anyone who's trying to make Russia into the main enemy of the United States is trying to divide and destroy the Christian West. That's just a fact. Yeah. So I don't know why people don't say that. It took me a long time to figure out. But it's just so obvious. Yeah. And isn't that funny? We get like, Le Mans, the BBC, all these people. I hear these people. My friend say, oh, yeah, I don't trust American newspapers or American media. So I watch the BBC. I said, dude, that's the same damn thing. No, you need to watch maybe a little India or a little Russian or Brazil or just get down. What a new perspective. You want to go to the global South country. It's so funny. Of course. Al Jazeera. I mean, just watch it all. Read it all. Disagree with them. The funny thing is that such like the upper middle class, half with Lady with the beach novel thing to say, I really, I watch the BBC because it's just more, I don't trust the other one. I watch the BBC. It's the same damn thing. I've heard that so many times. Really, it's the BBC. It's like, oh my gosh. So true. I don't. Anyway, Rick Sanchez, it is wonderful to see you after all these years. And thank you for your amazing story. And thank you. Thank you for your resilience through, you know, many different jobs. I do respect that. You just keep on fighting. Amen. Amen. Daddy. BAMOS. That. My pleasure. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could blind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it. A way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's just subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that. Time for their true life out story. I got a call for a friend of mine yesterday. Honestly, true story. Who said his girlfriend had just broken up with him over out. He wouldn't stop. And I thought to myself, that's kind of sad. He said, no, it's not sad. Imagine if I married her. Now I know I was saved. Then the next day, this same friend is driving at twice a speed limit through a major American city pulled over by a cop in a speed trap. Cop takes his license registration, goes back to patrol car, runs him, comes back, looks in the window and sees a tin of alp on the dashboard. Pause his stunned, says to my friend, use alp. Yeah, I do. Says my friend. So do I, says the cop, we all do. He looks at my friend, thought fling, goes drive safely, sir. It hands back his license to registration. No ticket. So in two days, he's saved from a tragic marriage to a girl who doesn't like Alp and a speeding ticket. All true. It's more than a minute. In an age to 350 million people are guessing they're about 350 million alp stories. Email us yours. We want to know and read it on the air. Email tell all at alppouts.com. Tell all at alpouts.com. Give us your