So, I guess the first question is, thank you for doing this. What, uh, are we rolling? We're rolling. Okay. Let's roll, shall we? Um, Good to be with you, Tucker. Nice to see you again. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I Yeah. as I've said to you privately, but I and I mean it, I think you're maybe the best reporter working. I know you don't even think of yourself as a reporter, but a gatherer of facts and an explainer of what they mean. I I think you're the best. [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Music] [Applause] [Music] Um, so, where do these fires, first of all, how many fires are there and where do they come from? I believe there's five active fires right now. And these are ignition-driven fires, meaning that this these are all this is all chaparral or, you know, scrublands, Yes. you know, brush areas. So, this is this is different than the Sierra forest. Right. These are not forest fires. Yeah, these are not forest fires. And that doesn't mean that you're doomed to them, but it's the it's not the same problem that we get in the Sierras. So, they're ignition-driven and they're obviously wind-driven, but there's nothing unusual, you know, I just interviewed a climate scientist about this or rather a environmental forest science scientist about this. There's nothing unusual about this. I mean, it is somewhat unusual to get um, you know, you have a dry period and then the Santa Ana winds in January, but it's not like that never happens. Um, they I'm working my way there, so the ignitions. But I mean, the important thing to know is that the National Weather Service put out a fire warning on January 2nd and a local weatherman actually forecasted on January 1st. They said we're headed towards super dangerous moment. Um, the next day the National Weather Service Los Angeles held a briefing to underscore that point. The day after that, the mayor flew to Ghana. I mean, it's crazy. Like And these were public press conferences? Yeah, these were all I mean, it was absolutely public and it goes to the politicians first, but it's all said publicly. It's the National Weather Service. So, that so that so that that was like literally on the 1st or 2nd, the governor should have called out the National Guard. He should have called all of our neighboring states. He should have called Canada and Mexico, asked for all their backup help. They should have started circling C-130s that are, you know, they're specially retrofitted with that can dump the fire retardant or or water. They should have had helicopters circling to see where the fires were. It should have been immediate mobilization. my ignorance. I I didn't, first of all, I didn't see that news when it happened, but I didn't know that. So, it was really clear to the people who run the city and the state that you had this combination of dry conditions and heavy winds, high winds. and and because there's so many ignitions because of really these two factors, mostly the electrical wires, you know, brushing up against, uh, you know, vegetation and turning into a fire. That's kind of the one of the main ones. The other one is is homeless people starting fires all over LA. Half of all fires put out by the LA Fire Department are started by homeless people. It's been that way for years. Why do homeless people start fires? Uh, well, you know, it turns out meth heads love to start fires. You know, there's just every drug has its kind of weird element to it, but meth heads love starting fires. They love destroying things. Like meth is like the drug of nihilism. So, it's like perfect drug for LA and California at the moment. these are not cooking fires. They could be cooking fires. But starting fires to destroy things is very methodic. Oh, yeah, for sure. But it's not evil or anything. No, it's totally fine. Yeah, what could go wrong? But isn't, um, classically starting fires and torturing animals, aren't those like signs of sociopathy? Yeah, I mean, for sure. I mean, look, meth makes you you know, makes you psychopathic, it makes you psychotic. It's meth induced psychosis. But I mean, yeah, and all the crazy, I mean, people behave I mean, things that people do on meth, I mean, it is like it's like they behave with like superhuman crazy powers, the levels of violence, the assaults, the, I mean, you just when you interview people, particularly people in recovery, that describe being on meth. I mean, they're just awake for like weeks at a time. Like it's not even clear how they get any sleep at all. So, that's just that madness has continued. And, you know, and Mayor Bass, who's the Wait, so just to isolate what you're saying and just to pause to kind of get this really important point. Fires, at least half of fires in LA County are started by homeless people. Yeah. And you believe that's driven by their use of a specific drug, meth. Not totally. I mean, I think homeless people are going to often start fires for a lot of different reasons. I mean, drugs can start fires, but but the meth heads are like into fire. Like it's a big part of meth culture. It's just starting things on fire. sees this in theological terms? It's like this is I know, it's amazing. Well, it is amazing. Yeah. No, it's satanic. I mean, you have to go it's totally satanic. it could be. Yeah. It's awful. Um, so, but you know, you kind of go I mean, so first of all, that problem should have been dealt with, obviously, years ago should never have been allowed. So, but that they knew on January 1st, January 2nd that the fires were coming. Like it was inevitable that there would be fires. Like there was like zero doubt among anybody that knows anything about fire in Los Angeles that the fires were coming, the fires were coming. So, the like the governor should have been there, the mayor should have been there. You should just like literally you should it's all about and it's all about prevention in part because by the time the fire trucks are having to weave their way up those little hills of, you know, the Pacific Palisades, it's over. I mean, so the thing to keep in mind is that Okay, well, so that's the first thing is that they just have to mobilize in advance. feature for people who aren't aware of the geography of LA. Oh, it's just incredible. I mean, it's why it's so beautiful, right? Beautiful places are dangerous. Exactly, right. So, so that was so that that's like the main event. So, the I mean, cuz I knew I did my first thing I did is I was like, look, they're going to come out and say it was inevitable and that's just a total lie. Because of global warming. Yeah, because of global warming and I mean, anyway, we can get so there's so many places to go here, but just on the most practical sense, they knew the fires were coming and they didn't do anything. The mayor leaves the country. She flies to Ghana after having promised not to leave the country, by the way, as mayor. She's traveled six at least six times out of the country and she promised not to travel. Why is it important the mayor be there? You can say, "Well, aren't there other people in charge?" Because it's a command it's a in emergency command situation. She has to be able to issue orders and to, you know, wave regulations and make things happen. The governor has to be doing that. They didn't do that. They should have had, by the way, they get they should get the fire trucks up into the fire areas right away. They can also start, you know, they can start clearing brush. They can start, you know, but literally they could just be in those neighborhoods just sitting there for days at a time waiting for the fires to happen, put them out as soon as they happen. Um, I'm not saying that they would have been able to prevent all the fires from happening, but you remember like the big fire in 19 in 1993, I think it was Laguna Beach or maybe it was Malibu as well, but it was like 700 homes. We're at 10,000, you know, structures at this point, homes and buildings gone, you know, 200,000 people evacuated. it's like it's it's madness. It never needed to get to that level. Okay, so that's the first thing. They just needed to have been there before the fire started and they didn't do that because the politicians are just they're focused on themselves, they're focused on the next political office they want to get. So, that's the first thing. The second thing is the water runs out, right? So, everybody So, that was the and you hear people go, "Oh, well, there's nothing you can do because like once the homes are burned down, like the water lines, you can see the pictures, you know, the water like will be spilling out, you know, of the homes." And so, that lowered the water pressure. That was a total lie. There is something called the Santa Ynez water reservoir, which is the potable water, meaning the drinking water that also goes into the fire hydrant system cuz the fire hydrant, you know, the the fire hydrant system is the drinking water system. It's the same thing. There's it's the exact same system. That reservoir was empty and it was the second largest of the 10 water potable water reservoirs that serve LA County. There let me make one distinction here because there's actually two kinds of reservoirs. There's the reservoir with the snowmelt water, these really big lakes, basically. Um, and then there's the and that's that's the unpurified water. And then those and then they purify it and then they feed into these reservoirs where they store the water for for all sorts of reasons, for emergencies. So, that is an absolute crime that that Santa Ynez reservoir. Why? Because first of all, it was it's right next to the Pacific Palisades. So, for people that don't know, Pacific Palisades, of course, is like right near it's on your way to Malibu. It's like the last big neighborhood before you get to the And they're Palisades. They're over the water. That's right. And so, they have a res like you look at the Google Maps and you look at where the Santa Ynez reservoir is, it's right next to like a few thousand feet uh, from Pacific Palisades and it's above it's really high up. And so, if you had had water coming from that, the firefighters would have had plenty of water. It would not have they would have had the water pressure even if you had lost some homes and had those those the water out. So, I mean, so two major um, failures. The first was the failure to aggressively respond days in advance even though they had very clear warnings. The second was the reservoir was empty. One reporter has reported that the that the the firefighters had not been warned by the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power that that reservoir was empty. If that's true, that's just additionally scandalous, but um one of the one of the things that we think probably happened is that they um had been required to build have a cover for the clean for the for the Santa Ynez Reservoir, which is the potable water, the cover to prevent the water from being contaminated. In the old days, like the '50s and '60s, you know, birds would poop in those reservoirs and the and they would just put a bunch of chlorine in them. And then we decided, well, that the water was still had a lot of you know, it still was not was not particularly clean, so we wanted to be cleaner, so you can just put a cover over it, which is a kind of plastic or rubber lining. Um it appears that there was a tear in that. They had to repair it. They should not have removed that water ever um during a fire season. If you need to make that repair, you you do need to drain right you know, right before you do the repair, but you would make that drain. The people that I interviewed said, "Look, it it would take you know, days if not a couple of weeks to repair. It was empty for at least a year." So, it was sitting there for a year. And the person I interviewed who works at a as a senior executive at a different um water utility in California said, "If if we had any of our reservoirs empty, we would be like super nervous the entire time. And you would also then have backup water systems." So, it's like any catastrophe, you know, you just have multiple errors occurring in advance and at the moment. Um and then the fires and then the actual ignitions. You can't completely prevent ignitions, uh but you can significantly reduce them. One would be to not allow people to camp outside all over uh Los Angeles uh Los Angeles County with uh somewhere around um I think it's 40 to 60,000 uh homeless people in the whole county uh madness. And then the other is the electrical wires that brush up against the vegetation and and create fire. Um with that you want to clear the vegetation from around the wires. That's obvious. And then and then you can also just stop I mean, this is a not great solution, but you could certainly do it in a pinch if you need to. You just stop the electricity from going into those homes for some period. I mean, it's a drag. We haven't I live in the Berkeley Hills, which is also a dangerous fire zone. And when the winds are really strong, they'll just cut off power as a precaution so that if there so that to prevent an ignition. So, I think the the thing that the reason I wanted to come on this your show um even though I'm in the midst of a huge book deadline is because I'm really concerned about this nihilistic discourse that there's literally nothing that could be done. I mean, that is that is exactly where the politicians want to go. I worry that you know, ordinary people have that idea. The problem is I mean, it's absurd. I mean, this idea that you couldn't live in Los Angeles, right? And it's like it's like you can say it about anywhere. You can be like, "Oh, it's there's snowfalls in this place during winter." You know, or hurricanes. I mean, we're in an area that's Hurricane Valley, right? Like huge amounts of hurricanes. That's that's not how humans roll. Like we're capable of living in many different environments, including with extreme weather conditions. And we're really good at that. stop my kids from dying of tetanus. Right. to death or whatever. I mean, what Yes. It's so nihilistic. No, that's It's so nihilistic. And you trace it back. I mean, the the the best the most articulate um advocate of that view is a Marxist named um Mike Davis, who wrote this book called City of Quartz. It's a crazy nihilistic book, but he he had an essay and also it's a chapter in that book called Let Malibu Burn. I mean, it's classic kind of radical left uh politics. It's classic sort of envy or sour grapes. I mean, sour grapes goes I can't remember the the parable, but basically it's like some animal wants to eat these grapes, but they're up too high and then he says, "Oh, well, those grapes were sour anyway." It's like it's a consolation for your own personal weakness and failure. That's just you know, let Malibu burn. I mean, um you know, you have a ideology of Marxism that is based on resentment and envy. And so then you go, "Well, yeah, those rich all those rich houses should go up in flames." It's a fantasy. I mean, it's a left-wing fan I should know. I was on the radical left. Like the fantasy you hate the rich people because you because you want their wealth and you you admire them in some level, but you know, you can't get it. So, I mean, this is how envy works. So, you end up constructing this whole political ideology. I mean, this is what Marxists have done. And it's infected like the citizenry. I mean, it's infected the politicians. And so there's this I think that even though it you it's not consciously the politicians aren't consciously saying, "Oh, let's let Malibu burn." That is the con that is the the behaviors they have taken have had that impact. So, I think that what you're seeing in real time in these in these fire these fires in Los Angeles, these destruction fires, is the manifestation of a nihilistic ideology. It's an emergent quality. It happens through a million small steps, but this heavy focus on left-wing ideology, whether it's DEI or ESG or climate apocalypse or just class resentment, manifests itself in like the most spectacular, beautiful neighborhoods just being turned into ashes and cinders. It's also on a more prosaic level a violation of like the most basic agreement there is between citizens and their government, which is I send you more than half of what I own, but you keep my house from burning down and meth heads from scaring my children or whatever. Like you provide public safety, fire protection, you know, water, sewer, electricity. Like just the basic stuff seems to be totally ignored. Absolutely. So, like why is anyone paying taxes? Why isn't there a revolution? There should be. Well, because of course they're all trapped by this ideology. I mean, these are the neighborhoods that voted overwhelmingly for Kamala, that voted overwhelmingly for Gavin Newsom, that voted overwhelmingly for Karen Bass. I mean, Tucker, I I watched focus I saw focus groups um in 2022 with uh two uh Latinos, men and women separated, Latino group and a white group. And the Latinos were great. I mean, they were just like when they started talking about the mayoral race, they were like, "Well, what are their positions? And like what are their policies? And what do they want to do?" And whatever. They were very rational about it. They're very as you would hope. You they were self-interested. They were Yeah, what do I get out of this? What do I get out of these campaigns? Fair. Fair question. The white the whites I mean, it was amazing. Like they First of all, they every focus group when the the moderator would just be like, "Oh, hey, you know, just how's it going around here?" They don't even try to lead the conversation anywhere. And everybody just starts talking about the homeless situation and the crime, you know, which is basically continuous with homelessness. And then they would be like, "Oh, yeah, okay. What about the remedies? Oh, there's a mayoral race coming up." I think it was in the it was like in the summer, you know, that these focus groups were held in 2022. Bass. Caruso versus Bass. And they hadn't really been thinking ton about it, but there's a moment there where you see it dawns on the white focus group participants. And they were not like recruiting like leftists or Democrats or anything. It was just supposed to be a mixed group of swing voters. And they just as soon as it dawned on them that there was a black woman running, they were like, "Oh, well. I mean, that's I mean, got to vote for the black woman." Like it was the most racist Like you would think like in the in the most racist moments in American history, you know, um the stereotypes that we would have, you know, about the South or whatever about you know, reconstruction or something. Like people would not be as open and honest about it, but they were just like openly like, "Well, we have to vote for the black woman." And then in the rest of the focus group, when they A lot of them knew who Caruso was cuz you know, he's famous for these really spectacular, you know, housing developments. And also they're that kind of calling them malls is a kind of just little side just really beautiful like um outdoor shopping centers with like lawns and you can get like a fantastic restaurants and you can like have the kids can play freely on these lawns. I mean, it's sort of tragic because of course it's all private. It's not public spaces, but nonetheless you feel safe. You go in there. It's amazing place. So, they didn't even vote for that. I wat These white participants, I was watching them through basically over like the next hour hour and a half explaining why Caruso was a bad guy for just running against this black woman. Like it was just outrageous. And what is he trying to do? He's trying to make money. I mean, which is just crazy cuz of course he's just you know, like he's like a billionaire. I mean, he's self-made and um extraordinarily successful person. And clearly running for mayor is an altruistic act. So, it was just appalling. So, of course I mean, I have to say, you know, What is that? I mean, I I've been to every big white country in the last year, Australia, Canada, UK, US obviously. And that very specific brand of self-hatred, nihilism, that brain disease is everywhere. It's not just here. It's it's throughout the Anglosphere. Yeah. What what And I it's history changing and that's a fact. Like what is that? Why is the white world determined to kill itself? Do you have any idea? It's really noticeable. Yeah, I mean, there's so much in that. I mean, it seems like there's like multiple levels. I mean, at one superficial level or at least a kind of psychological, sociological level, they're all competing with each other to show who's a better person. Yes. I I more the more hatred I express towards white people, the better I am as a human being. your own kids is like the measure of virtue. Oh, yeah. The nihilism. Um Obviously, this is a very old story about decadence and of you know, comfort. And you start to kind of uh believe I mean, there there's something really checked out from reality about the whole thing. I mean, it first of all, it's um the stories that get told are just, you know, like absurd. Like 1619 being the founding of America. That's just obviously wrong. The country was founded, you know, our constitution 1789, Declaration of Independence 1776. And not that, but like slavery was never at the heart of the United States. It was always It was a whole place committed to It was English Americans or the American English as they were referred to wanting to create a country the first time that was just founded on the enlightenment ideals of freedom and of free expression. I mean, so important they put it the first amendment, they insist on a bill of rights. So, you just get this completely twisted um you know, disinformation story about the United States that gets embraced. Yeah, it's nihilism. I mean But in But embraced by whites at whom it's aimed. So, it is a I mean, leaving aside the fact that it's it's false, but you know, a lot of creationists are false, but this one is false in a specific way, which is like you suck and you should die and all the way it's like, "Yeah, you're right, I should." Right. What It's I mean, it's end of civilization sort of ideology, isn't it? it. So, like what I don't I've never seen anything like it. No, and when you read the old is the whites, too. Oh, yeah. No, cuz the Latinos I mean, they're still They're like, "What?" Yeah, they're for sure. They're like working They're like more working class, they're more Christian, they're more they love America more, they remember where they came from more. So, yeah. I mean, it's also Yeah, so it's just in some ways it's an old story of a civilization just at its end. I mean, including all the transgenderism. I mean, of course, you know, that's the Camille Paglia's famous writing about how that that shows up at the end of civilizations. And so, you know, if you read Toynbee, it's like one of the characteristics is when the elites stop the creative class of elites, which is I mean, Los Angeles, um they stop identifying with their own working class and they start to identify with uh you know, with outsiders, basically with with people from foreigners from outside the country. That's another sign of a civilization at its end. So, we were at a meeting here at TCN the other day and I looked around the room and every other person had a kind of ruddy vitality, with pink cheeks, alertness, bright eyes, full mental acuity, and a cheerfulness you could almost smell. And I asked, "Why does everyone look so good?" And part of the answer, of course, is they like what we do for a living. It's really interesting. We think it's important. But another reason everyone looks so good is because they'd all had a great night's sleep. I'm not making this up. Almost everybody here uses a new sleep technology from a company called Eight Sleep. They sent it to us and everyone here loves it. It's called the Pod. It's a high-tech mattress cover effectively that you add to your existing bed. You don't need a new bed or anything like that. You just throw this over what you have. What it does is adjust the temperature of your bed warmer or cooler depending on what you want. And it maintains an ideal sleeping environment all night long. So, I didn't know this, but as you progress through different phases of sleep, your body's needs change. And Eight Sleep automatically keeps things exactly where they should be in the sweet spot through the entire night. It's been proven to increase the quality of your sleep, the amount you sleep every night. It improves your recovery time from physical exertion, and it may even improve your cognitive performance and enhance enhance your overall health. It seems to be doing that in our office. So, it learns and adapts to your sleep patterns over time and automatically adjusts temperatures throughout the night through each phase of sleep. And it does this independently for each sleeper on either side of the bed. That's pretty cool. So, you can sleep well and feel much better and be more effective the next morning as we are here. Try it for yourself. Go to eightsleep.com/tucker. Use the promo code Tucker to get an extra 350 bucks off the Pod for Ultra. You can try it with zero obligation for a month, and if you don't like it, just send it back. Again, that's eightsleep.com/tucker. Better sleep today and look great in your morning meetings as our guys do. You alluded a minute ago to its cause being affluence? Just generational affluence makes people It does It feels that way to me, too. I I'm not an I mean, there's the I mean, it's a cliche that I like a lot of cliches, got a lot of truth to it, is the you know, the the good times make soft men and soft men make bad times. Um So, I mean, I There's obviously been a huge correction in the United States, which is, you know, welcome, which is a sort of re-embrace of of the ideals of the United States. Yes. Um I mean, let's hope that this has been a wake-up call for the people of Los Angeles. I mean, it's um they are reaping what they sowed. And the people of California are reaping what we sowed. And you know, that is um you know, I mean, it's really quite symbolic. You know, it's like the neighborhoods of the of the elites in Los Angeles that are really that it really got the most affected, that are having to flee. And but again, I mean, part of the reason I wanted to come on I've been writing about it every day and trying to surface the stories of the utility the water utility executives. And I've got a story coming out later today from a firefighter who uh you know, like basically just described I mean, the firefighters, of course, the men and women on the ground doing the hard work, they're blameless. But I mean, the destruction There's 29 fire departments in Los Angeles including LA County Fire Department. You know, there's 88 cities in People don't realize like Los Angeles is a city, but then there's a much larger county around it with 88 cities in it. And there's um and not all of them have fire departments. In fact, most of them don't, right? So, the ones that don't have their own fire departments, they depend on LA County Fire Department. But um you know, and it's been this way for a long time. So, it's not like it can't work, but it definitely introduces a level of complexity into it. I mean, the priorities of these fire departments, it's not just like a social media meme. I mean, the the it really has been DEI. Like it really has been the priority of these fire departments. The first priority of the fire departments should be to put out fires and keep people safe and save lives. But the first priority has been DEI. I mean, that is clearly Is there evidence? Do we have social science that shows that lesbians are better firemen than non-lesbians? I mean, I mean, the What are the chances, right? That like all three of these executives are I mean, um you know, it's like it's also sort of like I mean, it's so it's funny because the way that the the defenders of it sort of talk about it is as though they're imposing equality. Actually, they're demanding that that it not be based on merit. I mean, there First of all, there was never any evidence that the fire departments were like systematically or structurally excluding qualified people. I mean, um it's not to say that it never happened, there wasn't some racism. I mean, of course, there is, but it's like you're getting They're getting to a situation where like people are getting promoted who were not as qualified as other people on basis of race. I mean, that is anathema to the American system. And by the way, the people of California have now twice rejected racial preferences. One of them in 1996, I believe, and then the other again in 20 Was it 2018? I think. rejected gay marriage, but they're not allowed to get what they want actually, it turns out cuz Whatever you think of gay marriage or racial preferences or whatever, if you believe in democracy and you have a referendum system, you have to abide by the results. Well, yeah, and they haven't. No, they haven't. I mean, the spirit The spirit of California I mean, there's a true spirit of California that I do think is very American, which is really egalitarianism. I mean, the American creed, if you believe Daniel Bell's um analysis of it, you know, it's it's liberty, it's laissez-faire, it's individualism, and it's egalitarianism. That's the state I grew up in. It was the most American of all states. That's right. It's not equity, it's it's equality of opportunity. That's what egalitarianism It doesn't matter who your family was. We used to say when I was a kid, no one in California used his last name. Now, why would that be? You know, you go back east as we called it. I We go in the summertime. It'd be like, "Hi, I'm Michael Shellenberger." In California, it's like, "I'm Mike." Well, my father would always say, "That's because in California, it's not about the legacy of your family. It's not about cast. It's about you. Can you do it or not?" Right. That seemed like a great system to me. It's great. I mean, that's what I love I mean, that's the part I love about California. It's like I I lived on the East Coast for like a year. It was a traumatic experience. You'd go to parties and someone would be like, "Oh, what school did you go to?" Totally. And then they'd be kind of looking over your shoulder. And you're like, "Well, what Like who cares what school I went to? Like, you know, who am I? Where are my passions?" And Exactly. So, that was like I was like, "Wow, that is like that is weird." You know, in California, it's like, "What's your jam, dude?" You know, it's like really like, "What are you into?" You know, it's That's like the best of it. you as a person? Yeah, who are you as a person? It's the human you know, it's like there obviously there can get culty and whatever, but I mean, it is the the best of that human potential. not held responsible for the sins of people you're related to. Well, I'd say and you know, I come from a complicated family, so I always loved that idea. You know, whatever. It's like you're judged on you and the choices that you make and the character that you have. Right. Which is Which is actually radical individual responsibility. I That's what I always thought. Yeah. I mean, that was always for me it was like you know, Victor Frankl who wrote Man's Search for Meaning, this is incredibly Holocaust survivor. The whole thing was was like, you know, being in a death camp shouldn't control how I think about the world. I mean, that's about as radical of a of an individual mentality point of view. And now, of course, that's viewed as very right-wing and very unsympathetic and whatever. But Victor Frankl was just loved by the existentialist California left in the '60s. I mean, he would sell out these huge auditorium in Berkeley and they would, you know, they'd go to Esalen. so I mean, you go from that to basically nobody taking responsibility. I mean, it's incredible. living under the crushing burden of history, most of it misconstrued and a lie anyway, but still the idea that the past is determining the present and the future. That's like the least Californian, least American idea ever. That's so well spoken. No, no, it's totally brilliantly well spoken. Absolutely. Yeah, I mean, it's like we in in in our next book we're doing we were working on this idea of these singularities meaning like these just awful events in the past, the Holocaust, slavery, indigenous genocide. And they become like gods for secular people. They become like super present. Like, you know, there's it's just everything that we do is affected by slavery and you know, everything now this is indigenous land. I mean, I was going through the I was just going through um the all of like the various documents over the years of like water and fire and disaster in Los Angeles and they they like all open with land acknowledgements. You know, you're just like, well, yeah, like literally you think that white people don't belong here. Like that is literally what you're saying in those land acknowledgements. You're saying, we don't belong here. And you may have seen there's a very there's a clip that went viral on social media with the deputy police the deputy fire chief of Los Angeles where she's sort of saying, oh yeah, people ask me, you know, can you carry my husband out of a house, you know, in danger? And she's like, well, you know, your husband got himself in a place that he shouldn't have been. That was her response. It was like Was that I saw that video and at my first I was that can't be was it was the was that real? I know, it looks like a parody. It's crazy. You're like, yeah, that's that's literally your job is to be able to carry someone Can you imagine like someone be like, oh, yeah, your father, your elderly father, um you know, we couldn't carry him out of the house and he shouldn't have been in that house when it was burning in that house. raped walking to school. Well, she shouldn't have been wearing a skirt. Right. Yeah. Which was all black There's like the left campaign like when I was in college like that was the whole Don't blame the victim. That was the whole thing. Of course they're all Which I would kind of agree with by the way. I mean, you should be able to look attractive and not get raped. Of course. to be old and immobile and not die in a fire. Like what are we even saying? That's civilization. It's civilization. Exactly. What's the point of civilization? The point of civilization is to protect the vulnerable, to make it possible for people to reproduce and continue. Right. So make it possible for you to have kids and your kids to have kids. Like there's no reason to have it other than that. So at the most basic level. Yes. And so I don't understand like how could she say something like that and not get fired or arrested? She should have been fired as soon as that came out. I mean, and Gavin Newsom should have called for her to be fired. The mayor should have called for her to be fired. She's still in that job. I mean, she's that that's dangerous. Like it's a violation of firefighter ethics. It's that person is a danger. In other words, she's going around suggesting to all of her people that work for her that they're not responsible for saving, but I think it reflects the mentality which is a nihilistic mentality which is a we don't belong here. You know, we stole we stole this land. And so you so and this is this you know, mal let Malibu burn. I mean, it is definitely definitionally nihilism. I mean, it's anti-civilization nihilism. You know, there's sort of two forms of nihilism. One of them is basically anti-civilization, anti-human, anti, you know, modern life. And it stems from this earlier nihilism which is that life has no meaning. We're just like animals in the famous Russian novel Fathers and Sons by Turgenev, you know, the the nihilistic character dissects a frog and says, we're just like this frog, you know, you're just we're just matter, you know, we're just dead matter, just this assembly. So it's a very dark nihilistic story that then leads to this just um yeah, nihilistic anti-civilization ideology which became very fashionable. I mean, City of Quartz, the Mike Davis book, I mean, it was a very fashionable book to read in places like Pacific Palisades and Hollywood and Santa Monica and um and Venice. So yeah, I think it's um you know, I hope it's a wake-up call. I don't know if it will be, but it is uh completely preventable disaster. Fires are definitely not completely preventable, but that level of destruction absolutely is. And anybody who says that it's that it is not preventable should be as far away from power as possible. Like anybody who believes that it was inevitable to lose 10,000 uh homes and buildings in Los Angeles over a week, they should not be in they should be very far away from political power. They should not be in charge of any fire department um because it ends up becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy. So I've taken you right to 50,000 ft. The future of the whites and all the stuff um which I'm grateful that you addressed. Uh but just back to the and I'm so I'm sorry for digressing so much. Back to the the first question. How did this start? You gave a great explanation. Did climate change play a role? Did was this caused by climate change? No, it's not caused by climate change. I mean, certainly warmer weather is all else being equal makes the wood, you know, drier, but um there is no change in precipitation over since 1877. They've kept very good records of rainfall annual rainfall in the Los Angeles basin and it's unchanged. Really? There are I know, it's incredible. There's wet years and dry years. You know, you look at it. I just posted it on X. It's just people can go look at it. It's from the Almanac. No change in precipitation at all in Los Angeles. Um there have been Santa Ana winds in January many times in the past. There have been you know, and and by the way, like we this we this is a dry year now, but the last 2 years were very heavy rains. Too heavy. Yeah, so Mudslide heavy. Yeah. And so um you know, we're it's extremes. I mean, it's what you know, it's why California is so beautiful. It's a place of extremes. And so we you know, we adapt to that. I mean, you know, like But there's been no in the aggregate change in rainfall in 140 years. No, absolutely not. Not not at all. Yeah. No, it's it's actually a remarkably stable climate. Well, it is a I mean, anyone who's lived there can tell you that's that's its appeal. Yeah. It it is a pretty stable climate actually. Yeah, I mean, it's a stable climate with these amazing extremes. So like you know, you always get these I mean, the best I mean, for my favorite weather is like after like, you know, 3 days of just intense rains and you're just like trying to make sure that your house isn't flooded and you know, the mud's everywhere and it's just the dogs are bringing in mud and then the sun comes out and it's just heaven on earth. I mean, that's why we're in California, right? You're just like So we love those we love those extremes. Um Yeah, I mean, I think that's part of the I mean, it's so funny because it's like it you the reversion back to these people are cursing the weather. You know, they're blaming the weather. That's why we need human sacrifice. Yeah. Um yeah, exactly. Well, there's another one was literally just before I got here, the legislature got to its very important work of passing a bill just now that sets aside $50 million for California to sue Trump. Like literally and they were in a special session. They that they kept going. They were in a special session to figure out how to sue Trump while LA is burning. And meanwhile Gavin's going out there all the time being like, oh, well, it would be really terrible if, you know, if Trump, you know, withheld disaster aid or heaven forbid, you know, required that we, you know, get our [ __ ] together. I'm not even sure if I'm allowed to say that on a podcast. Get our things together. Um And and then like literally he's like, we're going to sue him for implementing the agenda he was elected on by a majority of the American people. MSNBC agenda. It's just a silly rich white liberal agenda. And I will say I've thought for 20 years that California will only be saved by like Nayib Bukele type figure. Some authoritarian Latino in a cape is going to show up and just impose order on the state. And I'm not I'm not being I am white. I'm not against whites. I love whites. My children are white. But that the fact is they can't do it in that state. Gavin Newsom can't do it. The burden of guilt and self-hatred is too heavy and you're going to get some guy from Oaxaca who's smart is going to be like, we're not putting up with any of this [ __ ] at all. And no, you can't camp in LA. No, you can't do meth in LA. And yes, we are going to have like full reservoir. I mean, do you know what I mean? You're going to have like a Bukele in LA. It would be amazing if we had that. We I mean, there was there was sort of an idea that Karen Bass because she was black and because she came from the left would be able to do things that a white guy wouldn't be able to do. That was part of the the reasoning for her. She didn't do it. I mean, she's just I mean, look, she's very People have to remember she's very radical. I mean, and I get it. I mean, it's like I was there. I left it, but um you know, she went to Cuba a bunch of times and sure. Um you kind of thought, well, maybe that was behind her, but it's not. You know, it really isn't. I mean, this the thing where like you're like literally get a warning that the whole city's going to go up in flames and you're like, oh, I really got to be in Ghana for the inauguration of the new president. I mean, look at where your head's at. I mean, she she talks about she loves going to Africa all the time. I love going to Africa, but you're like you're like the mayor of like it's really narcissistic. It's it's really vapid. So It's not good to have people kiss your ass your whole life and tell you I mean, that is just bad. It's it if it ever when it happens to me, it's bad for me. It's bad for anybody. And if some people are always being like, you've got black girl magic. Like after a while, it corrodes No, I'm sure cuz it's there is no black girl magic. There's no white man magic. It's all [ __ ] actually. But if if you start to believe it, having people kiss your ass, having had many people kiss my ass, I know corrodes your soul and makes you into a bad leader. And I really think that's part of what we're seeing. It's not just in LA, but like the black girl magic thing has been bad for a lot of people. You know You know I mean? Oh, yeah. As the white man magic would be too. Yeah, of course. Yeah, I mean then she gets I mean they they so the other thing was she did cut the fire department budget, okay? Like she just cut it. I mean she just it just happened and then literally it. I know. So she literally goes up at a press conference and it was word salad. I mean it was quite impressive. I mean she was just sort of like like you were like What did she just say? I mean she's kind of she goes she goes well that was you know, it would kind of be like well that was different because we just approved this other money and she would basically just was a non sequitur. I mean she's describing a totally different salary negotiation. They cut 17.5 million from the budget and not only that but then they had this internal memo that leaked that said that they were looking to cut another 48.8 million another 49.1 million from the fire from the fire department which which had already was already decimated. I mean it's a whole story on this. It's like famous for fires. No, it's crazy. So so then like so they do that and of course the LA Times and Politico and I can't remember other people. They all come out and they go they go did she cut the budget? You know, it's complicated. You know, I mean it's amazing. You know, it's it's complicated which is like yeah, yeah, she did cut she did cut the the budget but nobody the media was not being honest with people about what was really going on until the fire chief the lesbians LA County fire chief to her credit um she was being actually she was being grilled by a local Fox television reporter who was just doing a great job actually. I mean just to be hand to the local TV actually some of the best reporting still. And only in LA LA has always had great local television. I don't know why. No, I think I I agree with you. Yeah. Um it's fallen off in the Bay Area. They did a little bit better on Oakland when things get really crazy. But she just kept going after her. She just kept asking her over and over again about the about the budget cuts and she was kind of having a hard time. She was just like yeah, yeah, she did she cut that money. And it's like it didn't matter. Yeah, yeah, it mattered. You know, she had sent a she had sent a letter. I mean there was a letter from I think it was December 4th that the chief the the fire chief had sent which said specifically this is going to reduce our ability to deal with wildfires. She said it twice. Yes, she said it twice in the letter. So it was a little bit like okay, you're on the record saying it was going to hurt your ability. So but then she was like yes, yes, it did hurt her ability um to deal with it. Then she just was like I think at that point the fire chief she was just like all right, you know, like um the gloves are off. So she goes on CBS and on CNN and reiterates it and with very strong language. I was able to get into this piece that will come out um shortly. I was able to get into the weeds a little bit on it but basically there's a hundred fire trucks that are currently um in the maintenance shop that are just need to be fixed. There's a hundred fire trucks missing. The person I interviewed was like we could go buy we could have bought for a hundred million dollars we could have bought um you know, uh like a hundred or two hundred you know, kind of used fire trucks or whatever just get fire trucks from wherever maintain them and just put them in different points all around the city. You wouldn't necessarily have the staff to deal with them but you could then if soon as you get that fire warning again on January 1st or January 2nd, you can just fly in firefighters from around the country from around the world. You just be like look we're just going to bring everybody in. We don't know what's going to happen and then they can just go he was this person was like you know, we could put like 30 of them at Dodger Stadium. You know, you could just like put these fire trucks that are well maintained, you know, but so she was like said cuz I didn't quite understand it either cuz she was like we didn't have the money for the mechanics and you're like well why do you like what do you need the mechanics for? Well, you need the mechanics to maintain the fire engines. Right. So I mean this is what you know, it's like when civilization breaks down it breaks down in like a just a million small ways, you know, um so you know, is it is there some DEI part of it? Yeah, there was they were promoting people not based on merit. Um is there budget cuts? Ab- absolutely. I mean they didn't you know, and what what goes wrong when you don't have those budget cuts? Everything. You know, I mean the other complaint um I've heard, you know, is just that it's just the the the advanced thinking. It's just getting people that can kind of be thinking in advance. That's where their focus is. That's where their priority is. So the D the problem with the DEI is that when you're just orienting an entire organizational culture towards racial and sex quotas rather than towards okay, you know, what about the Santa Ana winds and the fire risk and whatever. It's just we all know that like it's it's not just time in the day it's also mind time. It's like what do you think about when you take a shower? What do you think about when you put on your shoes? Like where is your head at? Their head has been in the clouds around you know, DEI the larger society ESG climate homelessness. I mean I mean the list goes on and on. But the the you know, it was on homelessness. We now know cuz the odd state audit came out 24 billion dollars on homelessness since since Gavin took office in 2019. Tucker homelessness in California increased by 40% under Gavin. For- can you believe I mean 40 per- so cuz everyone goes it's such a curious it like it's such a curious mystery as to we spent all this money on homelessness and yet it just increased. It's like well yeah because you spent money incentivizing and subsidizing homelessness. You spent all this money to attract people from all over the United States. I mean I interview people in California that are on the streets and it's like nobody's from California. I mean they come in. the only reason I feel like I have any understanding what homelessness is is because of the interviews that you did several years ago which is the most un- I never heard of you before I saw these interviews and you did the and I would recommend to our listeners to go find them cuz they're on YouTube. You did the thing that nobody I've never seen anybody do it before. Others have followed since you did it but you just went and interviewed the homeless and like what are you doing here? Tell me your story and they were remarkably honest. Oh, they're they want to be. They See the thing is like homeless people they're always lonely, you know, and so they they're um obviously these are people in really bad way and they're eager to tell their story. They have a lot to say. They're not most of them are not dumb. Some of them were not dumb at all. I was shocked by it. no. And they do lie like at the beginning. So I mean you have to um the secret to all great interviews as you know more than anybody is is you need to have a long time because people tell the they lie at first and then the truth comes out. So like you'll interview people and you'll be like you're like where are you from, brother? And they'll be like oh, I was raised here. And then you get like 30 minutes in the interview they're like all I'm from Arkansas, you know, I'm from Texas or whatever. So yeah, I mean um so yeah, they're from all over they they came here they come, you know, I the most famous one I did with it was with James Church. He he had tattoos on his face and he was just an incredible. I just love that interview so much. I think it was like it was like an hour hour and a half with him just holding my iPhone up to him while he's talking. But he was the one who was like um you know, if I'm being honest, you know, they pay people to be homeless here. And I was like I was like what do you what do you mean by that? You know, and he's like well he's like I get 650 bucks a month, you know, um in cash welfare to be homeless here plus a couple hundred bucks more in food stamps. It's a great deal. And he was like I got Netflix on my phone. I watch Amazon you know, I watch Amazon Prime TV on my phone. You know, I still electric city from the from the the the light pole right here. Um that video I will say is very satisfying. I do think that played a pretty big role in the voters of San Francisco voting to get rid of cash welfare um for homeless people. Make 2025 the year you check life insurance off your list and protect your family's future with Policygenius. It is hard to find life insurance. It's a hassle. Who wants to think about it? Policygenius makes it super easy. And when you do that you ensure that your loved ones have a safety net to cover all the debts or expenses should something happen to you. And things do happen when you don't expect them to. So with Policygenius it's really easy. You find life insurance policies that start at just $292 per year for a million dollars of coverage. Some options are 100% online and you don't even need unnecessary medical exams which is another hurdle to go through to get life insurance. You don't want to sit through that stuff. They've got licensed support teams to help you get what you need fast so you can get on with your life and check life insurance off the list. They answer questions. They handle paperwork. They advocate for you throughout the process. They make it super easy. Life insurance is a form of financial planning. Obviously, Policygenius is the country's leading online insurance marketplace. Even if you already have life insurance through work, it may not protect your family in the way you want them to be protected if something were to happen to you. Policygenius can fix that. So head to policygenius.com/tucker or click the link in the description to get your life insurance quotes for free and see how much you could save. But why did it I know I I've asked you this before but why did it fall to you to do that? It's well, it's because well, we know why. I mean because it's Cuz you weren't a reporter. You weren't working for a newspaper or a TV station. No. I mean look it's I for me this is the golden age of journalism. It is so much fun. Like I mean cuz like basically I can go into um every story and you discover that people aren't really doing reporting. You know, I I showed up at the guy I showed up at the house that the guy lived in the guy that assaulted Nancy Pelosi's husband. Yes. Just to give you a sense of where journalism is at. And I show up and I'm like I'm ex- just happy to be there and there's all these journalists there. It's like a bunch of like local TV news and like the local print paper or whatever and I was like I just kind of was like oh, hey, what's it going on? out in Berkeley, right? Yeah, he's in Berkeley, yeah. Um Black Lives Matter flag in front of you, you know, um uh you know, abandoned school bus um they were really it was really terrible environment. But um and I was like oh, I was like have you so I was like have you guys already I was kind of like worried. I was like I got here late. I was like so you guys already like knocked on all the doors of the neighbors. And they were just like looked at me and they were like no, we're like not We're We're I can't remember one of them saying he's like, "Oh, we don't want to be like rude or something or that would be like inappropriate." I was like I was like and at that moment I was like, "Oh, god, this is going to be great." And I just like went and knocked on all the doors and like get all the information like, "Oh, yeah, they were around naked out there and they would be on drugs all the time and yeah, they were like all left wing and it was like black you know, I was like, "Oh, this is amazing. Like there's no competition." Like it's you know, I got on the I got on the White House briefing just recently. Um the White House briefing on UAPs which you and I um are both interested in on the drones. Um and it was just like you can kind of go into these stories you just start talking to people and you just realize journalists aren't really they're not really journalists. They're more like kind of the people that would run for like class president or something. They're kind of goody two-shoes type. Ass-kissers, yeah. Yeah, they're actually very authori- I mean they were the ones that wanted all the censorship. Of course. So they're not that that old picture of journalists is like this kind of cantankerous and like you know, crabby and they got rid of all those people. Anti-authoritarian. Anti-authoritarian. Um yeah, difficult people. Like I'm the son of one of those. That's Yeah, I grew up around this. Classic, right. That's like the greatest I mean there's like and you realize it's essential to the functioning of civilization to have a bunch of disagreeable people running around asking impertinent questions. Exactly. So with this one it was like, yeah, so I mean you basically get like when you just look at the coverage of the fires, I mean it was like the the reporters that are going out and doing it it's like they're The whole thing is like, "Oh, we've got to make sure that the right wing doesn't take advantage of this situation to push their agenda." Like literally that's how they think about it. So they're out there running cover for the poli- I mean it's amazing, you know, somebody did like a little meme on it but it's like that thing where it's like, "Yeah, it used to be that the reporter would like be holding the microphone up to the politicians and being like, 'Answer my questions.'" And now they're like demanding that the people defend themselves for their terrible votes, you know, it's like a complete reversal. So true. Well, they're the Praetorian Guard for the powerful, of course. Yeah. Shoo, but one of the things I learned from your interviews with the homeless which I I just cannot recommend strongly enough as a primary source of information, actual information um is the degree to which the narcotics-fueled homelessness. So you can't really disaggregate homelessness from drug addiction. No. Of course. I mean it's really of course, but like No, I know. Well, no, I know. I wrote San Francisco because it was literally like cuz I knew drugs like I you know, I I know drugs. Um you know, I mean I had three friends from high school that became homeless addicts. Two are dead. It's like you know, um I'm you know, I happily avoided personally all the hard ones, but you saw your friends like you know, you leave you a wow. You guys are doing meth, you know, it's like that's bad, guys. What what town did you go to high school in? Greeley, Colorado. You know, um So um you know, my parents are psychologists. I remember just being around my my aunt had schizophrenia, you know, um I told the story a million times so I don't want to bore you but basically it was like it was just kind of like, "So wait, everyone just thinks that this is like a housing problem." Like that's just crazy. So you know, you sort of needed to I needed to go do all those interviews. But I mean really the first homelessness epidemic, the first time that we're modern homelessness was in the early '80s and it was just a it was basically all it was was a combination of the emptying the final closure of all the mental hospitals where they literally literally dumped people on the streets. Like I thought that that was that sounded like an exaggeration when I first started. They literally were putting you know, schizophrenics and stuff on the streets. And then the crack epidemic. Yeah. Like that's all it was. It was just those two things. And then of course then you know, left-wing mayor of San Francisco and others are like, "Oh, well, we can't like we can't like require that people not camp outside. They're poor." The left um in reaction to Reagan then took up homelessness as a as something that they claimed was caused by Reagan. Like I mean he'd been in office for like whatever two or three years and they would just make ridiculous claim you know, the Reagan budget, you know, that's why he's on the street. Yeah. So it really gets used so it becomes a viewed by the left early on as a political propaganda tool. I also blame the comics by the way. I mean and just I'll name them. Robin Williams, Billy Crystal, Whoopi Goldberg. They did this whole thing you may remember Comic Relief where they framed the whole thing as a prob- as a problem of poverty which is just you know, it's just it's just such a disservice to the people on the street who need an intervention. Right. There's a natural like when for addicts there's a there's a natural progression where you you you know, whether from trauma or just because you enjoyed getting high, you your addiction gets in the way of your job and you stop going to work and you often you know, live at home with your parents or with friends. You lie, steal and cheat from them repeatedly. They give you multiple warnings. They finally kick you out. That's often the route to homelessness. You end up on the street. That's the moment where the society the parent the family and friends were not able to impose an intervention. So the way it should work is that you end up you go out camp on the street and the cop goes, "Hey, you can't camp here. It's illegal to camp here." And they go, "What am I supposed to do?" And they're like, "Well, we're going to take you to jail or you you can go to rehab." Like those are your two choices. Two choices. A natural intervention is imposed in that situation. What progressives and Democrats did for 40 years is they just removed the intervention in the name of compassion. The most compassion I think is to impose the intervention. I mean the thing that's most common I'll even find this with like harm reduction workers. I was just with some harm reduction workers in in Skid Row and and one of them was telling me the whole usual thing, "Oh, you can't make somebody get clean. They have to hit their own bottom." Like whatever. And I was like and they were like, "I used to run around here, you know, on on meth." It was a um an Asian-American woman um who was doing this and I was like I was like, "Oh, wow. So what did it finally take you for you to get clean?" She was like, "Well, I went to prison." Yeah. You know, it's like, "Well, right. So I have a really close friend who had who's lived the same trajectory. I have a couple friends but a very I have a legit close friend who was totally out of control on drugs and lost kids and all the things that happen when you're addicted and got sober in prison and rebuilt a life um a wonderful life. Yes, but yeah, no. And they're like the best By the way, recovering addicts are like the greatest people. I mean they're the fun- They're the funniest, most honest um people. They have an equanimity about them. I go to AA meetings when I can, not because I'm in danger of partying again. Not after 22 years but because I like the people because they're so honest and they they're honest about the one thing no one's ever honest about which is themselves. It's super easy to be honest about you. I don't like your sweater, Mike. That's disgusting. Like that's not hard. You've gained weight. That's not hard. Yeah. I've gained weight. I'm wearing an ugly sweater. Those are hard. And you find among those people, the recovered people like a true honesty about themselves. It's like Right. It's like the greatest church service there is. Right. Because they're all born again in an important sense. They've all died in some way. Yeah. No, I So that's the But to deprive people of that is to encourage them to continue to use drugs and alcohol is like I mean don't even I mean whatever. It's an interview of you, not me but I just feel like sobriety has to be the goal not just for the individual but for the society. I really believe that. So sobriety is the greatest gift. A, B, use of drugs and alcohol causes mental illness which nobody ever says out loud. I've seen it. To some extent experienced it. I know. You can cause severe mental illness by using drugs and alcohol. Like right? Is that even controversial? It shouldn't be. But that's I mean you've done more on this than I have, much more but It's sort of coming back a little bit. People talk about meth-induced psychosis now more but um yeah, it's uh it's really psychosis. Oh, yeah, and the weed now it's just so potent and dangerous and yeah, ugh. Shoo, but you as a someone who still lives in California, does anybody do you ever hear people say that? Like why are we paying people to use drugs? Like should it surprise us that things are falling apart? I mean I do think I do think that the the conversation has changed a bit. Um I'll take some credit for it with San Francisco and the videos in particular. Um But yeah, it's just still that thing where it's like they kind of go, "But yeah, but there's a black woman running for mayor." And it just it's like the singularity it's like what I always say that it's like this just it's just hovering over people. The race thing. Yeah, it's really it's really about race in a in a in a really important sense. Um and then the guilt. are all immigrants from Central America. We can't do anything about it. Right. No, sanctuary state, sanctuary city. That's what part of what they're going to sue on. Um Yeah, I mean I think that it's just um yeah, it's a big trap. I mean I think that it's funny because you know, we're a guilt culture and so you know, like you know, Japan's a shame culture and you know, guilt is this um incredibly important part of the Christian tradition. Yes. Well, you stop believing in original sin and you stop believing in Christianity. You still apparently there's still this deep desire to feel that guilt and to sort of show it as well. In other words, there's a social part of it. People wanted to see in that focus they wanted other people to see in that focus group that they they felt guilty. You know, it was very important to them to show that. is so in you know, traditional Christianity other um religions you know, the guilty person a repents, atones dons ashes, wears sackcloth and covers himself in ashes as a way of saying, you know, I am worthy of the degradation. Yes. But we've kind of transferred that. It's almost like the homeless are in sackcloth and ashes. Do you know what I mean? Like I live in the Palisades. I produce music videos. I'm doing pretty well but I still feel guilt. So but like seeing somebody like you know, writhing on the sidewalk, I'm like displacing my atonement on really interesting. Yeah. He's Well, they then And talk about it that way. Even when you talk to the activist that justify it, they're like, well, that's a you know, that those people are are suffering because of capitalism and Exactly. and you know, slavery and But the whole point of Christianity is no, no, no, you suffer. You. Right. Like confess your sin. You don't like put it off on some junkie. Right. Well, it's the part of it that's just really satanic. I mean, not to be theological about it, but it's just a complete reversal of the traditional Christian process. It's just yeah, it's exactly. It's making other people Um atone for your sins. Yeah, it's it's crazy. It's so bad and they're sort of on display. You know, it's the it's the it's really if you kind of read it. I mean, it's like it's like a it's like they they they want to they want it to be on display. They want to sort of show it and that's why they insist that they not be arrested or or or mandated treatment. Um it's wild. It is like her you know, like you go to Skid Row and it's still like a Hieronymus Bosch You know, it's just like you just can't you still can't believe it. I mean, you still can't believe there's a person lying there um you know, sweating profusely passed out. You can't tell if they're alive or dead. You don't know like do I do an intervention? And it's just it's it's really breaking down. These are human beings. I don't That's and I'm not a particularly compassionate or kind person. I'm kind of a dick actually, but even I like whenever I see that, I feel such deep sadness for the person. It's like heartbreaking. Like of course. Don't allow If that was my child, would I allow it? Not for one second. I would take that child and chain him to the [ __ ] radiator until he got better. I would not allow that. My child. It's a healthy response by the way. Absolutely, it is. Absolutely is. Those are the people that end up getting off the street. You you raise the bottom instead of lowering the bottom. If you're still using Verizon, AT&T, or T-Mobile, obviously our condolences, but you're going to want to hear this. Our cell phone company, PureTalk, gives us the exact same service you're currently getting from those big companies, but for half the cost. Not a joke. There's no reason to spend 85 or 100 dollars per month per person on your wireless bill. Now we can get unlimited talk, text, and 15 gigs of data with mobile hotspots for just 35 bucks a month. You don't have to be a math major. The average family of four saves about a thousand dollars a year with PureTalk. You enjoy America's most dependable 5G network, support small businesses. We would know that because they are now powering TCN and can probably save you money, too. So, cut the fat out of your wireless bill, switch to puretalk by going to puretalk.com/tucker. You'll save an additional 50% off your first month PureTalk, America's wireless company. God, we're so far afield from the topic. Okay, so there are in LA County 78 How many fire departments? Well, there's 88 cities and there's 29 fire departments in counting the county. No, no, no, that's fine. Um but yeah, so like literally like once the fire starts, the I didn't even understand this until I started investigating it. The county fire chief has to call all these cities and be like, hey, can you send a couple of the trucks? We're putting together a strike team. You know, can you send some engines or whatever? And they have to call around and then they're like, okay, we're all going to meet meanwhile the fire's like blazing away. And they're like, okay, well, we're all going to meet, you know, wherever, you know, Sepulveda or whatever the streets are in in LA. Um you know, we'll meet in this place and we'll get together and we'll sync the radios and we'll develop a plan. I mean, this is all happening like while the city's burning. I mean, it's ins it's madness, right? The other thing is that it's I mean, there's like So, they didn't like have any preparation for this. There's nothing, man. I mean, there might have been something that I have that we obviously if there was, it wasn't enough. I mean, it's a little bit like when they go when the people that are like that when the nihilists are defending what happened, they're like, well, there was nothing else we could have done or we did everything we could have. It's like, well, no, obviously you didn't. Like it doesn't matter what it is. It obviously was There's only one right answer, which is that you didn't do enough. You know, the the the fatalism you know, it's a um it's a way to disavow responsibility on the one hand. Again, I think it expresses that nihilism, but I think it's like people just have been out of practice, but you have to this is part of the journalism, too. You know, it's that you kind of it has to be like, no, no, we're we're not accepting that as an answer. Like you they the right attitude for the journalist is to basically be no excuses. Of course. for like I mean, maybe the journalists are being too much of a hard ass and too much of a dick about it and maybe they need to be a little bit more whatever. That's fine. That's their role. It's like your role is to be the prosecutor against the the on the case of the failure. Your role is to be the investigator. defender. Yeah, the public the public defender or the prosecutor or the you know, but your point is to be like, oh, no, that that can't be right. So, because when they go, well, we ran out of water. Well, why did you run out of water? Well, there wasn't enough water. No, well, why wasn't it? Well, cuz actually it turned out one of the reservoirs didn't have any water. Isn't it your job to make sure there's enough water? You know, I mean, and then this is what they do when they go after Trump and stuff is that like cuz Trump will often be like directionally correct. Right. oh, but Trump was referring to the wrong kind of reservoir. You know, the other reservoirs were full. It's like, okay, fine, but the reservoir right next to the Pacific Palisades was empty. So, you know, his basic the basic intuition, which is I think a I often talk about the importance of you know, like if you're defending civilization, it's a physical thing, right? So, it's I'm always thinking to myself as like like there's a physicalism in my world view, which is like, okay, that's a that's a person. It's a body. You you need to they need to they're somewhere they shouldn't be. They need to be somewhere else. So, we can have a debate about how to move them somewhere else. That's totally reasonable debate to have, but they can't be there. They can't be there because they're creating fires, they're breaking the law, they're hurting themselves and others. Similarly, there's there wasn't water there. There needed to be more water. And if you go, okay, well, we actually let's say let's say that they had all the reservoirs, the the potable water reservoirs. Let's say they had all been full and they still ran out of water. Well, then there was some other problem you needed to solve. You maybe needed more reservoirs or maybe you needed you you needed the preparation there. So, you just have to have I mean, you know, the Bukele type that we that you'd want to see or somebody. You just have to say something that's just like literally you can't no excuses all the way down the line. I feel like you're on something super important. If you could flesh it out. You say there's a physicalism to your world view. Yeah. Contrast that with the world view currently in power. Oh, well, this is yeah, this is exactly. It's like it's this First of all, it's like I mean, it's just so symbolic. It's the city of angels, you know? So, it's like we're up here and you want it like the wealthier you get in LA and like it's with some exceptions like Venice Beach, but mostly you're you're getting up higher. You're moving up up up up up. Um you're trying to get away to the cliffs of Malibu. Yeah, and you end up in the heavens and people talk about I live in a little tree house. I mean, I get it. I love it. It's like I live in the Beverly Hills. I'm not like, you know, but it's like I'm you know, I'm above all that. I'm away from all that. Like I'm connected to nature up here, but also, you know, away from all the you know, the plebs. And so, you actually I think they do it's that whole thing we talk talk about people being in a bubble, you know, I mean, it's like the most bubbly place in the world except for that it's not and you're in a massive fire zone that must be constantly managed. There's consequences of living in these spectacular places. But you've got people that are it's there it's the the whole industry is a fantasy industry. I mean, it's just exists to construct a fantasy reality. And yeah, you would hope that that people would be able to compartmentalize. Yeah, my day job is constructing fantasies that we charge you know, 20 dollars to stream, but I know that when I go home that like all the brush has to be cleared around my house and I have to vote for candidates that are physicalists. I mean, look at Physicalists. Yeah, I mean, I don't I mean, I don't know if that's the right word. I just There's something there though, right? It's They're fantasists. I mean, they're the people. I mean, I I don't want to use the word idealist cuz there's too many other connotations to it, but there's just it's just the difference between being your head's your head's up in the clouds and also and then as opposed to just being really you need the firefighter view of the world. You need the cop view of the world. Frankly, you need the homeless guys view. The homeless people like live in a I mean, they're high a lot, so they're switching in and out, but they have to get their physical needs met. You know, there's just a yeah, so it's um When we first had kids, I remember my wife being and I had much lower standards, but insisting on the house being clean and orderly. Mhm. And I remember saying like it doesn't you know, the point of having kids is to instill values in them. She was, yeah, but one of the values is like order and cleanliness and like they will feel like things are out of control if the house isn't clean and orderly. And she's really insistent on that and we've lived that way our whole lives and I it it's a version of what you're saying. It's like you can tell your kids about honesty and decency and compassion and high achievement or whatever, but like someone has to make the bed and vacuum the floor and if there's dog [ __ ] in the kitchen, like it has to be cleaned up. Like that's she understood that and has imposed it to great effect, I would say. I'm sure. No, I think that's right. And also like parent we all I did it, too. So, I'm not like judging. But like we talk too much to the kids. Talk talk talk talk talk talk talk. And you see like new parents doing that talking to their kid and the kid's like, what? It's like the peanuts is right. Like the whole what they hear is the wah wah wah wah As opposed to like, could you could you set the table? You know? Um could you you know, like the kids like I mean, we the kids like to have a job. They want to have a chore. Chores are super like kids love that. You know, and so you you know, and you're teaching the kids to clean the classroom every morning. I mean, the problem is the specialization and the wealth. They sort of get disconnected from it. Do you know what I mean though? That's why I'm laughing. And dogs, too. People do it with their dogs. You ever see people with like the like you know, whatever. I live in the Beverly Hills. It's like, you know, older ladies and their dogs and the you know, they're just like sitting there blah blah blah blah blah. The dogs It's like, "Well, you're not holding the leash tight enough, lady." You know? You rewarded the dog when he did something bad. You should have rewarded it when it came to you. Anyway, um so all these things break down. All these norms. and true. You just said you're a physicalist. I I want that to become a I want intercom usage cuz I think it's that is like really really important. I think it cuz it's like a People say things like practical, which is good, and pragmatic, but some pragmatic guy started to mean things like making shitty political compromises. Do you know what I mean? Or it's an American linguistic tradition or philosophical tradition. But yeah, physicalist, it's like yeah, somebody's got to clean up all the you know, if you have all the homeless people, you're going to have to spend a millions of dollars on cleaning up crap right all the time. And you know, the the homeless, one of the things you probably have observed is that I think it's a like probably a compensating mechanism, but they're just they're obsessed with collecting tons and tons of garbage, basically. So they'll you know, you'll clean up these homeless encampments and you'll be like, "Oh, wow. Like there's not minimalists. No. No, they're not living the Zen lifestyle. Bang & Olufsen life. It's like No, no, it's very cluttered, you know? And so they're probably over But so yeah, I mean, they need You need to We need to reimpose some limits. You know, there's a I'm also I just became really obsessed with the scholar I just discovered who wrote a trilogy on nationalism named Lia Greenfield. I highly recommend her books. Her first book is called Nationalism, second book is called Spirit of Capitalism, and the third book is called Mind, Madness, and Modernity. And these books are just incredible. But basically Lia, l e a It's actually l i a h and then Greenfield. Um Common spelling. Yeah. l i a h l i a h Yeah, she's a Russian I think she's a Russian Jew who went to Israel, lived in Israel for a long time, and then her and then her and then her mentor was Edward Shils, the sociologist. Um so she's a sociologist, but the nationalism book is beautiful. I mean, it's like the the the famous book on nationalism is got by is called Imaginary Communities by Benedict Anderson, and it's he's a Marxist, and so it's all the whole thing is like him trying to explain how nationalism, why it's so powerful when Marx thought it should wither away. And but she describes na- So she defines nationalism The picture that people have of nationalism is completely wrong. She describes nationalism as a sovereign community of fundamentally equal individuals who have a shared identity. And so she's like, "Nationalism is fundamentally democratic." Now, you might have some systems that are nationalist, but they don't have proper democracy, but really the basic idea is that egalitarian idea that we're Americans, we live here, we have the same solidarity. I've also was um I've also become I'll come back to the Greenfield, but I've also been obsessed with Hannah Arendt, who I'd never read until recently, and she think you're allowed to read her anymore. I know. Well, she was canceled. I know, I discovered she was canceled. I love Hannah Arendt, so I but I didn't realize, just like Freud, who was also a huge figure in my childhood. Everyone talked about Freud, alluded to Freud. Um and then he just kind of disappeared one day, and Hannah Arendt, same thing. Oh, yeah, totally canceled, but it's brilliant. Yeah. She's too honest. Well, yeah, yeah, she was very Well, it's it's really in um there's I read her two books. One is the On Totalitarianism book, and the other one is Eichmann in Jerusalem. Eichmann in Jerusalem is it's rough cuz she describes how the Jewish councils participated with the Nazis. I mean, that was what was really controversial. Um But what what I what really blew me away from reading um Hannah Arendt, cuz I was coming to the nationalism conversation. I mean, it's I should I self-confession cuz I should have been reading nationalism starting in 2016, but um but you know, I finally was reading on it, and it was like she was like, "Nationalism is a barrier to totalitarianism because totalitarianism is is attempting to destroy all relationships between people other than the relationship with the state." Exactly. And so so religion, nationalism, you know, um you know, the classic de Tocqueville associative ties, you know, all of that is a threat to totalitarianism. Yeah. And um so that would really struck me. And and Lia Greenfield kind of she has a I just interviewed her, so she has like a just difference of opinion with um with um um Arendt on this issue, but but nonetheless, I was just struck by how I don't know what the right I I'm just like Like for me, like nationalism, cuz I come from the left, you know, from the radical left, and we would we would code our socialist yearnings as the public interest. Yes, of course. You know, Ralph Nader kind of took all of the Chomskyan left-wing views of the early '60s and packaged them for moderate He kind of made it all seem very reasonable, you know, um and the environmentalists did the same thing. So So the brilliance of the left in general, but the radical left in particular, was just cross-dressing as mainstream issues. So um so so it became So really what is a socialist movement became a consumer rights public interest. The women's rights movement. Yep. And you get these really radical ideologies. I mean, I'm just obsessed with this um the ways in which like So Marxism Look back on it, I was like, "Wow, I can't believe the things I believed in." Marxism has this idea that the capitalists, like what's distinct about them, is that they're just super greedy and they're thieves and that they're stealing from their workers. And there's really no difference between the entrepreneur, the capitalist entrepreneur like Elon Musk or Thomas Edison or Henry Ford, and their workers. They're just meaner and they steal from them. And it's like it's just an amazingly audacious lie because whenever you go and actually study an entrepreneur, what's incredible is that it's not just that they are doing It's not like they're the best at what they're doing. They're the best at like 12 different things. Exactly. You may remember when when Trump and um Elon were beginning their bromance, um Trump goes he goes, "You know, I asked Elon. I was like I was like, 'What is it you're really good at?'" You know, you could see it was like probably a question that Trump is used to asking people that he interviews for a job or something. And he goes, "Turned out it was a lot of different things." You know? And it's like, "Well, yeah, like I mean, cuz of course like with Thomas Edison, people go, "Oh, he invented the light bulb." He didn't invent the light bulb. Um he improved it. He invented a viable economic model for electricity production. I mean, he invented the electrical grid. He found the customers. I mean, one of the things that that impresses me so much with with Elon is like I'll see him You'll see him out there and he'll be selling. You know, which is a kind of I mean, it's selling is sort of the worst part of our jobs in some ways. I mean, you can do it with pleasure and you can do it with verve and stuff, but but you know, you're kind of like and I I do it. I mean, I'm always like, "Subscribe now." You know? And and you're like, "You have to do it." Like it's part of the work, but I'm always like, "Wow, Elon is still He's the richest man in the world. He's probably He may be the greatest innovator in American history, certainly top three." Um and he's still out there having to hawk his products. And but and he does it great. He's an amazing job of it. He like he One of the innovations was, you know, he just be become the biggest user of Twitter rather than buying paid ads. But so this gigantic lie from Marx, which is that the the First of all, the entrepreneur, the capitalist is is just a meaner version of the worker as opposed to this you know, this Schumpeterian genius. Um And Schumpeter comes along, and then his The other thing The big The big lie and then Schumpeter points it out is that the owner of the company and the workers have the same fundamental interest. In other words, Elon Musk's employees and Elon have the same interest. They want to expand their markets. They want to expand their products. Um so to put them opposed is just so it's just it's so dishonest, and it's so reminiscent of of what you can say feminism or radical feminism, but this idea that the interests of women are opposed by men. That the that women and men have different interests. And of course, you trace it back, it all goes it all goes back to Simone de Beauvoir, who's a Marxist writing in the postwar period. I guess it was was like the '40s her book came out, The Second Sex. But she's just taking this totally idiotic Marxist framework and and applying it to women and men. lie? Cuz I mean, it ignores the very obvious symbiosis. It's just It's It's not possible for them to exist apart, and it's not possible to continue the species. It's like so dumb that they they need each other, that actually power is exerted in very subtle but powerful ways within a relationship between a man and a woman that are not at all described or even acknowledged, right? It's the basis of life itself. Of course. So it is like really you trace back like the emergence of nihilism. It really is in Marxism, it's in feminism, and then they successfully cross-dressed for for decades, and they get so good at it. This is the famous long march through Yes. institutions or what they call cultural Marxism. Um But they basically dressed themselves up as I mean, civil you know, basically civil rights. I mean, cuz once you get equal rights, the work is done. Same thing with gays and lesbians. But then the radical left activists then go and grab all those trappings cuz we started the conversation um This may seem like a digression, but it's important, I think, for normies and everybody to understand that I mean, this it dawned It took a long time for me to get it, but it was like, "Oh, right." Like the people that call themselves environmentalists are actually just radical leftists, slightly different from Marx because they're actually um into Malthus, this totally dystopian anti-human view. But the genius of the left is that they are so successful at masking their real agenda behind something else. You know, we just want equality for people of color. We just want to create equal opportunity for migrants. No, their agenda is the destruction of civilization. And you see I On the environmental working in LA. Well, it is it is working and I always thought um on the environmental movement there was a woman called Julia Butterfly Hill who spent more than a year in a redwood. And you know, I always thought, you know, if you were sincere about environmentalism like she would be here like whatever happened to her nobody knows. And that was to your point about physicalism like I like redwoods and like if there's a reason to cut them down okay, but like maybe don't because they're just so beautiful. That's my personal view. I always have felt that way. So like here was someone who was she saved a tree that's got to be the highest level of what they claim they're trying to do, but they totally ignored her. They don't give a [ __ ] about her at all. She died in the tree. Probably better for them. What they really wanted to do was disconnect people from nature. It was the opposite. Right. So why is it that every single person I know who really spends a lot of time outdoors who's into you know, the sporting life or whatever lives in a rural area. Man, their goals are the opposite of those of the Environmental Defense Fund and the Sierra Club. Right. Do you know what I mean? Well, and also and also I think the physicalist distinction works on that as well. I mean here you have I did an interview with a terrific this this scientist I mentioned and he's just like, you know, when you're like dealing with fires the main event is what is happening on the ground. And they're and the climate extremists are out there basically saying, "No, no, no, ignore ignore this whole physical reality. We just need to reorganize the entire global economy." Exactly. Exactly. Like we can't stop these fires. Let Malibu burn, but give us control over the the the driver of the economy. I mean it's such madness. Exactly. And it's the opposite and they don't care. I mean what what's the pollution generated by these fires? Oh, it's it's so much I mean it's I can't I don't know the numbers off the top of my head, but it's massive. Now I mean I will say right? Well, yeah, I mean oh my gosh the air in LA now I mean it is my daughter's at in college there. I'm worried about her. I mean it is absolutely toxic air. I mean of course it is, you know, and you have a lot of electric cars and you have a lot of batteries going up. We don't know what that stuff is putting out in terms of particulate matter. So no, it's awful. I mean you know, ostensibly you'll get you know, tree growth and the carbon will be you know, reabsorbed and those trees will be reabsorbed, but yeah, no, I mean it is about carbon. I mean like poison in the air and water. Oh, for sure. I mean all the thing of all the all the all the houses with all the plastic and electronics burning. It's terrible. No, for sure. I mean yeah, we a chance to get regrounded I think a chance to I mean, you know, it is also an interesting moment, right? Because Hollywood it's just producing garbage. It is just it is incredible how bad the cultural production is. Just at a straight like you know, if you're someone that just loves pop culture like you just love Steven Spielberg. We're not getting that level of quality. I mean we tried to watch something on Netflix. It's just it's just awful and it's because they're all trying to fit it in artistry and creativity is transgressive. It's supposed to be it's supposed to be break I mean that's actually where you want your I want my transgression in my art not in my civilization. I want a really boring civilization and really transgressive art, but it's become the opposite. The art has become boring and conformist and authoritarian and the civilization has gotten completely transgressive. So people are not where they need to be. The laws are not being enforced. So I mean part of you go God I do hope it is a wake up call in it. It was 5 years ago this month that people started to drop dead in the central Chinese city of Wuhan. 5 years since the beginning of COVID. Tens of millions dead. Societies reordered completely. Economies destroyed. And yet for some reason we still don't know answers to the most basic questions. Where did this virus come from? How did it get here? Why did the government tell us to do things they knew wouldn't work? None of those questions have been adequately answered and one man knows those answers. His name is Dr. Tony Fauci. Until now nobody has really pressed. And now a documentary filmmaker called Jenner First is out with a new film explaining exactly what happened. The film is called Thank You, Dr. Fauci. Jenner First spent years trying to get answers and in that time as he awaited Dr. Fauci's response he went through tens of thousands of pages of documents and pieced together the story which is shocking. We are proud to host that documentary here on TCN from December 20th to January 19th. You will see it exclusively here on TCN. Again, it's called Thank You, Dr. Fauci. And it's worth it. So what um speaking of the laws not being enforced, tell us what you know about looting. Oh, I mean it's that's kind of the standard that's the that's like the norm in Los Angeles, isn't it? I mean um Even when there's not a fire burning. No, of course. It's terrible. I mean you know, have you saw that they just arrested they I guess they had a couple of guys they found a couple of guys looting Kamala's house and then they let them go. Of course. Of course. They got the guy they found the guy that set one of the fires the homeless guy that set one of the fires and they let him go. I mean it is uh It's amazing. I mean the comedians like all their best materials just you know, in the news already. So they let your your stealing from people in the middle of a of a profound disaster? The city's burning down and you're stealing people are dying and you're stealing. Aren't you you're like a true villain I think. Oh, yeah, for sure. And then and then they let them go and then that became widely publicized. Well, guess what? You know, this is the thing that people have to understand. You know, criminals you know, they read the news. Like criminals are very online. It's not like criminals don't know what's going on. I mean we have these amazing there's these amazing like I think it was like phone calls between people in the Oakland jails and their friends and they're like basically Auntie Pam the name of the DA they're like the Auntie Pam's going to make sure we you know, get off. You know, they all know where the the laws are not being enforced. to follow? Yeah. They're rational actors. You know, the irrational ones are the rest of us the ones trying to you know, live there. So if you're Gavin Newsom or Karen Bass like you're all in on the climate change explanation, right? That's that's all you got at this point. they did I think they are backing off a little bit from it. I think that they're in a they're a little trapped, which is great, which is that on the one hand they they they can't accept responsibility because they know that if they accept responsibility then it's just then then their their political futures are doomed. On the other hand by not accepting responsibility and passing the buck that also becomes obvious to people. So you know, they should all go. I mean remember like you know, New Orleans like that mayor was out of there. I mean like Ray Nagin. Yeah. He was there for that. Yeah. So that should be what happens. But New Orleans has that just accelerated the decline of the city. I mean it's I was there for Katrina. I covered that and I thought at the time 20 20 or I guess it was 20 years ago incredibly 2005. Mhm. I thought well, you know, it's obviously tragic, but Bush is sending over a billion dollars to rebuild it. I'm sure the city will be better and it's been much worse ever since. Uh-huh. Oof. That's depressing. But LA is not New Orleans. It's our second biggest city. It's the in a lot of ways the greatest city we've ever built and in my opinion and like so what happens to it now? No. Well, there's no vision for it at all, you know, and and we don't have anybody visionary in there. You know, and they did I mean I think we had this guy Rick Caruso as you were mentioning who ran for mayor. I mean they someone found you know, there is a video of him calling for increasing the fire department budget. I'm kind of like that what else do you need to know at this point? Can that overcome the I do think that the woke trance was broken. I mean Trump I do for sure. And look at that. I mean look at the catastrophe that the news media's in and the success that people like you and I are having and Joe Rogan being the most influential he's where somebody was observing he's where Mark Zuckerberg goes to confess his sins. So it's a different world. I do have some hope for it. I mean the the thing about the United States that's so different from Europe is just that literally they I find I'm becoming like an old man cuz I'm talking about how great the founding fathers were, but but it's like literally they created this incredible system that if you have free speech if you can if you if you can protect your free speech, which we've I think succeeded in doing. You bake it in. You remind people of its importance. You then are I think going to be able to self correct in ways that places that allow higher levels of censorship are simply not going to be able to do. I mean just look at this impact that Elon is having right now. It's incredible. I was on some social media chat group and somebody was like, "How come we're all talking about the British grooming gangs?" It's like cuz Elon decided that that was an issue. The AFD in Germany may end up you know, be I mean I think they're they're going to come in at least second in the elections next month cuz Elon has mainstreamed them. So I that gives me a lot of hope. You've got a platform now that is still just the I mean we always knew that the media had that agenda setting power. Yes. Um but it it's amazing to sort of see it so dramatically. Only you can really see it it when it shifts from the mainstream news media. We were we were writing last summer about how the sovereign in the United States meaning like the true power center in the United States was the news media. Um that is now cuz in my view clearly shifted to to X. It's just I think you said something recently. I thought I think I saw a clip of you saying the same thing. I mean it's just clear like that is where It dominates everything. It's just everything, you know, and like Blue Sky gave it a they gave it a shot, but nobody can go on there. It's too mad. It's too insane. So, I think it could be very, very positive. You know, I always compare X to you know, it's like when the printing press was first shows up in the end of the 15th century for like about 100 years, the Catholic Church is like, "The printing press is great. You know, we can print Bibles and give them out to all the priests. It's very cheap." The Catholic Church loved the printing press. And then Martin Luther got a hold of the printing press and it was just for the next, you know, five centuries was game over. I mean, the best history of the printing press, she goes back, I think it's a Oxford uh history, she goes back and just looks at its impact and she comes back and she's just like, you know, after years of study or whatever and she's like, "Oh, we knew it was a big deal, but it's a much bigger deal than we thought. It's not just the Protestant Reformation. It is that, it's also the scientific revolution, it's the Industrial Revolution, it's nationalism, and it's democracy." I mean, so you get a huge epochal change with this shift of communications technologies. And social media, we knew it, I mean, we you know, Martin Gurri famously wrote this book Revolt of the Public about the game-changing aspects of social media just on the Arab Spring, you know, which is now 14 years ago, but in some senses it really just didn't get its power until Elon came in, bought it, and held strong against people calling him a racist anti-Semite for 2 years. I mean, it was just crazy. The It was like 2 years of the media just making him out to be the devil incarnate and he held strong and it he ended up breaking the news media. I mean, they're just not getting the traffic. done. They're It's over. It's over. So, where does it I mean, so if have happened to a worse group of people. They I spent my whole life in money on them. I can tell you that's absolutely true and they're you know, they're terrified. I was I was watching John Carl, who I on CBS, who I've known, someone just sent me a clip this morning. John Carl, I've known him for over 30 years, nice guy, you know, reasonable And um and then Trump comes, the business starts to collapse and he realizes, I'm speaking for him, but he realizes, "Oh, [ __ ] You know, I'm a middle-aged white guy. I better go along." And he becomes just this cheerleader for every stupid woke idea ever. It was You feel sorry for him. He's a nice guy, actually, and not a stupid guy. Someone just sent me a clip of John Carl like basically defending Trump. Wow. And and it's just like Wow. I'm again, I'm not a I'm not a The weather The The wind moved. The wind moved. Then you realize that most people just kind of you know, they they're easy to easy to control. You just Yeah. tell them what the program is and they go along with it. Well, yeah. It's Kent Brockman. No, you're totally right. I welcome our new alien overlords. You know what I mean? They're the first. They're the first ones to shift. No, you're right. Right? Yeah, cuz they're covering the news. Like they know They They're the first ones to know when the winds are coming. Principle plays no role. Most people just kind of go along with what they think the marching orders are. It really reveals, doesn't it? The herd animals. So, Yeah, did I say CBS? I think it's at ABC. Whatever, they're all the same and they're all going away. Yeah. But if you're true entrenched power, which does exist, particularly in the intel agencies, I mean, that's where it really resides as far as I can tell. Um I don't know. It's like pretty threat You've just lost There's been a massive movement in power from the news media, which you control. That's a fact, I would say. In effect, control News media is controlled by the intel agencies, fact. To something you can't control. So, that's a huge loss of power for you. So, like how can you let this continue? Well, yeah. I mean, how can they stop it though? I mean, the know. I'm just feeling a little paranoid right now. No, no, I am, too. too much freedom? No, I know. No, I totally do, too. You're like, when's the when's the penny going to drop, right? of. Um Well, yeah, and I also kind of go, "Are they really going to disclose all the stuff that they have?" I mean, we were going down We just did a Actually, I don't know if we published it yet, but we were just going down the list of all the all the files that we want. Cuz you know, people are like, "Oh, can we have the Twitter files for the government?" You're like, "Yes." Um So, what I mean, there's so much in there, right? There's the Russia gate, you know, the Russia collusion hoax, um COVID origins, COVID vaccines, um Hunter Biden laptop, Yeah. um I mean, I'm assuming there's just a bunch of stuff on Russia-Ukraine that's there. I mean, remember cuz they keep leaking they'd go They'd go, "There's no biolabs in Ukraine." They'd be like, "Well, there were some we were doing some help with the bio." only are there biolabs in Ukraine, there are a lot of biolabs in Ukraine, which are working on on biological weapons. That's what they're not there for Right. livestock vaccines, sorry. Um and you know, the thing that people don't in this country understand is that the Ukrainian military is selling about half of the arms they get from the United States into international black markets and they're winding up in some cases with the drug cartels Oh. in Latin America. That's a fact. Okay, it's a fact. And you can you can buy them. And I spoke to someone who did buy some, actually. So, I know I know this is a fact. And they're bragging about it. So, they're selling conventional weapons, including weapon systems that are very dangerous and very destabilizing that would make commercial air travel impossible, for example. Right. And so, what are they going to doing with the pathogens in those biolabs? And does the Biden administration have a manifest? Do they know exactly what's in those labs? And will they turn it over to the Trump administration so we can keep track of these things? And the answer is no, actually. The answer's no, I know this. So, that's like the scariest thing that's ever happened. And And so, like what you know, like I think the Ukraine war has the potential to destabilize the world more than anything that's happened in my lifetime just because of the scale of the weapon systems and biological agents uh involved in the most corrupt country in the West, which is Ukraine. I'm not attacking Ukraine. I feel sorry for Ukraine, but what the hell? Yeah. And so, we could use some just We could use a That's why I'm saying this right now cuz I hope this is widely disseminated cuz I think it's like the scariest thing I've heard in a long, long time. Mhm. That is scary. You but it's all flowered in secrecy. That's the point. Yeah. The only reason this stuff has happened, like this end of the world stuff has happened, is because there's no disclosure at all. Everything is Right. Oh, it's so much pent-up stuff. So much. we're supposed Yeah, we have the JFK files, the UFO files, UAP files, I'm supposed to say. Yeah, there's so much there. about the UAP thing. Now, we're so far afield, but I do think it's all connected. No, it is all connected though. It's like none of this stuff happens except in secrecy. And this I said, "Let's stop playing like you've been I've been talking to these people for years now." And the answer was the public is not ready for this information because it's to you know, it's just too It's too much. And what What's your view of that? I someone who's pushing disclosure, by the way. This is not I know. I don't know. Yeah, I'm worried that it's bad news. Well, that's the point. It's bad news. Yeah, I'm worried it's bad. Really bad news. Yeah. Do you think that's true? Well, I don't know. not even saying it cuz I don't know if it's true and it is bad. It's super bad. I mean, it seems like the dom It seems like the dominant two theories are now that it's non-human intelligence or that we or our adversaries have mastered anti-gravity technology. Um The other scenarios of, you know, some kind of new plasma or you know, it just kind of it it the phenomena doesn't seem to be showing up in that way. core idea seems to be that it's that there is non-human intelligence, whether all these manifestations of it are that or whether they're government programs or Chinese or whatever. It's probably a pastiche of all of them, but the core idea seems to be that there is non-human intelligence, which is possible, and that it's been in interaction with the US government for quite some time and that it plays a role in And what role is it playing? I mean, Well, there are all these things that I I don't know if what is true or what's not true. Do you think any of that is true? I know you've done work on this. Yeah, I mean, you know, and I it's hard. I mean, um you know, they I covered the New Jersey drone situation. I went to Jersey and interviewed a bunch of people. I mean, the weirdest For me, the weirdest moment is where you have John Kirby, the Defense Department spokesperson, and Mayorkas basically on the same day or at the same 48 hours just um when they were asked about it, they just came out affirmatively and they were like, "Well, we're definitely not getting any drones over the military bases or other sensitive sites." And you're like, I was like, "Why would you lie about that?" I couldn't I couldn't because of course, you know, all else being equal, I think that they don't people don't want to lie. Politicians don't want to lie cuz it just creates more work or hassle for them. life, yeah. Complicates your life. Yeah, honesty is the best policy. So, why would they lie about that? Especially cuz the Wall Street Journal had like they did this huge piece about all of the drone so-called un By the way, unidentified anomalous drone flyovers over the military bases and sensitive sites, which includes nuclear plants. I mean, I Part of my interest in this was always you know, I was trying to save Diablo Canyon in California. They kept getting drone flyovers. Also, Palo Verde, which is our biggest nuclear plant, three beautiful reactors there in Arizona. Like a lot of drone flyovers. I'm also from Northeast Colorado, which is where, you know, the ICBMs are. A lot of They whole They did this exact same drone situation. I believe it was Decem I want to say December 2019. Um and they had this whole interagency task force and they were like they were like, "Oh, we're going to put a plane up." And they kind of put a plane up and you're watching them and you're like, You're like, "Well, why are they not scrambling jets? Like what are we like what are we doing here?" Like this is really bizarre. make any sense. Doesn't I can't figure it out because I think the other issue is that they may not know. I mean, okay, well, so to finish that story. So, then Jerod and Mayorkas do that. I go out and I'm just like like that's the weirdest lie because like it was just it's been heavily reported. I mean, the drones is I mean, the drones over sensitive military bases is really well reported and some of the best reporting was by a uh publication called The War Zone, which is I highly recommend. Um very good, serious investigative reporting. They don't believe it's aliens at all. Like they're just openly like anti-alien. They're like this is and I think it's Well, anyway, for whatever reason, they're just like this is Chinese or Russian or whatever. They're not taking it seriously, but they do some of the best reporting cuz they're kind of cuz they can't figure out why the military's being so weird about it. So, then Trump comes out and he goes, they know what it is. I don't know why they're not telling anybody. And I'm going to tell everybody on the on the 20th. I mean, I I first of all, I'm really happy that they're going to disclose and I want to raise expectations about what the Trump administration's going to do. We want the data and I mean, someone was criticizing me cuz they were like all oh cuz I came out and I said, I'm confident the Trump administration is going to share the data and they're like, that just shows that Shellenberger is you know, it's like pro-Trump and whatever. And I was like, no, I'm just like pro-disclosure. I want the expectations to be high because they should be high. There is so much information they're not releasing. So, you know, they were over Bedminster and he he's talked about it twice now, by the way. So, look, we're about it, obviously. He's worried about it. So, we're either headed for a pretty epic moment of disclosure. There's another part of me that worries. So, I Okay, so it seems like Yeah, they could do disclosure and we could find out what it is. You know, is it if it's there's could be aliens. If it's aliens, that's just a whole can of worms and then you have to be like, is there like do we talk to them and if so, who who's doing that? Do you think we have? I I I genuinely don't know. I genuinely don't know. I mean, there's um there's this guy named I can't remember his first name, Stringfield. He wrote uh this incredible thick book of um UAP crashes, crash retrievals and it's and he was started doing it I want to say 50s or 60s and he did he made for like multiple decades and you just sit down with that book and it is like it's impressive. I mean, if it's a hoax, it's just um one of the greatest hoaxes of all times. You know, like other hoaxes, um you know, like the protocols of the elders of Zion or whatever, they're they're really bad. Like they're really you're just like this is like the dumbest hoax ever. Like most hoaxes are not that sophisticated with all these details and nice people interviewed. Of course, Roswell is the big case, but it's only apparently one of them. There's others. So, there is this incredible, you know, gray literature, never published by any academic press, by any really a little bit of commercial non non-fiction. Um Obviously, I have David Grusch and Lou Elizondo. I testified in front of Congress on this in guess I was in December or November and um you know, two people, the two guys from the military when we when we were asked, what are they? Two guys said, non-human intelligence. And then me and the NASA guy said, we don't know. Um because I just don't. I mean, I just um What do you think the drones over New Jersey were? I mean, look, here's here let me tell let's just let's just let's just let's just look at the possibility that they're human. Um They didn't get a single one of them. They didn't down a single one of them. Not a single one of them crashed and there was a lot of them. And now there was a lot of Look, there's a lot of mistaken sightings. Um you know, it is easy to mistake things. It's totally natural, but but there was also I mean, I interviewed mayors, two mayors were like one of them that was like, I had an SUV-sized drone flying over my house. Another one said he was going to a Fox News interview in New York. The car came for me, walked out his door and there's one hovering right over him and he said it, you know, felt like it was watching him. Like it was there monitoring him. I mean, that's weird stuff. Um so, we can't get a single drone down. They're over military bases. They can't seem to get any of them. Um I you know, do I think the Chinese could be behind it or the the those are the Chinese? I mean, when the Chinese decide to like encroach in you in like in the South China Sea, when they decide to you know how they like they'll like warn the United States occasionally like, you're flying over our airspace. It's all super calculated and like you know, like they're make they're they're it's like a performance. The Chinese are like, we're messing with you. Like you all kind of know and they're doing it in ways where they don't want it to escalate, but they want to get a little bit more of that space. It's all super calculated. Now, there was the balloon. You know, are there Chinese balloons? Yeah. But I mean, to be buzzing air our military bases, it's just so aggressive. Now, I've I've said it before. I've had other people point out. They go, well, they're aggressive with the cyber attacks. I guess that's true. It as a physicalist, I guess I kind of go flying your drones over US military bases and nuclear plants, that is just a level of aggression that just doesn't seem characteristic of the Chinese. Unless you were Well, of course, I agree with you. An intel person told me um that that that this person believed that they were in fact Chinese and that a Chinese satellite went down, was visible to the naked eye. There was new stories about it and it it evaporated, uh burned up and that this person told me that was taken down by the US government. That was a commanding control satellite for these drones and the belief was the Chinese government was sending the following message, we're moving on Taiwan and maybe other things. You can't do anything about it. Okay. Okay. So, you know, look, I have no idea if that's true or not. Zero. Yeah, I mean, I don't know. That just doesn't It just I just got to say it's just it's just so aggressive and and also but the other thing is that like, you know, actually. It seems really reckless and the Chinese have not been seeking confrontations like that for the most part. Um now, Jesse Michaels, who is doing some of the best reporting on this issue of UAPs, um he's doing YouTube videos. He just did a documentary that was incredible. Like I think it's like an hour a couple of hours, highly recommended that goes through the very long history of unidentified anomalous phenomena over US military bases, including all these cases of, you know, several cases of them shutting down um systems. Like a 65-year-long history. Yeah. Yeah, and there was this famous uh press conference with like Miss Aliers and others from military bases in in Washington, D.C. I want to say in the 90s, maybe maybe 80s. Um so, you know, like that predates any of the Chinese stuff by far. It predates all the drones. So, that was going on for a really long time. I mean, if you just kind of if you step back and you look at it, it looks like a very like, what is it communicating at a very basic level? It's definitely communicating dominance. You know, it's it's you can read it in a lot of different ways and that's similar to what the the Navy pilots said around the Tic Tac um interactions off both coasts is that these were um phenomena or you know, or objects, whatever you want to call them or craft that were just demonstrating dominance over our craft. They were able to do things that our craft weren't doing. So, yeah, I mean, And that was from their perspective the point of the behavior was to say, we can do things that you can't. Yeah, and so then it then it then it then the question would be, so if it is NHI, then the question is, are they communicating something? And if they are communicating something, why would they only be doing it in that way? Like you would you would like if you're like if you're trying to demonstrate your strength to an adversary or something, you're trying to send some message, why would you just do that? Cuz you there's nothing that we can do with that information. So, then you have to wonder, okay, if it is NHI and it's behaving in that way, Yeah, non-human intelligence, then is there some is there actually some other communication going on Right. that we don't know about? And of course, there's just a long history and there's all these crazy stories of, you know, presidents. I mean, going back to Eisenhower. So, just to just to bottom line your view after reporting on the lights over New Jersey uh in Pennsylvania, New York, uh mid-Atlantic drone hysteria. Do you think they were human-made drones? I I genuinely don't know. I mean, I will be I'll be I might be more shocked if they were human-made because of their behaviors and they never were able to get one. I did have somebody tell me recently that they had heard I mean, again, it's always second-hand. It's so untrustworthy, but somebody told me that that the military got one of the the orbs, the famous orbs and opened it up and it was Chinese. I mean, if that's the case, then somebody has mastered anti-gravity and that's almost harder for me to believe than that it's NHI because I mean, it's just I mean, I don't know. I mean, look, we have a I mean, here's the I I go I go I literally I go back and forth. You can see me doing it in the same conversation. But we have these huge black budgets in the military. I mean, just gigantic and they've been there for decades. So, is it possible to cover up something like that? I think it might be. I mean, I'm much more after having covered the Hunter Biden laptop and I mean, Russiagate 2, but really the Hunter Biden laptop, I was just impressed by how many people were involved in the conspiracy to cover it up. I mean, you had the FBI getting it, covering it up, basically working with working with Aspen Institute to run a disinformation campaign. By the way, um this is Vivian Schiller um and Garrett Graff run the disinformation campaign aimed at persuading journalists in advance of the release of the Hunter Biden laptop that it was a Russian information operation. Garrett Graff is the guy that goes and does the big UFO book. So, these things all I mean, this was very weird. So, he comes out with a big book on UFOs. I think it was last year. It was called UFO, Garrett Graff. This is somebody that is famously close with the intelligence community. His other books were on Watergate and on 9/11. The book Both of which were totally legitimate. No, for sure. And I'm sure the the official story is everything we we to know. So, you know, you sort of go And what was his conclusion on UFOs? Well, it was very it's the um the narrative is that they don't know what they are. So, he doesn't fully he's not like a debunker like these guys who are like all oh, we can explain everything. So, he's much more sophisticated than that. But it's basically a debunking. It's basically that it's basically that it's it's just all the you know, typical explanations um and then maybe some US military programs, but he also just says that he just argues that the US military doesn't know what it is. I don't believe Garrett Graff and the reason I don't believe Garrett Graff is because I saw him participate in a disinformation campaign on Hunter Biden laptop and I know for a fact there was something else going on at that Aspen Institute program and Aspen Institute of course is a massive US government-funded NGO that cosplays as a kind of you know, bourgeois gabfest. So, there I mean So, I'm like that was for me that was all came out in the Twitter files. I discovered that in the Twitter files and for me it was like pulling back the curtain and you actually have as a journalist like you you we have the emails, you know, like you have the documents, you have the tabletop exercise where they're brainwashing journalists into believing a lie about the Hunter Biden laptop. That was so sophisticated of that because they they basically go and brainwash journalists before the story comes out because they know they're listening to Giuliani, you know, they're FBI tap on Giuliani. You're listening to Giuliani. They had they knew they got we got to go brainwash the journalists. They go get all the journalists from all the major outlets plus the social media platforms in these seminars where they program them. Um I mean that was like for me it was like wow, there's like a secret government. Like it was like there's some there's like a whole there's like a whole it's a very and it was very just sophisticated. I don't know how else to describe it. Like it was very everything seemed very careful. Also with all the censorship stuff you see these limited hangouts, right? Where limited hangouts are kind of like the public relations of a covert operation of like a covert propaganda operation where like after they get caught they can be like oh, no, we were totally honest about what we were doing. We were talking about it. But they do these weird limited hangouts. You'll see these people that clearly look like either directly intelligence community or their intermediaries having these conversations they put on YouTube and like they're like but it's like you know, a couple hundred views. Like they're not promoting them in any way. And so, you just kind of go wow, there's like a whole creepy like world of disinformation realize is that the covert operations are really not covert. Like all the all the information's out there actually. Right. But it's just discredited or unnoticed or no one collates it. Have you noticed that? Yeah, I know I know and then and you only can understand it um when you see the whole big picture cuz it there's there's no smoking guns ever. So, there's never something you can I mean Hunter Biden laptop got us about as close to a as a smoking gun as you can get. And it helped because it was what helped to expose it was that you it was partisan. And so, it was a particular partisan weaponization. My concern with the UAPs I mean it's now I guess the strength and the weakness is that it's become bipartisan in terms of the desire. I mean it was a really I mean Tucker, the weirdest experience I've had. I've testified now like 12 times or 13 times in front of Congress in the last few years. The weirdest experience I've had was on UAPs seeing the Democrats and Republicans basically being aligned in wanting to get to the bottom of the UAP thing. I mean it's beautiful. Like I never seen I was like I this is I've never I've heard of bipartisanship. Never thought I would see it in you know, in the wild. Um so, that is exciting. On the other hand, I suspect there is also some bipartisan group that's trying to prevent that information from getting out for some reason. So, I mean look I mean it is a I mean what is going to happen? I mean I mean part of me is you know, maybe it's my defensive pessimism on it cuz I like everybody else I want the information. Part of me is like there's just no way they're going to let that information out. It's just something is too there's something about the UAP thing like the JFK thing where there's some secret there that they are really there is some group of people that really don't want us to know. So, you know Well, that's a that's a fact. I've bumped up against that personally several times on both of those issues which appear to be related. Yes. I but I don't know the answer. All it's it's almost like seeing something in photographic negative. All I know for a fact confirmed is that they are willing to go to extreme lengths to keep it secret. And so, that's just a tell that it's there's something profound there. It's not just a bureaucracy covering its own ass. It's more than that. how about the clip where Pompeo is being interviewed about the JFK files and then he like literally mid-sentence goes but I mean I've also seen the UFO files. And it was like well, why why did you just switch from like what made you think of the UFO files on the JFK files? I don't know. I mean um So, anyway, is there a secret has there have we developed anti-gravity? Have we developed I mean we know that in the '50s there were like there was a there's a whole book on it. It's very fascinating. But there was like there was an anti-gravity program in the US military with our defense contractors. It made the cover of one of the aerospace magazines. It was like it was like a cover of it and then it just disappeared. And so, you can kind of go I mean I think the official explanation is yeah, we tried that and it didn't work. It's like well, that's never stopped you before. Right. Um like it not working like that's like um you know, like like you would keep working on it if you can do anti-gravity. So, the other possibility is that it just went dark and they just they kept doing it. Well, I I wonder though about the like the possibility that there is a or has been technology transfer from some other realm to this realm. Um cuz there are you know, just in the study of history there are it's like there's really no understanding at a bunch of different points of in human societal evolution like where did that technology come from? And you see that on a bunch of different technology. So, but nuclear anti-gravity that kind of stuff like are you open to the possibility that that there's been like a transfer of that technology from some other I mean that is definitely there's definitely that is that is what a lot of people talk about. Yeah. I mean the problem with this issue is just it's very frustrating because it's just all second hand. Of course it is. And so, like the Hunter Biden laptop is not second hand. Like it's first hand and I have the documents. Now, there are a bunch of really fascinating uh you know, alleged US secret US government documents on UFOs on on alleged alien spacecraft crashes. Um they're called the you know, Majestic documents or the MJ-12 documents and so, the story is that Um you know, that that one or two of these craft crashed in 1947 near Roswell, New Mexico and that sort of begins and you know, and there's a whole cast of characters that allegedly you know, um including Oppenheimer were involved in that program. You know, the Why would Oppenheimer be involved? Well, why I mean because he was the man, you know, like he was like he was our greatest scientist obviously the father of the atomic bomb and and you know, Roswell is where the um where we launched the the flights to bomb Hiroshima and Nagasaki. So, it's very symbolic in that sense. Maybe more than symbolic. Yeah, maybe more than symbolic. I mean they keep flying over nuclear like as my wife says she's like the alien your aliens really they don't like the nuclear, you know, cuz I love nuclear. So, and I'm kind of like I'm like well, yeah, I mean like and also the most ridiculous thing is when people are like all yeah, they want us to give give up our you know, the people that believe in them they go the aliens are here and they want us to give up our nuclear weapons. It's like doesn't sound like a good idea to me. Um the foreign space invaders would like you to give up your most powerful weapons. Um but those documents I spent a bunch of time on them and I couldn't figure out how to report anything on it because of course of course FBI was like these are all debunked. They're all frauds. But there are first of all, there's a lot more of them. You go to majesticdocuments.com and you can look at them. They're amazing. I mean if they are and I've also had an the other and they're by the way in those in the Garrett Graff book they're in that book. They're also in another debunking book called um by Mark Pilkington. Um I can't think of the name right now. Um but they they all all the people that are the debunkers deal with these documents and their story is not that they were all hoaxes. Their story is that they were what's called counterintelligence passage material. Documents that were created by the US government but leaked to people to ostensibly be able to smoke out double agents or people like you would see them I guess you would trace these documents. Right. Like putting dye in the water to find the leak. yeah, exactly. So, I mean but the thing is I mean it is like there's like one of them is a handbook of crash retrieval like for like to like that the that the soldiers would ostensibly read to retrieve these crash. I mean it's they the if they're hoaxes, they're incredible. I mean like they have like they have like they they have like the people like they have I forgot what it's called but like basically like a manifest where they show who's checked it out and read it and they've all these different names and they've checked those names and those were like real people at those air bases that had these documents. So, um and then you know, there was one document in particular where it was a memo from JFK to the CIA director Dulles where he says, I want to see you on this particular day. It was like July '62 or '63. I can't remember which. And now again everyone was like well, that's a forgery. It's part of the MJ-12 documents or whatever. It's not real. But then they released the JFK files and then sure enough we see the Dulles calendar and he had met with JFK twice that day and nobody had known that they had had those meetings until we had that JFK um memo until we had the confirmation of the memo. So, that would suggest that at least either that document is real, that JFK memo to Dulles, or whoever forged it knew that he had met with Dulles that day and nobody else had known that. So, you know, you'd be sort of like, I guess I I guess you could still put it in the This is why this is the problem with this issue is you can still there's there's still plausible deniability for a lot of for all these things. You know, you can make up a reason for why these documents are all counterintelligence passage material. Um I don't know. That's why I just have to kind of go I I don't know. I mean, I talked to a lot of people and yeah, it's just a lot of second-hand information and the documents are second-hand. So, you kind of go there's like my world of like the Hunter Biden laptop which still a bunch of my progressive and Democrat friends and family don't believe. You know, they still they still think the Russians were somehow involved. Um but like I actually have the documents and we can prove what happened there. On the UAP stuff, it's just still just surrounded in But the incoming president has said he just said, "I'm going to tell you what those drones were about." He was very relaxed about it, too. I mean, I was struck that when they when he he did she said it twice. He said it again recently like last week, right? And but then he said it in December. He was I don't know why they're buying like I don't know why they're not telling people what they are. They know what they are. And I was like I was like I mean, it was a really um he made it sound like it's no big deal. Like we should just tell people what it is. But if Trump knew what it is and if he if it's NHI and Trump knows that, he seemed very relaxed about that because of course the I mean, the the main the dominant the conventional wisdom among people that follow this who think it's NHI is that um it's bad news. That it's not a great that it's not a great story that if it were good news and that they were just friendly space brothers, you know, offering us you know, advanced tech then and they'd be like and there's no strings attached or whatever. That would be a much easier story to sell. But if there's some bad news in that story, then that might explain why they're so secretive. there's some bad news. My theory is that the reason that permanent Washington or deep state or whatever uh people who administer the system hate Trump is not because of any of his policies which they're probably agnostic on, but because they fear that he will disclose information. I think it's everything's about disclosure. If you look at the federal government, what's its defining quality? It's secrecy, right? Billion classified documents. Why is that? Right. It's not good. It's never good. Your kids behave like that, it's not good. No. They're using drugs or whatever. You know what I mean? Right. They're having sex they shouldn't be having. There's never a good reason for that kind of secrecy. It's not privacy, it's secrecy. Right. Yes. And there's something about Trump that makes everybody nervous that he might say more of what he knows than he should. Well, they don't control him obviously. So, that's that's very nerve-wracking. I mean, how much do you think that they're just worried that he's going to pull out of NATO? How much of it is that? That's I mean, I of course that's that's in my daily prayers that he would do that. I don't think he's in danger of doing that. Um I hope certainly hope so. But I think it's even more fundamental. It's like this guy could say the truth. Mhm. Because Trump is not much of a liar actually by Washington standards. He's an exaggerator, of course. But actually his defining quality is like saying the truth. Is being honest about kind of the big issues. The big issues, exactly. So, what do you um so you think he knows what it is? The UAP stuff? Yeah. think that. Yes. And and you think it it's a NHI? You know, I he hasn't told me. But yeah, and I do think he knows. Pretty sure. Pretty sure he knows. And I'm pretty sure that everybody I've ever spoken to who I think knows a lot more than I do. I mean, what does it mean to know? Like do we really know anything? I don't know. I'm I'm not sure anybody ever fully understands this or even partially understands it. But the people who who I'm confident have a lot more information than I have Mhm. to a person are very very uncomfortable about it. Yeah. Since not in public, in private. Which is another tell. That I'm just I mean, you've talked to a lot of people. I mean, yeah, no. I mean, it's there it's very um yeah. I mean, I say my prayers. I'm still Christian. I mean, um you know, it's interesting Joe when I was on Joe Rogan's podcast last time. I mean, here you know, Joe was like, "I think that they're extraterrestrials." You know, he's openly saying that. Yeah, it's not the that's not the case. Well, okay. Or NHI. I guess NHI. Yeah. Um But I mean, here you and Joe are like the two big most influential podcasters in the country and you both think that it's not just a government secret tech or that it's not just plasmas. And Joe's very close with Elon. Mhm. Loves Elon. You know, like me and I think probably like you believes that Elon deserves a huge amount of credit for saving free speech in this country. Um Elon says there's nothing there. Never sees anything. And they've got an amazing rocket system that sees a lot of things. sure. I've talked to Elon about this a number of times and I'm not sure he says that. Okay, I thought he did say that. I thought he said if I see if there's any aliens He jokes about it which is a tell. Um Trump does, too. And they all they joke in the same way. I mean, I of course I love them both, obviously. And I feel like you know, I'm um I feel like they both have really been great for this country, you know, net net as they say. But um No, they joke about it in the same way that a lot of people joke about it. They're like, "No, there are no flying saucers from Mars." Right. they're not from Mars. They're not from another planet. They're from here. They've always been here. These are spiritual entities. This is my view and I I sincerely believe it. Can't prove it. But since you asked, so he is I've never heard Elon say that's not true. That there's nothing there. He just said like we monitor space. That's what they do, right? And this is self-evident. If there were there've been so many sightings in this country and around the world that if they were from another galaxy far, far away, there would be some satellite evidence of that. They'd be picked up coming into our atmosphere. And of course that's not as far as I know. Joe, we do have some photos. I mean, there's that one photo of the one I can't remember. It's like it's in the James Fox documentary. So, there are some of those apparently. Coming through space in here. only I've been told there's a lot more of these photos and images. But yeah, I mean, there's also me though. I mean, it's clear that these things reside, you know, deep in the earth, under the water and in the in the atmosphere. So, um And why the elusiveness then? Why the secrecy? Well, that's the question. That is the question. I mean, why is everybody who I Again, I don't know what anybody really knows. I don't know anything. I just want to start every sentence by admitting I don't know anything. I don't know what happens when you die. I don't know how the brain works. I don't know anything. I don't know what sleep is for. Mhm. None of us do. That's a really interesting one. That's a surprisingly interesting one actually. But it's such a it's so revealing of the limits of human knowledge. It's like, "Oh, science has solved this." Really? What's sleep for? Tell me how that benefits us. Sleep, really? Um but anyway, so I just always want to say and remind myself of the limits of my knowledge which are profound. So, I don't know anything. But once again, every person I've talked to who I believe has deeper knowledge on this question than I have has seemed burdened by it. Mhm. Have you noticed this? Yeah. Yeah, it's not fun anymore. money from it. No. These are not people trying to get famous from it. These are people who just seem to have this knowledge and they're they're bothered by it. So, that's to me don't think it's I don't think it's to cover up a secret weapons program. I mean, in other words like I don't think that's how you would do it. It's so like yeah, I don't believe it. A secret weapons program. Yeah. Sorry. It's much deeper. Look, weapons programs come and go. Right. Weapons that we thought were fearsome when I was a child are a joke now. We're we're watching weapons technology change so fast in the Ukraine war that people can't even get their brains around And you wouldn't need this elaborate and also like if you're doing passage material like just to go back to those cases, like why would it be that and why would there be so much of it? Why would it why wouldn't it be something um anyway, it's a very curiously large body of passage material. Yes. On this particular topic. Well, that's right. Well, that's that's what I was saying. Like I do think all the puzzle pieces are sort of in plain sight. Did you ask Putin about it? Um I I did not ask Putin about it. Um I would never have done it on air Mhm. because I did ask him a bunch of questions off off camera about you know, he has access to the of course. He controls the Soviet archives which and the the Soviets are great archivists. And we know that from the, you know, couple of I'm interested in Soviet leadership and government and all that stuff. There've been a couple amazing books written. Um The Court of the Red Tsar being I think the greatest of them about Stalin, for example. And one thing you learn from reading the book is they kept records on everything. Almost like the Nazis. Like crazy level records. And you know, most of them have never been disclosed. So, I had I did have some questions for Putin about that. About Rudolf Hess specifically. It's one of the great stories in history that doesn't make any sense at all. The number two guy in Nazi Germany flying into Scotland in a plane by himself and bailing out. Mhm. You know, right before the US entry into the war and had all these things to say that were wild. And one of the things he apparently said in his debriefs was he believed that Hitler was being influenced by demonic spirits that he had summoned through the occult. Huh? That's not worth knowing more about. There's a lot of stuff on that. There's a lot. There's a lot. But Hess said that. So, I immediately asked Putin about that off camera. I didn't want to seem like a wacko having unauthorized questions. But I did ask him about that. He did not get a satisfactory answer. But I did not ask him about UFOs. Well, I thought also they you know, you may have seen Mark Andreessen recently say that when he met with White House officials who said that they wanted to take all they they wanted to take control over all AI that they said to him something like we've we've declassified whole areas of science since the 1950s. And I was like that just seemed like a reference to this stuff. At least at least the at least the anti-gravity if not to some of the UAP stuff. I think the modern Western mind, the post-1945 Western mind is incapable of understanding some of the stuff because we lack the language of, you know, metaphysics. And I think that's, you know, just been a feature of human thinking from the cave period Right. until we dropped the atom bomb, in which case it just like turned off and we're like, oh, only the material world is real, but no one else has ever thought that cuz that's not true. Well, like for 100 years, right? Really from Darwin, you know, like 150 years or something. Yeah, but I don't think I mean even before before the war, before dropping those bombs, which really were I mean I do think that's like the pivot point in history more than anything else, but yeah, there've been secular movements, you know, rich people always think they're God and so they want to eliminate any rivals from the public from the conversation, but those bombs, man, everything changed. You don't think? Well, it sure seemed like it. I mean, there's a really positive side of it though, which is that we haven't had these awful wars. Yes. Brutal. I mean, when you look at the death toll that was going up from up and up and up from wars all throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, it's awful. So, we've it's they've spared us that, but it took something apocalyptic. Well, it's been 80 years, we'll see. Yeah. So, last question, sorry, I've got Can you imagine sitting next to me at dinner like you I never get anything done. Um, and you're I think one of the most knowledgeable people in the country on like all the most interesting topics, so You're too kind. No, it's well, it's just it's just a fact. In fact, if there's anything in this conversation I think is like provoked in people to desire to hear more Michael Shellenberger, so Thank you. Um do you think it's possible that what we're seeing in LA, which does feel like the destruction of our second biggest city, Mhm. um from which maybe there's no recovery, I don't know, I hope, but do you think it's a an act of war in some sense? Mhm. You mean from a foreign power or Oh. Like what what's the evidence for that? It happened. And it happened between Trump's election and his inauguration. And it's just crazy. Yeah. The second Trump got elected I had this instinct like, oh man, I bet a lot there's going to be bad bad stuff that happens. I mean I was more struck by that on the UAP, on the drone UAP. it's of a piece. The bizarre Tesla explosion in Las Vegas, the mass shooting, like there's just Yeah. if there's a 2-month period in my whole life, 55 years, where more more weird shit's been packed into 2 months, I can't think of it. Yeah. Can you? No, it's freaking me out a little bit, honestly. I mean the the I spent a bunch of time on the Livels burger, that's the guy that killed himself in the Tesla in Las Vegas. I mean, you definitely have cases of PTSD causing people to do things and people are surprised by suicides, but yeah, it was a weird one, you know, and I was skeptical of his emails cuz you know, he sent these emails to Shawn Ryan, it's another excellent podcaster now. I think you've had him on or you've been on there. I I he's a friend of mine. I I can just for the record I consider him an honest Oh, no, I did too. is an honest man. Everyone always says he's a CIA operative. Oh, shut up. No. No, no, I was like I I was like into it because because I believe in Shawn and and I didn't I'm sure he did not fake that. So, you know, and then they and then the FBI did confirm that those emails were real. On the other hand, you know, that was a weird one too because also it felt like he was like, oh, the the Chine- those were Chinese drones, they've mastered gravitic. It just felt like he didn't really know what he was talking about either. So, there's just a lot of a lot of people talking. before? I mean, I I thought it was anti-gravity is what I've heard, so never Well, you're a writer, you're a word person. I'd never heard that word or seen that word. felt like he was using it wrong. That was my instinct, so thought too. I looked it up. Yeah. No, I mean, I guess I I look at it I just think um Nietzsche really nailed it, which is that when people, you know, when people stop believing in traditional religions, they become they they unconsciously, you know, develop you know, they they develop new sense of guilt, a new vision of the apocalypse, they invent a new soul. I mean, people think that there's this thing called gender, which is separate from your body. It's kind of like a soul. My friend Abigail Shrier um pointed that out. And so, we just end up recreating Christianity, but in a deformed and deranged way. And and it and the emergent quality of it is this destructive fire. Like you don't it's actually more powerful cuz nobody got out there and said, you know, let's let I mean, somebody did say let's let Malibu burn, but that was never like the explicit policy of the government of LA. It's just something that emerges after years of budget cuts, after years of self-hating ideologies like DEI, like climate apocalypse, like the homeless apocalypse. It's just emerges kind of deep from deep within us, from some from some self-destructive part of us. So, for me, if there's a foreign invasion, it came through the human psyche, not from outside of it. Michael Shellenberger, how can um people find you? Uh public.news and @shellenberger on X. The best. Thanks for having me, Tucker. Really appreciate you. Yeah. [Music] Thanks for watching our YouTube channel. We hope you'll subscribe to it. And by the way, you can also hit the little bell icon and get a notification every time we produce a video. We hope you'll do that, too. [Music]