All right, we're live first of all. Thank you very much for coming. I really appreciate it Well, thank you for having me. I mean, I've been looking forward to it for a long time I'm as well. I enjoyed our conversation in New York City It was kind of like two years ago now, right? It was a fun time and I've been a big fan of your work for a long time before that and I find you a fascinating character and I'm glad you I mean you got up early this morning English time It's eight o'clock here in Los Angeles So this is like what do you like eight hours ahead of us here? We're talking two hours. Yeah, even up for a while fella. This is not good for life expectancy, right? This is certainly true people who played this out. I think you know all the things I do that are probably not going for me That's the one and I get enough sleep. Don't get enough sleep and you like the booze fella. Well, that may be good for me You never know. Really? In moderation. Yeah Well, we're drinking it right now. You know little Jack Daniels Is that supposed to be good for colds? Is that a myth? It's working for me. Okay. It does work for you really it helps you It certainly does whatever you might feel better Um, you're involved at the foot for folks who don't know Aubrey de Grey your researcher Cambridge You are involved very much so in the forefront of Anti-aging life extension As far as Medical science is concerned. You're at the forefront of this. So I could first of all correct one thing Okay, I'm an affiliated with the University of Cambridge for a very long time now. How long is it? 2006 fucking Wikipedia Those assholes 2006 Yeah, basically as soon as we were able to bring in our funding to be able to pay me at full-time salary It may more than for me to Not actually work doing something else to pay the bill So what is your organization now? Right, so we're since research foundation where a father won three three public charity Best in Mountain View California and we are a level of roughly five million dollars per year and I'm about a third budget So we're still really pretty small, but I think we've been it pretty well and for folks who said what's wrong is why he's suffering from a bit of a cold Like now leaves a gentleman. That's why he's drinking the whiskey. I don't know how it works that way What what is what's exciting right now in terms of like medical research when it comes to life extension? What are the exciting areas that you're pursuing? Perhaps the most exciting thing is that there's no one exciting thing They really important thing to understand about medical research into aging Is to start out from remembering that aging is not just one phenomenon It's a collection and network of interacting phenomena and the way that it's going to be effectively tackled by medicine in the full It's a time is by a divine and conquer strategy a panel of interventions all of which need to work reasonably well in order for the whole Edifice to actually work Told a breachable degree in terms of postponement of health So from my point of view working at the Colfax so to speak It's a fantastic thing that you know There's always something every week there's something that's going to be breakthrough here in that But of course the breakthroughs are often very technical. They're often things that only specialists would understand that they actually Were breakthroughs. They're not like you know, we haven't doubled the most the lifespan of mice in the past week for example Nevertheless, that's fine, you know, I mean that's how pioneering technology is always developed and The people that do need to understand in other words the people who are doing the research and who need to know about each other's results In order to know what experiment to do next, you know that that community obviously is sufficiently cohesive that these pieces of information are distributed Obviously player large-potting doing that as well as in actually overseeing the research that the foundation does so You know Coming back to my original statement. There's no one answer But they that's a very good point because is there a lot of cooperation between the various different Individuals all throughout the world that are working on these life extension technologies and life extension medical science So that's actually a slightly different question to which the answer is depressingly different They failed the individual failed that I think all need to be developed to a reasonable degree of efficacy in order to actually give the overall result those individual fields are Naturally cohesive and people talk to each other within those fields, but between the fields. It's a very different matter One of the things that I've had to do ever since I started out in this area and certainly over the past let's say 10 or 12 years I've had to actively bring these people together The far too much book and isolation building up of silos and of you know unnecessary barriers Between fields that somehow don't think that they're relevant to each other and this happens, you know not in any way I'm not blaming the scientists for this because it happens really as a result of The vagaries of funding the fact that nobody's got enough money and therefore in order to get whatever they can They've got to focus on the things they're already known to be good at it works extraordinarily strongly against the The possibility of cross disciplinary work and also against high-risk high-gain work And it really massively flows science and technology down So it's a tragedy and everyone kind of knows it but nobody really knows what to do about it It's not any one person's interest to do anything about it So the whole 50 minutes perpetuated So is it one of those situations where you have like various pharmaceutical companies or what have you standing on the outside looking and waiting for something to be Something that they could put their chips on something where they can hedge their bets and say okay This is a this is a promising little piece of research here Now we'll start to gamble on this being profitable down the line because for Medication especially to be ultimately profitable is there's a huge period of testing and research and ultimately can cost millions and millions of dollars Before you could ever even find out the efficacy of a product. That's exactly right And again, it's not quite the same thing as I was saying earlier, but it's related What I was talking about earlier was really with respect to academia per say with respect to people who rely on government funding to Get their work done pharmaceutical industry or more generally the medical industry have a different perspective But it kind of has the same kind of problems medicine is key to do and Everyone wants to keep it as simple as possible, which means that there's an inherent bias against against Cross disciplinary work against Dividing conquistagios that involve doing more than one thing at the same time to the same person But ultimately we're going to have to bite that bullet and there are smart people in the pharmaceutical and medical industry Just as there are in academia and everyone's kind of getting used to this. It's just that It's a very difficult thing for anyone to be the first Group the first company the first first Reset group to actually do it's kind of got to be a collective Shift of mine fat the kind of say change in the culture of how all of this is done So is this something that's being actively pursued all over the world or their pockets of Intellectuals that are working on this or all over the world But yet only pockets. I'm afraid at this point There is still an enormous tendency and honestly productive tendency to retreat into Doing what just makes money quickly and what gets papers published quickly irrespective of whether it scales In other words, whether it leads to Significant progress in the longer term So the biggest thing that I always point to is they absolutely Biologically inaccurate and damaging Idea that the diseases of old age are in some sense distinct from aging itself It's completely nonsense the diseases of old age anything that causes People who were born a long time ago to be sick, but it doesn't tend to affect people who were in early adulthood Those things are that way because they are side effects of being alive They are side effects of having been alive and accumulating damage for a long time in the body And that is the only thing that one can say as a definition of aging itself too So one should not be dividing these two things and saying these things are diseases and this other thing is not We shouldn't be doing that If we stop doing that Then we've got a chance of actually understanding how to attack these that this network of interacting Elhoth issues that affect the elderly in a manner that really works We will stop trying to be over optimistic about these things that we choose to call the diseases and over pessimistic about the things that we don't And we'll start to realize that all of them together can be tackled So you're looking at aging itself as a type of a disease I would actually go the other way I would say that the right thing to do is not to look at the so-called diseases of old ages diseases Because of course there is a huge distinction between the Between things that are side effects of being alive in the first place on the one hand And infections infections are what the word disease should be restricted to Well infections and congenital diseases that we say Infections can be actually eliminated from the body. They can be cured by bashing away at the symptoms Eliminating the infectious agents Now if you try to do that with something that's a side effect of being alive You're obviously not going to succeed unless you like goes far as eliminating being alive Which would rather defeat the object, right? So you know That's the that's the conceptual thing that people think that something like Alzheimer's or atherosclerosis or cancer is basically just Not all that different from tuberculosis Complete bullshit and that fundamental conceptual error Causes enormous amounts of money to be spent in the wrong way against the disease of old age in ways that will only ever make a very minimal impact on those diseases So is that that there's a sort of a resignation that Alzheimer's is just a side effect of old age that there's nothing they can do about Well, no, no, my point is there's not a resignation people say it to disease Therefore we should cure it not in your part But I mean, okay, and that's the problem that people think they can cure it in isolation They think people get old, but let's cure Alzheimer's So what you're saying is what we have to cure is they're getting old part. That's right. Okay. What it what's What do you think will be the method? I mean obviously there's a bunch of different ideas What do you think will be the method ultimately that we move into that direction? It's been very clear to me for at least 15 years now The way to do this is damage repair That we must develop a panel of interventions a panel of therapies Which go in and restore the molecular and cellular structure and composition of the body of an elderly person to hurt was more less in early adulthood So that means things like putting cells back when the body is having cells dying and not being naturally not being automatically Replaced by cell division It means taking cells away when cells are dividing when they're not supposed to or when they're not dying when they are supposed to It means cleaning out molecular waste products if they're accumulating because they sell the body doesn't know how to get rid of them Doesn't have to break them down or to excrete them You know pretty basic things really But it turns out that even thinking in that very sounds like a very simplistic way It's a very robust framework for actually identifying what needs to be fixed and how to fix it Do you think that diet at all plays a part in this? Do you recommend the specific diet to people to enhance their their body's ability to repair itself? I don't really do that first for two reasons first of all With regard to diet and it more generally you know lifestyle anything that people can do to die I definitely take with you that there are plenty of other people who know more about them me And therefore if I also became an expert in this area I really wouldn't be making as much difference as I am making by spending my time in this other way Second thing however is that And this is rather depressing but it's rather an important thing to mention that As far as we can tell the overwhelming evidence is that none of these things make very much difference to most people If you're an unlucky person if you're someone who They're short-store or two and you Aging unusually rapidly then it's a bit different Especially if you're aging unusually rapidly only in one particular way or one or two ways Then maybe there are supplements or dietary or lifestyle Regimens that will substantially normalize your rate of aging and that's obviously a good thing But for those of us who are already average especially for those of us who are already doing better than average That's not the case the evidence seems to be that these interventions simply don't give you anymore the body is already as well tuned as it can be Sub'day to the development of much more sophisticated interventions of the sort that sounds research foundation is working on So the things like getting good sleep getting good diet. They're really essentially only going to go so far They're only going to go very small amount. That's right. So you'll have a real living extra 10 years or something Even 10 as I think an overstatement I think we're talking like more like one or two if you're lucky. Wow one or two so you Here's a here's a good illustration of this People often around the rest of the world, you know people love at the USA a lot for it For the fact that even though it spans a huge amount of medical care far more Per head than any other country Nevertheless, if you look at longevity The USA is way down the league table. It's like number 45 or something like that Really? People say well, this is just shows, you know that Money doesn't buy health or something but actually a much more important message comes if you look at the real numbers not just the league table Something I like to ask you just if you know this. Okay What do you think the difference is between the life expectancy of People in the USA and the life expectancy of people in Japan the longest lived country in the world I would say the life expectancy of the United States is probably a Good average is probably in your 60s where I would say Japan is probably in your 70s So give me number what's it if it's 64 78 how about that? You say you gotta say 14 years. Yes, you answer it four years four That's it four. It's not much. That's right. That's my point and the four the last four really you can have them Well, of course The last four you can it's the same in Japan The way to live a long time is to stay healthy a long time first and then they let the period of decline is typically about the same however long the period of Good health was beforehand So and all these factors that people look to to enhance like you know Surround yourself with loved ones have a good community Do something you enjoy doing When they're talking they're really only talking about a very small amount of time anyway I would say and the reason I spend so much time emphasizing this and making sure that people understand it is because if people don't Understand if people think well, they can do a great deal to push burn their alcohol just by doing things that they can do already Then they're gonna be correspondingly less enthusiastic less committed to figuring out and helping and hastening the development of things that we can't do already Of course, the sort of stuff that I work on it's really because the Impact of things that we can do today is so small that it becomes so urgent to develop new things What do you think will be the message for repairing damage? I mean how how will that Find itself In our lives so there are many different types of damage and the only reason why it was possible for me to come up with a really Solid robust clear research program was because 15 years ago I was able to identify why to classify these many types of damage into a much more manageable number of categories just seven categories within this it within each category there is just one generic intervention which Made differ in detail from one example within the category to another but only in detail So basically we're talking about only seven different types of repair So for illustration. Let me just talk about one or two of them one type of damage is lost the cells cells dying and not being automatically replaced by the division of other cells That's basically the reason why we get Parkinson's disease as probably the best example of it must obvious example Now in Parkinson's disease what happens is there's just this one part of the brain called the substantial NIGRA in which there are a special type of neuron called a dopamineergic neuron These neurons die much more rapidly than neurons in most parts of the brain and Sure, not eventually. I've never left of them now in most of this You've only lost about 20% of those neurons by old age But some people live a bit faster and they may be lost 70 or 80% in old age And those are the people that get Parkinson's disease So then you ask what is the damage repair approach? The answer is actually really clear in well known in this case namely stem cell therapy That's what stem cell therapy is you put um Excuse me you put cells into the body that Are prepared in advance and speak their set up so that they will have the tendency to divide and transform into Replacements for the cells that the body was not replacing on its own So you restore the number of cells in the tissue to see start working again. You fix the disease And about 20 years ago people started trying this because people realized this Didn't really work too well back there and it worked occasionally But the basic problem was we didn't know enough about how to manipulate stem cells before Interaction them into the body. Now we know a lot lot more And there are new stem cell trials for Parkinson's disease starting up now Which people are really optimistic about. I think there's a very good chance I would say even a 50-50 chance that we will be able to say in a little of 10 years from now The Parkinson's disease has genuinely been cured with stem cell therapy. Wow. That is very promising. That's incredible 10 years That's a relatively short amount of time Unless you're it is some before Right is a sort of amount of time a lot of the therapies that we think also need to be developed to address other Parts of aging. I think a harder than that and I think we could be talking about 20 or 25 years And even then we're only talking about that's a 50-50 Probability of getting there for anything that's more than a few years away It's obviously extremely speculative if we're talking about timeframes I think we have a responsibility to Give our best guess to the general public because the general public's best guess is going to be a lot worse Right and you've got to know we've got to have some kind of idea of how Close something is in order to understand how Much to agitate to make it happen faster You know if you think something's a thousand years away It's not going to be a priority to make it only 90 years away So that's that's a big part of why we wait the board to talk about these timeframes But yes, I mean, I think there's at least a 10% chance that we won't get there for a hundred years Wow, that's now a little bit of a deal, right? Because very 50% chance is quite enough to be worth fighting for Most certainly you and I met at the global 2000 what is a 2045 initiative event in New York City which is It's a group of you there's a sort of a group of two different groups of people There's people that are concerned with Biological aging which is your group medical biological aging and this people that some folks classify as Sci-fi dreamers that believe you're going to be able to download your consciousness into a robot and bypass the whole biological Process in the first place and that all this work about repair It's only good. It's going to be a moot point because we're going to get to a point where we're going to develop a body That's far superior to the biological body that we're born with and we'll simply impart our consciousness into that Do you give any credence to that? Do you do dabble in that or do you just concentrate on what you're doing? I tend to have a very open mind about these things I'm not at all fond of people talking about things that are clearly impossible But very often when something initially looks clearly impossible But because you look the more you understand that it might actually only just be really difficult And there could be an example uploading is The idea of moving one's consciousness to a different Hardware, you know, it's not completely clear that you can't be done. The may in the end Be reasons why it totally can't be done But I think all that really matters now is that we can say that it's very difficult I think that Yeah, I would certainly say in fact that I bet serious money that the Problem of aging will be decisively solved by a biomedical approach of the thought that we're aware of pursuing Well before it gets solved by an uploading approach Well, but here's the thing Like any sensible technology I know I might be wrong and therefore I'm delighted that there are people working in these other areas So that if they if they work turned out to be easier than I think it is and my work turns out to be harder And they get their first then they'll be saving lives that I couldn't save that works for me Now there's a philosophical debate here a philosophical conversation that conversation is Why would you want to continue? How long do you truly want to live? Do you want to live to be a thousand? You want to live to be a hundred thousand years and will that be an issue as far as national or national natural resources go? Me are we already overpopulated are we already putting a tremendous burden on the natural resources of this planet that will be Accentuated by a thousand year old people It's running around having babies when they're 900 years old. So I'm going to answer that question in two very separate parts First I'm going to talk about the so-called philosophical issue of how long one would want to live I Find it quite remarkable that people worry about this simply because it's not the way that people actually think about anything else Let's remember that the longevity aspect of all of this work is a side effect. I don't work on longevity I certainly don't work on immortality the way you might think if you read the papers. I Just work on health. I'm just interested in stopping people from getting sick when they get older Now if you think about it all medicine is like that all medicine involves stopping people from getting sick or fixing them up If they are sick and all medicine has a side effect that people live longer than they otherwise were done So the only real difference between the work that sensory such foundation does and the work that everything Everyone else in medical research does is a difference of degree the fact that the Longevity side effect of our work may be substantially greater than the longevity side effect that we're familiar with It's still a side effect So if we come to the question of how well one might want to live, you know Does that any if even a meaningful question to me? It's like saying What time would you like to go to the toilet next Sunday? You know We know that that's a dumb thing to have an opinion about it a dumb thing to have an opinion about because we know We're going to have More information on the topic near at the time and we're going to be able to act on the information and it's the same deal You know Nobody makes decisions on the basis of how long ago they were born People increasingly make decisions. I think I'll do on the basis of how long they think they've got to live But that's because the amount of time they think they've got to live is going down Which it won't be going down anymore If you've got an arbitrary amount of time behind you and another arbitrary amount of time ahead of you Your decision-making is going to be based on more short-time considerations, you know Like peer pressure and so on You know, I sometimes point out when people ask me these things. I'll sometimes say okay Take yourself back to the first time you got laid Oh, yeah, all right. No, I don't go think about what you were thinking at the time What are you thinking? Oh my god, oh my god, I have to get this person into bed right now because I've only got another 60 years to live So I mean it's just ridiculous Okay, so then I want to come to the second half of your question, which was the business about other population and such like This is I Again, I recoil somewhat at the idea that this is in any sense a philosophical question to me it's a sociological question And that's not the same at all, but we're not getting into semantics. Where's the answer? I have a kind of three-level answer And this applies to all of the questions one might raise with regard to the problems that might hypothetically be created as a Consequences solving the problem. We've got to die the problem of aging, right? So First thing is specific answers just let's look at the actual scenario Closely rather than a knee-jerk reaction and say is the problem actually like you took a care at all Now in the case of overpopulation what we have to ask ourselves is okay how rapidly would the population actually increase in the context of eliminating death from aging and How badly would that matter at the moment? We've already got an overpopulation problem. We've got too many people on the planet We've got global warming and stuff so how on why do we have global warming? It's not because we have seven billion people It's because we have seven billion people all of whom are burning a lot of carbon And that's not going to be true for very long as we ramp up solar energy and we invent nuclear fusion and so on You know The is going to be in the relative in near future a situation where we increase the carrying capacity of the planet a lot By these technologies that mean that we can have more people with less environmental impact It's very likely that that kind of trajectory and of course I'm not only talking about global warming here and talking about all other types of pollution that we engage in That kind of technology will outrun any changes that may happen in terms of demography So that's the first level of answer the second level of answer is perhaps More important. It's a kind of general one applies across the board whether it's other population you worry about or border More dictators living forever or how will we pay the pensions or any of these standard degenerate reactions The answer is how bad could it be? Let's have a sense of proportion about this how bad could these problems be as a Relative to the severity of the problem. We have today And also answer that question. We have to remind ourselves exactly what is the severity of the problem. We have today How many people die of aging every day? We answer it 100,000 and of course most of them don't just die They die after a long period of disease and Debititation and decrepitated decline and dependency in general misery So there is no question that aging is responsible for the vast majority of human suffering in the world today Not even if we don't even have to restrict ourselves to the industrialized world The overall I was asking you about life expectancy earlier So we're saying like you know, there's only four years difference between the US and Japan Turned out there's only ten years difference between the world as a whole and Japan Is that amazing or what that's pretty amazing so worst case scenario and best case scenarios only ten years. Well not worst case average case Yes, they're real worse than they're down in the 40s of 50s. Well Worst case as far as global mean. Yeah exactly So I mean what we're saying here is aging is undoubtedly the world's worst problem right now has been for a long time and We have to ask you know even supposing that we ended up in a situation where population was Going to be a problem because we haven't invented technology to fix that to increase the carrying capacity of the planet quite rapidly as we need to So we were faced with this Rather irritating feature of having to have fewer children than we would like in order to make room for all these elderly Who are still healthy and not dying? How about if that? Feels to me to be hard it's hard to make a case that the right thing to do would be to let the people age and die in not dying. How about any fact? Seems to me to be hard. It's hard to make a case that the right thing to do would be to let the people age and die rather than to have fewer kids. And the third level of answer is perhaps the most decisive of all. A third level of answer says, well even if you've convinced yourself that these problems are going to happen and even if you've also convinced yourself that these problems are going to be so bad that they might outweigh the problem that we're solving. The question is who are you to say? Who should actually be making the decision as to whether these therapies are used? The answer clearly is humanity of the future rather than humanity of the present. If we said to ourselves, oh dear idea, you know, overpopulation whatever, let's not go there. And we thereby, you know, delay the development of these therapies. Then what we would be doing is denying humanity of the future, the option, whether to use these therapies based on the information that it had available to it about, you know, available technology that will ever. Well if we develop these things as fast as possible then humanity of the future does get the choice. No, I do not want to be someone who is helping to condemn whole cohort of the future to an unnecessarily painful and unnecessarily early death just because I thought I knew better than Well innovation and advancement seems to be a fundamental part of human society and civilization. It just seems to be something that we do no matter where you go, there's someone who's always trying to improve upon everything. When you have medical science it only stands to reason that that too would try to improve and advance and life expectancy. Of course the way you describe it, the way you did with that being the number one problem physically health wise in our world. That's going to be a huge issue. It's going to be a huge issue that we're going to try to solve. It's a fundamental part of being a human being. I very much like the way you said that. I think that's the right way to explain the fallacy of we should leave aging alone because it's natural which some people say. Some people say, well you know aging is not like a disease, it happens to everything, it's basically natural we shouldn't touch it. And you're absolutely right you say perfectly. The way I would say is like it would be unnatural for us to say, oh yeah let's leave it alive even though it's horrible. It's what's natural for the humanity is to see what's natural and we don't like and affects it. Well there's that existential angst that people tend to wallow in and what's the point? What's it's all going to end some day? What's the big deal? And there's you know many groups of been in many different schools of thought when it comes to that. Some people just think that's nonsense. Enjoy the moment, live in the moment, live today. Don't worry about the feud. But there's a lot of people who don't subscribe to that who really do get depressed when they worry about their inevitable demise. When you come across, when you come around and say hey we are developing new technologies that are going to allow you to live within this lifetime we're going to meet the first person who lives to be a thousand years. They're like well great a thousand years of suffering and existential angst. They don't want in and that's where it's a philosophical question really because it's a matter of how do you approach every day. How do you approach this experience? Do you look at this experience like you said the moment you get laid go geez I got to get her in a bed because I don't have 60 years left or do you look at this experience saying while this is going on there are a million wonderful things to enjoy about this life and on top of that it seems to me that as time goes on we're getting far better at this whole civilization thing and one of the things that I think would benefit us more than anything possible would be if we could have people that could be alive and healthy and live for 500 years imagine the type of wisdom that they could impart on the rest of us. Imagine the life lessons that you would get from a few centuries of mistakes and corrections and lessons and information that you've absorbed we could transform society and culture world society not national society not local society but world society in a radical way just with the wisdom that we would all be able to share. I think there's a lot of truth in that absolutely. I think you know maybe you could argue that the fact that we have culture you know the fact that we can write things down so on means that it doesn't matter so much that individuals should be around the way does that elephant so whatever but in practical terms it does matter things get forgotten when the people who came up with them are not around anymore and things get rediscovered 20 or 30 years later it's rather rather ridiculous. There is however a related point which I think it's worth bringing up at this at this stage with regard to the the value of living a long time and the value of all the perceived value of living a long time which is that at the moment the people who feel well not worth living 500 years or whatever are actually the same people who have a lot of trouble understanding why the life worth living for 50 years. Yeah the people that spend their time essentially living their life in front of the television. The difficulty here is simply a lack of education. The fact that most people in today's world do not have the training to be able to understand how to get the most out of life. The other thing you do, that if you have good education, good understanding of how to get the most out of life we always have a massive backlog. I probably go 1000 years of backlog already and things I'd like to have done. You know if I'm not like to have seen books I'd like to have read, play for the elective gone, people I'd like to have met and by the time I'm through that I'm certain I'm going to have at least another 10,000 years of backlog and right so you know I mean all we need really is to educate people better. That's an interesting way to put it educate. I tend to agree with you but I think that for a lot of people it tends to be an issue of mental health. There's certain people that suffer from depression or struggle with depression and life itself becomes very difficult for them to endure. I think I want to stop you that way. I think we need to understand that we need to account of the spectrum here. There are obviously some people who are extremely depressed. I have a friend actually in the UK who is clinically depressed right now about the problem of aging. Her parents are in a bad way, they're a lot of the people that she's obviously in. It's really going to and you know that's an extreme example. If we talk about the just malaise you know the envy that I think is a much milder version of the same thing then I would accept what you say that this is quite common. But I would also say that it's part of what I was talking about. Lack of training, lack of exposure to the opportunities that lack of understanding of how to actually seek out those opportunities. So I don't think it's a such a hard thing to eliminate. I don't agree with you that it's education because I know some very educated people that struggle with depression and I think a lot of it has to do with physical health. The meat wagon that you're carrying around that you're trudging through life with if it's burdensome. If you're causing you issues, if you don't take care of it, if you eat poorly, if you smoke cigarettes, if you tend to overindulge an alcohol and it leaves your liver in a constantly processing state and you're just a mess. Like those people tend to have a dollar experience and perhaps a more burdensome experience. Sure, I just was saying it's like there's a tale of the curve. People who are badly like that and they're very much people and if we're talking about the larger end of the population, they've been the thick end of the wedge then we're talking about a milder phenomena. But actually, you remind me of another thing there. You know, there is at the moment a very strong tendency in society when they're exposed to these ideas about the possibility of bringing any end to control and consequences of only living a lot longer. The very strong tendency to think, oh my god, the quality of that life will be put. And that's because people have this sense in their heads that quality and quantity are inherently opposed to each other. That the more quality you have, the less quality you're bound to have. And of course, that makes sense in today's world in a way because by large today there are a lot of things we like to do that are bad for us. And so we'll shorten our lives by, you know, whether it's smoking or whatever. But that's not going to be true in a scenario in a world in which we have therapies that can actually address these various types of damage and repar them. In those situations, these two things are going to be on the same side of the fence. Quality is going to be the thing that confers quantity. So you imagine a world where cigarettes are being consequential. You'd be smoking cigarettes, just popping some sort of repair pill and bam. No more marboro cancer. Well, basically, yeah. I mean, I don't like to buy that out too heavily because of course it's not true yet. So, you're not banking on it. Well, right. That's right. I mean, we don't know how long these therapies are going to take to come along. And the best bad in order to maintain your chances of in the maximally a chance of actually being around in time to benefit from these therapies is to actually limit healthier lifestyles. You can't at the moment. I mean, I was talking earlier about maybe a landing at a year or two, but that might be the key guarantee. It might be the key year to the brings to the next thousand. Exactly. You said that stem cells within a decade, you believe there's a large possibility that it could cure Parkinson's. These other things that maybe 50, 50 and 25 years, like what are they? Like what are the big ones that you're excited about? Well, so most of what we work on at sensory search foundation is these hard things. We actually do basically know stem cell therapy work. And that's simply because so many other people are doing it understood as a very plausible and very exciting approach to treating a number of different disease conditions, not restricted of course to a related ones. And you know, it would be a poor use of our limited funds to add a drop to that bucket. But most of the other things that we feel need to be done are far more neglected. So let me think where I will even start. Well, okay, one great example that we've been working on is heart disease. So atherosclerosis is, of course, the number one killer in the Western world. It's the cause of heart attacks and strokes. And it's age related because it's caused by the lifelong accumulation of a particular type of damage. In this case, the type of damage is the accumulation of waste products in the artery wall. The waste that matters here, the most is oxidized cholesterol. Cholesterol itself is not a bad molecule. People get this wrong a lot. But cholesterol is a vital molecule. You don't want to remove your cholesterol. You do want to have a remove the contaminated cholesterol that accumulates at low but significant levels in the body. Oxidized cholesterol in particular. This is what poisons white blood cells that are in the artery wall and makes them into what are called foam cells, which are the first step in the creation of an atherosclerotic plaque. And we'd like to stop that happening and we'd like to prevent atherosclerosis from emerging. So the way we've done this is we've identified bacteria in soil, actually, that had genes and enzymes that are allowed them to break down oxidized cholesterol. And we've identified these bacteria and the genes and enzymes and we've introduced those genes into human cells in cell culture. And it works. We have shown that these cells that have our engineered gene are much more protected. They're much more robust in the presence of a certain amount of this toxic oxidized cholesterol than cells that have it. And of course, we're moving forward to that to other types of cell into mice before we go into clinical trials. That's the kind of thing that we're doing that's earliest stage that might take a bit longer. Does oxidized cholesterol can this be eliminated with diet? Absolutely not. The fundamental problem is that these molecules, these oxidized cholesterol species, they get into our white blood cells, they get into a part of the cell called the lysosome. They poison the cell. They inaccurate the lysosome. And that means that the white blood cells can no longer do what they used to be able to do. They can no longer process normal cholesterol. No, you can't do anything to the diet. There's nothing just there because the cells don't have any machinery to get rid of it. But are they a product of what we... Like product, but an accidental product. So they happen just because they're bound to happen. But cholesterol comes from animal protein. Is that kind of a... Kind of. We bring in cholesterol in our diet and we also synthesize our own cholesterol in the liver. And that's actually be. That cholesterol is doing a good job. The problem is that oxidation is a chemical reaction that is going to happen in the body whether you like it or not. The fact is we are aerobic organisms. We need to breathe. We need to inhale oxygen in order to keep going. And breathing is really bad for you. Breathing is bad for you. Breathing is why we get free radicals. But it's a bit non-negotiable. This is the thing. So we've got to intervene in this process one step down the chain of events to get rid of the toxic products of breathing rather than to get rid of breathing itself. Breathing is bad for you. That's a pretty straightforward statement and it's unequivocal. Wow. So when they use like hyperbaric chambers oxygen rich environments to enhance healing, is that extra bad for you? No, necessarily. So of course breathing is also a good for you. If you don't breathe then you're totally screwed. Right. So it's a try-off. There are some aspects of breathing than a bad for you. And we need to fix the last bag. And those aspects have zero to do with diet. So this... Well, one type of cholesterol. So if you're really low on, for example, vitamin C vitamin E, then you are depleting your own body's ability to limit the toxicity of breathing. And therefore that breathing will be even more bad for you than it otherwise would be. So antioxidants are crucial if you're going to bother breathing. Up to a point. But it turns out that because breathing has been around a long time. Breathing with invented about two billion years ago, evolution has done what evolution tends to do. It's made the best of a bad job. And therefore at this point, some of the toxic by-products of breathing, free radicals, are actually not just bad molecules. They're also good. They're used by the body as signaling molecules. So if we were to have some magic one that we could wave and just get rid of all the free radicals in the body, that would be extremely bad. You die at once. We have, therefore, a rather interesting balance that the body takes. If you have too few antioxidants, then that's bioners. But if you have an abundance of antioxidants, if you take mega-dices of vitamin C or vitamin E, for example, doesn't really do much. Really doesn't, because the body wants a certain amount of free radicals around. So it dials down. They in here, they in belts on to oxygen at McInery. And you end up basically why you started. So this bacteria that you're introducing to skin cultures, when they're introducing the bacteria themselves, what you're introducing the one gene from the bacteria. One gene from, I mean, not anything you're going to get into skin, where it's just immune to cells, artery, tissue. And cultures of our yes. And how far away do you believe you are to implementing this in an actual human being? Well, clinical trials, I think, could be 10 years away. I think we'll probably be talking, this is an intermediate one. I would expect that we've got a 50, 50 tons of brain this to the point of being an approved therapy within maybe 15 years. Now, me as a lay person standing on the outside looking at all this stuff, I'm always very optimistic, oh, yeah, this is going to be great within my lifetime to see some huge changes. Talking to you though, it's not that I get less optimistic, but I get more aware of the actual landscape itself. And I start realizing, well, this thing that we have that we're carrying right as body has an indescribable number of operations that are going on simultaneously. And there's reactions and counter reactions and all of these are not completely totally understood. So when you're talking about anti-aging or life extension or any of these things, you're talking about a just a stupendous number of different processes that are going on in the body that we're going to have to figure out and that is going to take a very, very long time and not one person is going to ever understand all of the processes. You have perfectly articulated why people who studied the biology of aging had by about the mid 1980s got to the point of absolute rejection of the idea that what they even were working on was doing anything about aging. Basically, it had become very frowned upon even to talk about intervention in a grant application, for example. Essentially, because everyone understood, oh my god, the body is so complicated, we understand it's so poorly, it's never going to happen. So it's a time to help. So here's the thing that changed in two steps. First of all, a step ahead and work out and then the step ahead. This first thing that happened, late 1980s, early 1990s, was people started to discover simple ways to extend the longevity of certain laboratory organism, initially worms and eventually mice. This was enormously exciting. Those discoveries and they fall out from them still dominate the field in most people's eyes. The problem is it doesn't work for long-lived organisms, essentially because it's all about the ability of the organism to respond to famine and short-lived organisms need to be able to respond more dramatically to famine than long-lived ones do. So I'll go into what it actually really went, but that's the basics of it. The one that did work was when I came along 15 years ago and talked about damage repair. Here's the reason why damage repair is so important. It's sidesteps, all of that complexity that you were talking about and all of our ignorance about that complexity. Why is it sidestep it? Because the damage that the body does to itself throughout life as a side effect of its normal operation is only harmful late in life. The body is set up to tolerate a certain amount of that damage and the problem only starts when the amount of damage exceeds the amount that it's set up to tolerate. So that means that until that point the damage is not participating in this massively complex network of processes that we call metabolism. It's just accumulating as an inert by-product. It's only by mass action after it becomes enormously abundant in late lives that it becomes part of metabolism again. And that's hugely important. It means that if we go in and target this damage, but why is not participating in metabolism? We have a much better chance of doing so without appreciable side effects than we were if we were going in and trying to manipulate metabolism itself. The metabolism itself, yeah, it's crazy and same network of spaghetti code that's not going any comments, so it's big. And you try to do anything to it to stop it during the thing you don't want it to do, the creation of damage. You're going to have unintended consequences that do more harm than good. But if you don't do that, if you instead attack the damage itself, why it is outside of that network of metabolism than you don't have that problem in the same way. Is there any focus on concentrating on the potential of you were saying that the body has a very good ability to deal with all this damage at a young age? And as you get older, it becomes less and less able to. Would the real solution be catching it early, finding people that are very young and implementing these strategies on them? Not really, because the only reason why an older person is less able to cope with the damage is because the older person has more damage than carrying more of it around. And why is that? Because it's had longer to accumulate. It has been going away. So a young person doesn't have much damage. It doesn't really make sense for someone in their 20s. Even if... So let's look 20, 30, 40 years from now when these therapies actually exist. Would it make sense for a 20-year-old to actually protect the therapies probably not? Because there's going to be at least another 20 or 30 years before they're going to suffer any actual serious functional decline as a result of this damage. And during that time, the therapies are going to get better, both safe, fair and more convenient and more comprehensive and so on. So the trade-off is better to wait for the therapies to be improved. That's not necessary when I was getting at what I was getting at. You were saying that over time, the damage accumulates to the point where your body can no longer process the damage anymore. Would it be more advantageous to catch it before it accumulates to deal with the issues before they become substantial? Well, what's that? We're going in saying that it's not 20-year-olds, but that's yes, like 40 or 50-year-olds, not 80-year-olds. That's right. You know, that's very fucked. You just fought it for now. It's harder. Let me go into that a little bit more detail. If you take someone who's, let's say, 50, that all the guy that needs the sense therapies, the damage repair therapies, that reduce that level of damage to a high-world back when they were 20 or 30 again. And of course, one of them periodically. Now, if the damage has already got the point where it's caused disease and disability to emerge, let's say someone who's typically 80, they're gone down hell quite a lot. Then these therapies are still going to be very useful, but they're going to be useful in a slightly different way. They're going to be useful when used in combination with traditional geriatric therapies, the kind that currently we have today. Remember what I said earlier, that the geriatric therapies today don't work and they never will work, basically because they're attacking the symptoms. They are kind of laboring under the methaprehension that the diseases of old age are like infections. Well, that means is that basically they're hacking away at something that is becoming harder and harder to hack away at because it's cause, it namely the damage from the throughout life, if continuing to accumulate. So if you think about what that means, if we were able to go in and actually repair the damage, then we would be in, if you're like potentiating the geriatric therapies. We will allow the geriatric therapies to actually work. And it may end up being that we need to do that. That if someone's in their 80s, they're going down hell and we only fix the damage that got them that way. That won't be enough because the disease, the pathologies will have a lot of their own at that point. We may need to go in at two levels at the same time. What are these geriatric therapies that I've just been like, you know, injecting dopamine for Parkinson's disease, for example. Basically, you know, short-term benefit, mild benefit, reason is basically the problem is getting worse. The cells are continuing to die. You get more and more dopamine. You become more and more resistant to dopamine. It's being supplied in the wrong schedule anywhere at the wrong times because you can only, because it's just because of the nature of delivery. You can only deliver it in a barless. You know, these things are all ways in which such therapies cannot be perfect, where if we were to put the cells back to repair the originating damage, then any other things downstream that have gone wrong in the rest of the brain would be treatable by other therapies, by more traditional therapies, in a much more effective way than they can know. What other methods are you looking into for repairing damage other than introducing this bacteria to... Okay, so that's the second one I mentioned. The first one I'm going to wish to stem cell therapy, right? Let's take another one. Let's take the immune system. So, the immune system is a classic example of the problem of work called death resistant cells. That means cells that rather than having too few of them, as in Parkinson's disease, you have too many of them. And in particular, you have too many because they're not dying when they're supposed to. People don't often think in terms of the idea that the could be any that should die. But the immune system is a great example of that, where when you get an infection, very much as I have no effect, you have a very small population of white blood cells that divide like crazy to get to a big enough population to attack and eliminate the infection after that's happened, then almost all of them die again, to leave run basically for a completely different subset to divide like crazy. Next time you get a different infection. Turns out that in old age, that whole cycle of division and death basically goes wrong. And you end up with a lot of cells that divide like crazy to attack an infection and when the infections go away, they don't die again. And they go in the way. They inhibit the proliferation of other cells. So, what do we want to do about that? Well, there are various options out there, but we think that we need to go for the jugular of this. We need to do something that's very decisive. And so we're looking at a method that's called suicide gene therapy. Wow. Now, that sounds pretty crazy, isn't it? But it turns out that it's actually much less crazy than the name implies. Suicide gene therapy has been a routine technique in the lab due to the most, for example, for quite a long time. Essentially what it is is you introduce a gene into cells that produces a toxic protein. And when the protein is produced, the cell dies. But you arrange this so that the protein is only produced when the cell gets into a particular state that you don't want. So you want the cells to learn at that point. Rather than a routine idea, what we would like to do is to make it well for humans. And the problem there is you've got to make it safe, of course. Now, gene therapy in general is a very tricky concept to make safe. And that it turns them up and down over the past 20 years, at least. But the, because of the suicide gene therapy had additional difficulties. You really don't want this this gene that's toxic, that's a toxic protein just killing cells randomly where it shouldn't be. So we're working on new, more elaborate ways to put multiple lines of defense against that problem. How many different people do you guys employ that you have working on all these various methods? It kind of depends what you mean by implied because we have some people that we fund through university labs, but taking the broader definition of everyone who relied on us for our salary, I think it's around 30 at this point. And do you personally oversee all these various projects or do you? I think you've saw on self-assess. So I oversee the project in the sense of yes, I oversee the decision-making process of prioritizing projects deciding which new projects to do, deciding how a project is going. I talk regularly with the professors and other lab heads that are responsible for the project. So yeah, that's what I do. In addition to, of course, also being the chief outreach resource. And the chief wizard, I mean, everyone notices, you're talking about life extension and you have a source of your beard. This is, that's about a day, I think it's a lot of life faults. My wife, it's a bad fanatic and it's a lot of life faults. That's right, many years ago my wife campaigned after we met for a long time, we met 25 years ago and it took a five years to persuade me to grow there eventually. I tried to give it a go and I was surprised if anybody when it came out like this. That's interesting because that's kind of your calling card. I suppose it has become sad. Are you satisfied by this research? Is this stimulating to you? Is this something that you're truly enjoying this process? Well, I always have an ambivalence there. On the one hand, yes, I'm extremely gratified that it's going so well, for a personal perspective of this and proud that I've been able to make a significant difference. But at the same time, all of that always enormously tinged by the knowledge that the still a lot of people dying out there. But at the same time, all of those always enormously tinged by the knowledge that there's still a lot of people dying out there. That this is not going as fast as it could. So I talked about our budget before I said, like, you know, we have about five million dollars a year that we spend. That's an incredibly small amount for the thing that produces most of the world suffering, right? Well, how? What the hell's going on there? And that's why I spend more of my time trying to raise money than I do. Actually, I've been saying the science. I have to. The worth of titions dilemma. Well, that's right. I mean, even if we could just have one more zero to that budget, if we had like 50 million dollars or 100 million dollars a year to spend, we'd probably be going three times faster. Three times faster. And that would save the most insane number of lives. That's the thing that really gets me out of bed in the morning. Do you have the ear of politicians? Do you have the ear of people that are in charge of universities that would listen to you and perhaps allocate more money your way? It's a very complicated network of conversations that needs to happen. The difficulty with politicians, of course, is that politicians ultimately have one single guy in life which is to get re-elected. And as such, their public policy tends to follow public opinion rather than leading it. So it's more important to me to appeal to public opinion and try to educate people and raise the positive debate. That's why I do so many interviews like this, above anything else. Then of course, there's other people, you know, there's wealthy individuals trying to, you know, I try to meet many of those. I generally get them to understand what's going on. The fact that we're a 501c3 of public charity obviously does help. It means that anyone can give us money in its exhibition manner. But so we've just got to get more of that money in the door. Do you have Kickstarter, GoFundMe, any of those accounts? We have done a certain amount of crowdfunding, but ultimately most, well pretty much all of the crowdfunding approaches that can be taken, are really difficult to reconcile with what we do, essentially because if you're looking for small amounts fine, but we're looking for relatively large amounts, you know, 6, 7-digit projects. For those things, it's really got to appeal to the imagination of what the specific achievement is going to be. And with early stage research, it's really hard to explain that in terms of really great people. So it's not really worked all that well for us. Well, we were describing before that pharmaceutical companies sort of hedging their bets waiting on the sidelines for something to be worth betting on. Boy, I'd like to change that if we can. Whatever impact we can have on it and this podcast gets millions and millions of downloads. I'm sure we'll have some effect on it, but I would like to, you know, whatever you need. Do you need things tweeted for you and posted on the more the better? The more the better. This is fascinating stuff to me. Obviously because I have zero research background, no medical science background. So to me, it's like when I get a chance to talk to someone like you, it's like a window into this world that I only ordinarily get through. articles and papers. I think it's it's it's massively important. It's also as I do discussed before, as I said before, I think it's a fundamental part of human nature. We want to improve everything and your health and your ability to enjoy this time is huge. And if you could extend that, you have the potential to be a better person. I think I'm a better person now than I was 10 years ago. I think I'd be even better if I could get another hundred in. You know, I think we could do some real change. And I think a lot of that real change could, you know, there's that issue like why worry about this. Our fundamental problems are the toxification of the environment. And blah, blah, blah. I think we could put more emphasis on that if we could have some of the brilliant people that we have alive today live longer. I think that's true. But back in 2006 when I spoke at TED, actually I made that whole concept, the centerpiece of my talk. I said basically, you know, you guys, you're all visionaries, you like aiming high. This could be the critical feature of this. Even independently of the inherent humanitarian value of defeating aging, aging is the thing that has ground us down over the history of civilization, the thing that has made us know that we are at the mercy of nature. If we can bring that truly under control, then this will empower us. It will make us feel really much more confident that we can address the other really hard problems, whether it's climate change, you know, world peace, whatever it might be. This is the guys who run the global 2045 initiative, the idea that there'll be some sort of technological answers to this question. Are they supportive of the biological ideas as well as their cooperation between these two groups? Sure, sure. There's always a spectrum of opinion with regard to desirability and faith-ability of these things. But absolutely, you know, everyone knows that we're on the same side. We're not in favor of getting sick. You are truly a mad scientist. I know you're tired and I know you, well, you're way past your bedtime now when it comes to the UK. So I really appreciate you being here. And for folks at home, what's the best way to contact you? What's the best way to send money? What's the best way to reach out? The best way is to go to www.fence.org. Yes, for sugar, eat for elephant. And for my friend, we're at fashigah.org. Just got that. And I have all the information about what we do, about what we like to do, about what we have done. It's got all the information you can imagine about why this is important. It's got obviously a nice way to contact us and send us any messages you like. And of course, it's a nice big friendly donate button. Anytime you're in town, please, be more than happy to promote anything you've got going on, any speech speeches you're doing, anything you're promoting. Please don't hesitate to ask. I'd be more than happy to help. Well, you're extremely kind, Jai. Thank you for having me on the show. I'm absolutely sure that being on the show will make a difference in of itself. And the more that you can do to help, the better it will be and the more life you will save. Wow, I hope you're right. You're really impressive individual. I really, really appreciate you taking your time. Aubrey DeGray, ladies and gentlemen, you can respond to your Twitter. Do you ever go there? Oh, yeah. You look at it a little bit. Check it out. Don't send anything rude. Fuckin' freaks. All right. Thank you very much, brother. I really, really appreciate it. Aubrey DeGray, ladies and gentlemen.