the u.s. government is now orchestrating a bombing campaign within russia in the United States is that in a hot war with russia because the president was just convicted for president trump there's a lot going on in the u.s. They're both nuclear on powers. What are the chances that this becomes a nuclear exchange for now? I don't see forces which is seriously awakened to deescalation. Do you think trump is capable of of stopping this trajectory of escalation? How many countries you banned from visiting? European Union, UK, Switzerland, Canada, United States, New Zealand, Australia, Japan? Japan? To be honest, I'm not sure about Japan. I need to check. Why do you think taking Putin out as president of russia became the number one objective of the u.s. government? I think it's a protest for what climate protesters in Europe have been destroying in renaissance paintings in the name of ending climate change. How do you get from a concern about global temperatures to destroying all the... what is that? Andre, thank you for coming. So we had dinner this winter in the middle east. It was one of the most interesting dinners I've ever had in my long life. And we've been texting ever since and I wanted to set down some of that conversation on tape because I thought people would be edified to hear it. And I knew that you were on the sanctions list for some reason I didn't understand why. I still don't understand why. But we are now in our Salvador because we couldn't meet anywhere else. We couldn't meet in the U. We couldn't meet anywhere in the Anglosphere. We couldn't even meet in Switzerland, which is given up at sovereignty to NATO somehow. And so we're meeting here very far from where you live. Tell us who you are and how you wound up on the sanctions list. I'm Andre Minnechemko. I'm 50 to a year sold. I'm self-made business person. I started my business when I was 19 years old during my study in the Moscow State University. I've done pretty well. I've built a couple companies which became world leaders on the fields of activities. Trust fund which taken care about the sets of my family on Yevarachim, which is top three global produce infotulizers. And also Suek, which one of the biggest world energy companies. So that's what I did. I never wake for a new state. A garage wall in Yevarachim. I never participate in any prioritization, any big government activities. So that's it. What else I do? So you are what you are described in the US Press as an oligarch. oligarchs, at least to my understanding, were people who as the Soviet Union collapsed in 91, grabbed state industries because they had inside connections and they killed people. But I think you were a teenager when it's Soviet Union collapsed, correct? I've had Moscow when I was 16 years old. I was studying the school, which is part of the Moscow University. Yes, then I was studying the Moscow, a physical faculty, or the Moscow University. That was a moment when Soviet Union collapsed. I did not have any connection. I was in the new city for me. So what I did, I started to organize businesses, different businesses at this age. So most interesting, it was a bank. I guess you have a bank in license when I was 21 years old. Little bit later, this one grow, become one of the biggest bank in Russia, biggest private banks in Russia. And I sold it in 2017. And then you went into the fertilizer business. During the United States, my bank did not participate in any of the British Union quotas you were afraid in the war. So we did not participate in privatization. We did not grab basically government assets. So we grew up like a market institution. So that was only what I did during the United States. As a beginning of 2000s, I started to be interested in industrial businesses also. But again, we did not participate in privatization. We bought it mostly from the second day market from people who bought it during the middle 90s. So why I did not participate in privatization? Very simple. I was 23, 24 years old. I did not have resources. And this is a part you're in chair. Pass. So you are self-made. I'm definitely self-made. So then 2022 arrives and Russian troops move across the border into eastern Ukraine. You are not working for the Russian government. I don't even know if you live in Russia at this point. You're not a political figure. You don't get elected to do anything. You're not a close friend of Putin's. You don't seem to have anything to do with the invasion of Ukraine. Is that fair? Well, definitely. I have nothing to go to the invasion in Ukraine. That's absolutely. OK. I'm an American perspective. We read that the US government is seizing Russian assets. And we imagine these are state assets. I'm opposed to it anyway because I think it's bad for the United States. But the story that we are told is that these are Russian assets. But your assets are not Russian assets. They're your assets. Is that correct? OK. So what happened with me in 2022, certain Western countries start to impose sanction on me? What does it mean? What sanction means in general? It means that your assets are short to say basically arrested. And like results, the results are used to confuse case. After that, any businesses or any companies to which you are connected, if they have a variation on the West, this operation basically cannot be performed going faster. So you cannot do business in the Western countries which applies sanction. And short and bad from the visiting countries. That's what sanction means. Unsecond your questions. There are different types of sanction. Like economic sanction. So usually the sanction applicable as it towards some states. Like for example against government, against state central banks or whatever. Exist sanctions which is targeted economic sector. For example oil or gas industry or I don't know, some another sector is which you bring in to certain government giving you. After that, the extension which targets in companies. So all of the sanction, if you have a meaning, a purpose to basically weaken economy based of your adversary. That is little bit understandable. The guy after that personal sanction, it's slightly different. Usually the sanction targeting individuals people. So for example, they will target politician or government official or people who do certain kind of the promoting violence or etc. So that's understandable. So purpose of this sanction, that people change their behavior. They stop to do what they are doing. So that is purpose of this sanction. And exist third type of the sanction. This sanctions are applicable not because you did something bad. They're applicable because who you are. So that's how it works. They're applicable to certain class of the people. In my case, I was sanctioned not because I did something bad. I was sanctioned because who I am and I'm well say like I was. That's why I was sanctioned. You're familiar with the phrase do process. It's part of the Anglo section, the basis of our legal code in the United States and in Great Britain and other enlightened countries. And the idea is that you cannot be punished until you are approved to have done something until you're guilty. Was there a process that you participated in before your assets were taken? Okay. So there are two different legal systems. You're a P and one and I'm here. Yes. In European one, they're done most simple way. They say that exists criteria which allows them to sanction anyone who is going under this criteria. Critic or it's very simple. It calls a leading business person. So if you're a leading business person, it means well say person who is doing well. What is the way? What is the way? So that is already good enough criteria to put sanction on you. After that, full discretion given tough target. So it's not necessary that each and every leading business person will be sanctioned. But after it's a different discretion to decide, this one to do it, this one not to do it. So first question is of course, looks like people not equal in terms of the law. So because that's a process which has basically unclear. It's not clear criteria. In United States, probably such simple criteria like to sanction business person would not be explainable to the society. At the end of the day, it's not, it's all an American, it just cannot be like this. That's why in United States as a criteria is used. For example, United States, I was sanctioned in August of 22 because of my participation in financial sectors. So that was a reason of my sanction. Yes, it's true. I have been participating in financial services. In the age of 2021 years old, I created a bank together with my partner from the Physical University. So there's a bank that initial capital about I don't know, $50,000 at this moment. When I sold it in 2017, the value of this bank was about $3,500. My risk was mostly expected to estimate the institution. For example, I have a policy, a world bank, a group and a number of zaz, a first-class on the rest of this. So after that, I never participated in any financial services. So I'm sorry, I said 2007. It was 2007. It means I have not participated in financial services 14 years before sanction would imply for me. That's it. So that's a official issue of my sanction. So what does it mean? It means, of course, it's a Fagmality. American law gives possibility to that ministration to again use the discretion, but they need to follow certain rules. So if you're in financial services, they can sanction you. I have been in financial services 14 years ago. If I need an assumption for this, I don't see why. That's why I think that's in reality. It's same like in Europe. I was sanctioned not because I did something. I was sanctioned because for him. I wish you'd be clear about what sanction means in this case. It's not simply that you're not allowed to do business in this or that place where you can't travel to this or that country. They stole your personal property. For now, they see my process. Okay. For now, what's the difference between seizing and stealing? You can not touch it. You cannot use it. You cannot basically the block. If you have money on account, they block on account. If you have private house, basically you cannot go in your house. That's more or less like this. How much would you estimate the value of the assets of yours, personal assets that they seized? A couple of billion dollars. A couple of billion dollars. There was no trial. It's good question. This is such how I said, they are applicable not because you did something bad, but because who you are basically, they are applicable to the class of people. What kind of trial it can be? Now you can go and say, I'm not a Russian business person or I'm a Russian business person. That's kind of the trial. So basically, power was given, tough target here. To use just this criteria, they don't need to justify that you did something bad. So you're just a cool act and that's it. You're in the wrong class of people. You're in the wrong class of people. Of course, you can change it. You said about duper always. Of course, this concept is very familiar to me. In United States, it's a few some end on to the American Constitution. And basically, question is about if the rights and privileges of the few some end on to the United States' constitutions are applicable to me or not or to other people. Normally, in United States, it will be unusual that people can be basically not allow access to the view process because they belong to the certain class. The trace B12 beats something else. But in our case, situation is exactly like this. Are you going to get your assets back? I hope so. Who decides? Who decides? I guess it's a political decision. So on the certain moment, one way on another situation will change and rules about sanction. I hope we'll also follow the spent of the changes. So you were not, as you said, in financial services anymore and haven't been, have an owned bank since 2007, long before any of this began, seven years per 2014. But you do own one of the world's biggest fertilizer companies. Is that correct? Again, it's a little bit more complicated. But yes, trust company, which matters. I said, so on behalf of my family, it's on a couple of the companies. One of them, it's the ever-achem. One of the biggest world which allows the company is that company which supplied to the market about, I don't know, 7% of the global trade in the Fuchalizer. So it's a big company. 7% of all global fertilizer? Samsung clicks this in the world trade because a lot of domestic consumption, but in the United Samsung about this. And of course, sanction against me affects this company's big deal. But you, I mean, it's one thing to shut down a global arms dealer. But to try and punish a global fertilizer dealer when fertilizer provides food that people need to live, that does seem. That's not the person who wants sanction. Once again, so sanction, how they were against the beginning. They were done in the hurry in the stress. I don't think that, after each use this tool, look very carefully for the consequences. What may happen in which case, especially it's applicable to the situation of this sanction which is how you can call them. Class sanction. Class sanction. Class sanction. Collective punishment. Collective punishment for the each people. So because it's very difficult to predict who, if you touch this, what else will be attached? What happens in the fertilizer? Has anyone ever accused you formally of doing anything wrong? Never. Anything. Never. So you are innocent of any crimes. No one's even accusing you of crimes. But they stole billions of dollars worth of your assets. I consider myself a collateral damage of the bigger conflict. I don't think it was anything personal. What does that make you think of the system that did that? System was not ready for this type of directions. Actually, if I may return a step before about fertilizer, what really happened? So mostly, it was a European program. Because the European Union used, like I said, effect that somebody is a leading business person, a wealthy businessman, like a criteria for sanction. In order to say this, they need to explain how exactly what exactly your wealth is. In the case of mine and in the case of some other owners of fertilizer company, it's become connected. Basically, my wealth is a fertilizer company. It means I'm connected with a fertilizer. So that's a justification to put me in the category of the leading business person. But at the same time, how it's interesting to X. So if I'm connected with whatever company, a creation of this company must be blocked in the European system on this way. So Russia and Bill Arshad totally supply about 22% of the fertilizer to the world market. So situation which happened to me, happened with one source of Russian fertilizer company. What was the result of it? Like it's also predictable. In 22, during about 11 months, 12 months after sanctions, where I apply, supply on the world's market was the problem about 18 million stones. It's a huge number. So that's only a reason for the goal process to apply was a personal sanction. It's well studied. It's reported. So that's basically what's happened. Well, people are really so, I mean, you will cause famines if you do something like that. Well, that's exactly what happened. You may have come to the obvious conclusion that the real debate is not between Republican and Democrat or socialist and capitalist, right-left. The real battles between people who are lying on purpose and people who are trying to tell you the truth. It's between good and evil. It's between honesty and falsehood. And we hope we are on the former side. That's why we created this network, The Tucker Carlson Network. And we invite you to subscribe to it. Go to Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. Our entire archive is there a lot of behind the scenes footage of what actually happens in this barn when only an iPhone is running. Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. You will not regret it. So when 20% of the volt market disappear, actually not 20% disappear because only supply which went through the Europe, me and X was a European port or other means where Europe had control. This part of supply disappear from the volt market. What happened like result? But guys, of the fertilizer shot up. So about three times during two 22. So it's let's say from average $300 we start to experience prices about $900. What happened like result? Basically demand dropped. So our farmers did not have money to buy for challenges, but what kind of fragments it's where it was disproportionately fragments from the poor countries. Because in the rich countries, our governments will help to the farmers. They will give subsidies or something else also consumers are ready to pay more for production produce basis farmers. So that is not a case in the poor countries. Governments don't have means to help farmers. And otherwise consumers not ready to pay because they don't have enough income, enough possibilities to do it. So mostly this proportional effect of the sanction was felt on the poor countries. So far because some countries of Latin America, some countries of Asia. So that's where supply of which lies with the globe. Now think about it. So this country is poor. They mostly they're not able to substitute domestic production of agarafuts by impact. Why? Because it's much more expensive. So it's much cheaper to import food for each other and grow products domestically. Because then import grains or other products. So if you don't have money to pay for fertilizers, you definitely would not have money to pay for the end product for the grain or for something else. So what happened? If farmers did not bought fertilizers, it means domestic production of agarafuts, products fell down. Like result, what happened? Domestic prices went up. What means when domestic prices of agarafuts products go up? Supply means demands. In this case, it's very simple. What means supply means demands? Supply is less. Demand becoming also less. What it means? It means before people, it's three times a day and some of them starting to eat two times a day. That's what means demands in terms of the food. We have numbers and we have researchers which show effect of this action on certain countries country by country. Well, global food prices have gone up. I mean, that's a well-known fact. That's almost never in American media connected in any way to sanctions that were the war in Ukraine or the war against Russia. I mean, but you think that's in part a result of not exactly what it's two different stories. The story about Fuchilazas in 2022. It was a story which was alive for about one year after that the story basically solved itself. Why it's a solved itself? Because Russian Fuchilazas found other way to the world market. Instead of the going through European ports, about the country ports, I don't know ports of Ukraine. So this Fuchilazas started to go via Russian ports. It took about one year for system to adjust. So issue yourself itself. But when you're referring to the food prices, they're not exactly world food prices. It's a traded commodity. That's, for example, not so much effect of the people in the most of the poor countries. Of course, some countries import food like Egypt, like many other countries. But most really poor countries, they import inputs to produce food. Right. That's why effect was felt mostly in the of the Fuchilazas crisis, mostly in the very poor countries, countries which were not able to import inputs of the food production because what is Fuchilazas? Fuchilazas import for food products. Yes. So that's how it works. Do you think that the lawmakers in the United States who impose sanctions and endorse them, which is almost all of them, very few American lawmakers oppose sanctions? Do you think they thought this through? Did they know the effects of a downstream? About a particular crisis about Fuchilazas. Yes, they know. And I must say that United States have targeted the Delta much more in a better way compared to the Europeans. This problem was created purely by Europeans. So administration and the administration, state department and other authorities actually dealt with the crisis, which is responsible. So they gave a potential to the sector to receive so-called general licenses, which is a related company, Fuchilazas company, from this type of effects. That's why I would not say nothing but from United States in terms of the Fuchilazas story. This issue was taken seriously and we are very basically, all should be thankful for this. But Europeans don't mistake. So in this particular case, it was like this. How do you think the war knew Crane and the response to it, the sanctions changes in energy distribution? How is that affecting Europe? It's affecting Bill Deal. It's affecting Bill Deal. It seems that way. How? How? In a certain moment when the supply was a cheaper energy to the Europe force cut, this energy naturally was replaced by the more expensive energy. That's how it's affected. You used to pay X and now you're paying X plus. So that's it. But that's affected Europe's industrial capacity. You see BASF moving a lot of its production out of Germany. Of course. Of course. That's right. But what does that look like in 10 or 15 years? What's the European economy look like? What does Europe look like? I would not remember exactly now, but I think it will be a pretty correct to say that 2019, European GDP was something about $15,000. And United States GDP at the time was about $15.4 or something like this slightly bigger. So what is today the D.P. of United States? If I'm not mistaken, it's something about 25 trillion. And the Europeans, it's about $16.5. So it was not much gross during the spirit of time. Of course, no company which builds their business on access to the cheaper energy would consider Putin's new investment or continue application in Europe. Because now, if European prices for energy, it's much high in the United States. Of course, because European prices today, it's a derivative of the price of a energy, like a five-natural gas. So if Americans consume us, industrial consumers pay a handy help, domestic price of United States, for example, the European consumers need to pay plus, plus, plus a lot of logistics costs for the same products to be delivered in Europe. So it's a big difference compared with the situation which used to be before the world. Now I was rushing and affected by the war. But in one way, because it's a big distraction, it's a tragedy. It's a tragedy for the Russian people for sure. And that's how it's being affected. If you're asking about a economy, okay, economy doing much better than many people expected and many expected. So why? Why? Because a lot of new production can come in place. A lot of new production connected with military industrial complex, so. Yes. Did you expect that? I mean, the idea in the United States was once we impose these sanctions and funded Ukraine, the Ukrainian military, that it would destroy the Russian economy. I don't think that idea to destroy Russian economy once short run, it's a very feasible one. I don't think so. Right. It's quite adaptive economy. It's quite big economy. It's basically quite smart, learn economic system. So I'm pretty sure the under estimation, what Russian economy capable to do. Apparently. How is it smartly run? We have a good team of technocrats, we can can the government, we can can the central bank and still now because part of the Russian economy basically it's a market based economy. So companies in the under scenario of this test, they're going to find their way to survive and looks like doing this more or less successful. What do you think Russia learned from? I mean, you said you got to Moscow at 16, you were 19 or something in 91 when Soviet Union collapsed and then it was what looked like a pretty dark period in Russia for the next 10 years ish. How bad was that time? And what do you think Russia learned from it? I mean, it was bad for some people, it was good for some people. So of course it was a moment of the dramatic change. Something called shepening maybe once in once or twice during normal person life. So it was change from the system where suddenly people receive a lot of freedom but didn't receive a lot of response abilities. So that is what happened at this time. So when you receive a lot of freedom but don't receive a response ability, then society not a gadget to be responsible what that does. So it leads to house and that is exactly what start to happen. So at this moment of time, many people who felt comfortable with the previous system were just oriented. It was pretty difficult for them to crop with the new situation. At the same time, completely for this reason, it was a good ground for the people who were not basically connected with the previous way of life, for young people, for people who in this simple way had nothing to lose at this moment of time. So that's a moment when entrepreneurial energy or ability to do something allow you to do what's impossible to do in other periods of time. And I'm very grateful that I was able to leave through this period of time. How did Putin change Russia? It was quite natural reaction on the situation of the 90s. 90s done a lot of brought a lot of, let's say, house in Russia. Chaos. Yeah, a lot of chaos in the gosh. So many people suffer. It was pretty difficult. So society was crying for the stability. That was really what was needed. And it was a great achievement. What Putin did. He brought stability to Russia. Are you close to Putin? I never met him one on one. You never met Putin one on one. Never. Oh, so you have absolutely no role in any of this? In this? Yeah. The governance of Russia, I just can't get past the fact that you're a bystander with a Russian last name and the West stole billions of dollars worth of assets. That's not kind of what we're told the system does. You're not, you don't seem mad about it. How you can meet on Samsung, what you cannot control. It's like to be met on Zarein. It's ill pass. What do you think the effect on the United States has been of this war in Ukraine? I mean, if you take sanction and economic part, actually what I don't like, I don't like when I hear from the certain politician, when they say it's a great for American economy. That's what I don't like. Really like when people say it's great for the jobs, it's great for the economy. It's great for Samsung. Honestly, it's make me seek because to kill other people, if it's even great for your economy, it should not be great. I agree. You cannot be a bit proud of this. That's what I think about this part of the income. I agree. From another side, from another side, I would say that I know more or less what will be effect of the sanction. So I think it will be the end of the main institutions which were traditional for number of the years. Such institutions like a dollar, like a United States dollar, for example, some like a global currency. What we see already in this year, for example, for in the age of the China, 50% more than 50% of the foreign trade of China done in $1,000 anymore. And it used to be about 90%, just 12 years ago. So that is what happened. In Russia, dollar was the main agency for the, I mean, for any outside expert in part of the page. Today, it's what 14% has more or less like this. And the same process is going in as a country. So that will be one major effect. Which can I think dollar will lose its position like will dominate some currency, much bigger like result of all of happen. What will be the effect on the United States of losing the dollar is the international currency? I think it's one of the six or four major assets which country has. But what are the practices as a former banker? What are the practical effects? Practical effects. So if less investors want a dollar, it means interest rates are higher inflation. It's higher. effects. Perhaps it's perfect. So if less investors want a dollar, it means interest rates are higher inflation. It's higher. It's more difficult to get finance debts, no, and set it in a certain. It means a lot of things when you cannot emit old currency. It means completely different wealth. This seems obvious as a non banker that was my first thought when these sanctions were imposed. This will scare people out of using the dollar because it's being used as a political weapon, not just the media of a exchange. It's not a safe haven anymore. If I could see that with no education or background at all in this area, why wasn't that obvious to US policymakers? How could you say? Perhaps the comparing to pluses and minuses of such polishes they put balance on the pluses. What would be the pluses from an American perspective? Well, that's how it for me to say. That's better to say from the American perspective. I have no idea. Well, I am an American and I don't understand any of this. I don't understand why you would want to kill or depose Putin, which is, of course, the whole point. You can like Putin or not. I don't have to live under Putin, so I don't have strong feelings either way. But why do you think taking Putin out as president of Russia became the number one objective of the US government? It doesn't seem obvious that that would be your objective. I think it's a pretty straightforward. It was a unit to look, he's not so long, but at least for the 20 years back. So in reality, preparation between Russian government and Western governments deteriorated during last maybe 20 years. So that was a process. If you see how it developed, it developed with increased of NATO presence closer to the Russian borders. It was many other things, which basically contributed to this deterioration of relation. And I would not say it was from one side or from another side. It was a way, it was a number of the things which basically brought us way it's brought it. It become more and more difficult during last 15 years. What is really for my understanding of all of this events in the Korean air? It just moving of the conflict on the next level is collision. That's what it is. So that was 2014. So what is the reality? It's events of 2022. Once again, it's a moment of the story which was in the process maybe 15, 20 years of basically unassolved situation of security in Europe to the next level of escalation. So basically it's one process. Well, creating for my understanding, it wasn't like issue by itself. It's a process of non-understanding, of not ability to communicate, to find the common solution between West United States, just to follow. And Russia, which led step by step to step to the new level of this collision. That was the process. And what happened during this process? But it's lost trust to each other. So a Russian government, a Russian leadership, lost trust in the Western system, inability to find the solutions with the Western leaders. Same happened from the Western side. So Western leaders lost trust in ability to make, to find the distinct and the most complex issue with a Russian leadership. So that is what happened. So when it's happened, that's probably answering your question. So it's just a kind of process of forward movement that will go on on the principle of entropy forever until something stops. It sounds like there is no motive. It's just organizations keep going until they don't. The dynamic, it's not very good. So dynamic, it means that because basic issues, basic problems are not resolved or even not articulated sometimes, more and more different means of confrontation, common can up into the play. So for my understanding, basically what's happening in Ukraine, it was one more step towards this escalation. But then again, can be another step and can be another step. So unfortunately, we are moving towards this direction from my opinion right now. Where are we right now? Would you say? I would say in very dangerous moment, in the moment when, which perhaps we did not experience for last, I would say from 94, something like this, for the last 40 years. I mean, the US government is now basically orchestrating a bombing campaign within Russia. I mean, the United States is that in a hot war with Russia. And this is because the president was just convicted for the president Trump, but there's a lot going on in the US. I don't think that most Americans fully understand we're in a hot war with Russia. So I mean, they're both nuclear on powers. What are the chances that this becomes a nuclear exchange? Unfortunately, each conflict rests its own dynamic. So for now, I don't see forces which seriously awaken to de-escalation because it's not defined yet what we've taken means. It's not defined with what purpose of each conflict in part here really is. In reality, it's described, but today's goals are not really discussed. Yeah, it's like one part here, moving one direction. What for example, Ukrainian part here saying Ukrainian part here of this conflict saying, okay, we want something like go back to the situation when everything was in 2014. Okay, so they want to do this calculation two steps compared with the situation. Step not to 22, but step 2014. At the same time, from the aspect of the air here when we're listening to use of the table, we're actually saying, no, we want something bigger. We want to do this calculation even faster. We want to come back to the situation when security arrangement in Europe done in a such way that Russia does not feel in danger from different sides. So that's to what Russia leadership ref is. So you cannot discuss one type of base care problem and don't discuss another. So when two parties don't hear each other and each of them kind of leave them on wealth, there's one limitation. What you should predict, you should predict that more people will die, that this calculation will continue and God forgive us. But next threshold of this calculation can be crossed. Both sides, you know, openly, sort of openly talking about using nuclear weapons. I never thought I would live to see that. That seems crazy. It's extremely scary. The Russians worried, of course, of course, but once again, even from Russia side, I can understand basically dynamic. But what I don't understand, I don't understand why I was not worrying about. What today's situation, we might be very much situation which was in the autumn 2021. So what we saw in the autumn 2021, we saw military maneuvers in here, Ukrainian borders. We saw the proposal to come back and to discuss different type of the arrangement, which can make situation a little bit more secure, not a little bit more, but more secure, more predictable. When security, it's basically waking in the both side, not only against Russia, but also the such side, such arrangement, like Russia feels secure. That was a major discussion somewhere in the autumn 2021. So Russia came with a certain proposal. It was a lot of discussion. What was the result? The result was actually noise. The result was, okay, it will not happen. The result was, okay, just try to do it and we do something more terrible to you. That was kind of the discussion at this moment of time. What Russia did at this time, move situations the next level of escalation, on the basically situation which we in the beginning of the special military population, that what Russia did. So that happened once. So compare with the situation today, military maneuvers. There's a tactical nuclear weapon at this time. A lot of basically comments like, oh, don't take it seriously. Mr. Putin did not use bomb for two years, for sure he will never use it anymore in the future. Yeah, all of this kind of the discussion. We need to ignore it because if basically Russia will do it, we'll do it something even more terrible. What a reminder for me, it's a reminder to anyone in the beginning of 22. But Putin did roll across the border in the end. So why if one time the escalation move on the next base. So we're almost getting like theological questions here. Do you think the West wants a nuclear war? Is this an effort to commit suicide? What is this? I think just an ability to propose a scenario which basically Western leaders can explain and try and write balance with actually it's a very difficult question. It is a very difficult question. Society, Western society, so much supportive of the, was so much basically done supportive to the cause which was promoted by the Western politicians to the certain moment. So because it's so simplified narrative like unprovoked aggression, unprovoked aggression, meaning, existing risks. If it's just like a risk, what you can do? We need to react on unprovoked aggression to push. So how can you change this narrative? So this negative is very difficult. If you're a politician who is dealing with this limitation, how to deal with this, that's very difficult. Sometimes it's easier just to follow in the earth. Just to do. Sure. I mean, of course I understand that in their prestige is at stake and no one wants to been in mistake and no one wants to be seen as siding with Putin or being a disloyal American or Belgian or Frenchman or whatever, the media control people by attacking them. But you would think that a nuclear exchange would be the moment where people would say, well, I don't care what you call me. We're not going to have a nuclear war because that could be the end of people. And I would do anything. I could do to stop that anything, including accept responsibility for dumb statements only before being embarrassed or being called names. I don't care. I'm going to try and stop nuclear war. I thought that was the red line for people, but it's not. If American society understand the moment where we are, I don't think they do. But you think we're at that moment. I think that next level of escalation, it's very possible. After that, if you take a click, effect that next level of escalation is possible. But next level of escalation, maybe. That's all that's left. But again, it raises the theological question like, why did Europe decide to destroy itself in 1914? Why is the West once again on the brink of destroying itself? What is that? It doesn't seem rational at all. I think it's pretty understandable. I believe in Western democratic system. Yes, in the certain moment, it's allowed to change the course. So leaders change. And then if some leaders follow some particular scenario, it's very difficult for them to change their opinion, to change the position which they took towards the population of their countries. But when democratic system make a change, then course of society may change also. So I think this problem will pass in one way and another. Problem is how fast this will pass. If some tragedy will not happen before. So the leader of the West, the American president changed his view on this, then you think he could lead Europe to de-escalate. I think we don't have choice, but we must have discovered. Do I believe it's realistic? Honestly, dynamic looks like it's not very realistic right now. It's very difficult. So I don't know. Some I may recall, neither. It's an illustration. So you read as a non-American who's not allowed in the United States, but I know you follow this carefully. Do you think Trump is capable of stopping this trajectory of escalation? I don't know. Is there any other leader in the world who is? I don't know. I think today, both in general have a problem with the leaders who can look not on the polarized way to say that's true or that's true. But people who can look a little bit more low, but I shouldn't risk a deficit of this. People are right now. And idea of this constant conflict of this things which are actually welled on part, it's become very dangerous. It's become very dangerous. So I think that will need a moment for little bit to cool down. And then probably the process will start. But remember what stops the war in Vietnam actually. I think it was only one way which stopped it. It was a slogan. I think that was one of the most important things which happened during this period of time, because it's very simple. And that goes directly to your conscience. So you repeat something and suddenly you start to think, okay, maybe it's not about communism, capitalism. I don't know, the 10 or something else. Maybe just about something little bit bigger. That it was what stops the war at this time. What will stop war at this time? I don't know. I don't believe somehow in the deal between politicians right now. I don't believe it somehow. In Europe, is there, I mean, you're in Europe, I guess you're not in Europe anymore. But do you think the rest of the world understands how close we are in nuclear war? I don't know. I think it's like in this movie, don't look up. Samsung's happening. Samsung's coming closer. But so many other more interesting things. Heets of Andresa. Heets some other interesting stories happening. Why do you consider it on such vacations? But in Europe, I think understanding of the situation growing. What's China's role in all this? How to say? But I think China behaves like very responsible power trying to basically say everyone, please calm down, please calm down. How strong what China really can do about it? That's another question. President Nixon went to China famously 50 years ago in a probably a lot of objectives. But the main objective was to solidify the split between Russia and China because you don't want them to align against you, of course, if you're the United States. In one day, that seems to have changed. Is the Russia China alliance strong? Is it enduring? Is it, for the next 100 years, will those two countries be in an alliance, do you think? It's a country with a huge trade compared to size of our economy. It's a country which very long lent border. So China is definitely growing a world superpower probably only two superpowers. Now we can really count. So yes, of course, so Russia and China would have strong relations. I hope they will. Is there any chance in our lifetimes that Russia and the United States have any kind of reasonable, non-antagonistic relationship? We should. I agree. We should. It's no, any reason. It's no fundamental. It's a way it should be otherwise. Nice of us, United States, Russia, not vis-a-russia in Europe. I don't see any reason why it should be otherwise. What would happen if you tried to come to the United States? If I would come to the United States, I don't know. I would not get to visa, so how can come? If you in to European country or Australia. Same? Yes. Do you think you might be arrested? I don't think so. I will simply not allow to come, sir. Wait to arrest me. I did not done nothing wrong. How many countries you banned from visiting? If European Union, UK, Switzerland, Canada, United States, New Zealand, Australia, is that it? Japan? Japan? To be honest, I'm not sure about Japan. I need to check. But since you live outside what we think of as the West, and Japan kind of as part of the West in a way, it has American troops on its soil, how do you see the world changing now that you've been forced outside the old world into the emerging world? Where are the new, where are the freest places in the world? Where's the power coalescing? I think world is a good night now. It's unclear where and what will happen where. Definitely China is growing with incredible speed. I spent quite a lot of time on China lately and it's amazing. In what way? Like when you see what's done and you compare what was on the same places 10 years ago, so you see the difference. My private foundation, check its foundation. Support kids, talented kids in different areas. One of our project we support chemical, let's say, competition between kids from different countries, students. So this year we hold the surveillance in China. I remember the city 25 years ago and I saw this each and now. It's unbelievable. There's an emphasis I noticed on building in China, in making things, whereas the emphasis in the West seems to be on banking, what's the difference between a society that builds things in a society that wins money and interest? At the end of the day, both societies are trying to resolve the same issue to make people in this country to feel better. Yes. So there are many ways which lead to the top of the mountain. One society going one direction and another going to another direction, how to say about the better. Which is the stronger society. American. America. Of course. Why? Democracy. Yes. Good thing about democracy. We all of law. The traditions. Do you think that and I agree with you completely? I strongly believe in democracy and of course rule of law. But I wonder what the lesson the rest of the world is taking from the last couple of years. I mean, do you think there will be other countries that want to sign on to the democratic project? It's really difficult to say what the democratic project is. But I mean, we are going through the period of time when dominance will fund super power of United States. It will not be it will not be in future like it was before. Yeah. For sure China done a great and credible job and we will see at least two super powers which will in one way or another organize world affairs going forward. At the same time we see a number of the countries who will become strong regional leaders. So we're going to completely different engagements of the world. World features. You can call it multipolar. So but the world features this completely different dynamic. That's where we are moving. For my understanding and what does it look like in say 10 years? What are the so I imagine it's the English speaking countries Europe. Maybe Latin America maybe not. And then everybody else. Again, it's very hard to say so let's assume that situation which we are talking about this escalation level will not be crossed. Let's assume that some ami recal will happen which will bring world to the East Kalation at slowly slowly new order will start to emerge. So how should we all develop in this scenario? How to say the bad scenario in good scenario. Bad scenario it's again to come back to the cycle of the Cold War basically to come back 40 years ago. Where's a couple blocks let's say United States one side China from another side couple countries which trying to I mean do something independently it will be so something like this. The dangerous world for my understanding because it will be just a petition of something could we already seen. So competition where there are only two powers couple steps after can lead to nothing else but to the very difficult confrontations very difficult fight for the different resources for access to this and this that's for my understanding. Accitation which not very sustainable to put it this way. So if this is the largest scenario if this scenario where something else may happen perhaps so what it can be it means should be possibility for some other countries to basically work with the both sides to work with one sort of power and form another sort of power to work it means to have security and elements to have understanding to have investment from the both sides to have to be this both side and if such countries such actors will be basically more and more of them will be forming the world that for my understanding what can make world more solid more stable more sustainable. So how to make sure that we did not come to competition where either you are with us or any may but how to come the situation when acceptance of the abilities of countries to don't be neither in one side not on another side can see if basically take it at like something good like something what's in the interest of stability of the system. I'm sorry maybe my English not so well and maybe I'm not delivering. I follow I'm following every word. Let me ask you the stated objective I don't know officially but certainly policy makers and lawmakers say it is to kill Putin or knock him out of his position to get rid of Putin. I know you don't live in Russia and you don't know Putin but as when it knows the country what would happen if Putin disappeared tomorrow? Firstly I leave from the country and I can see them myself for gosh. So it's not going to say that I'm not leaving in the country. You're not okay great. So for last year I spent in the Russia most times in any other countries. It's changed a lot. So what would happen if Putin disappeared tomorrow? What happened to Russia? It's such a big complicated country and it seems like whatever you think a Putin he holds it together. House. House. Any type of the it will increase level of uncertainty like in any system which is basically where it's centralized and Russia became very centralized system and the last decade or so. Yes. Any unexpected changes only will increase. So chaos. Chaos. Yes. So exactly this increase of the chaos will lead. That is again very much depends of many other situation during this particular time. But I think it's very a bit scenario for and I don't even want to think about it. Oh that bad. I mean it seems that way is a total outsider if you have this in the biggest country in the world with very complicated demographic mix and a lot of different parts of the country. You don't have that much in common with each other. It seems like with a lot of nuclear weapons that could be bad for the world. House. It's in general. House. Sorry. Chaos. Chaos. Chaos. Chaos. Chaos. Chaos. Chaos. Chaos. Chaos. Or in Iraq or in Yugoslavia 30 years ago. How long it took before stability was brought to the same places. So in situation like Russia any type of the chaos. I don't think firstly, a system will be destroyed by the chaos because Russia. Russian people Russia society already came through the very different period of time in the 90s wait for a lot of chaos and society is you've kind of the vaccination against. Right. In this type of the disease they had chaos they don't want it again. Exactly. So that's why I'm pretty sure what will happen if more chaos will appear in the system. Our system will react with the more centralization, with more concentration of the power, with less freedom. That will happen. And what is it good to bed? I think it's very bad for the Russia and very bad for the rest of the world. Because when system becoming more concentrated on defending itself, when it's dangerous everywhere instead of the opportunities, even if dangerous not exists, they will appear. And they will follow and they will come to next. That's exactly right. So what happens to Ukraine since you are in some sense in the agriculture business and that's I mean I know you know a lot about Ukraine. Do you have a Ukrainian parent? My mother is Ukrainian. Yes. And I'm very familiar with Ukraine. Zelensky has apparently, I heard from Ukrainian two days ago, backed a new law that will allow foreigners to buy own property in Ukraine. It doesn't feel like maybe the effect of this war is foreign companies buying a lot of Ukrainian land and moving a new population. And maybe that's just a dark guess. What do you think the future looks like for Ukraine? It's a tragedy. What happens there? It's a exaggeration when Kantie became a stage for competition with outside powers. So that's exactly what should not happen with any other Kantie. So that may happen. It was a chance that the same scenario could happen before in Georgia since Ghatie did not happen. It was possibilities that same scenario could happen before in Belarus, probably in Kazakhstan. Now Armenian living through the most serious on the period similar to this. So it's very dangerous when Kantie becoming a competition, a ring between superpowers, between even regional power and global power. So that is what happened in there. So that's example, which is very, very bad. And such example, unfortunately, exist not only in this ex-Soviet sphere. Such examples we can see elsewhere. So for example, take the Hornor of Africa. So you see a conflict in the Sudan. So more people were killed or injured in Sudan than Ukraine and Gaza combined. How often do you speak about it? Never. That's a disturbing question, of course. So what as soon as competition starting to happen like this, that's a worst scenario for any country to be in. So that is what happened with Ukraine. Hopefully other countries will look on example and try to don't be there. That's why I think as a model, it's much more positive. It's a model when Kantie not trying to be one side or another side, not trying to find which house is better to compete in the competition where they have nothing to gain. So I think the best way for such countries is to find the balance and to be good with everyone. So that is a much better way. I want to ask you about climate and the response to climate change. So I live in a place that had glaciers 15,000 years ago. It was very obvious from the landscape as it is in many parts of the world. So from my perspective, there has very obviously been radical climate change that is nothing to do with human behavior. And yet my government and most Western government, government sector, world governments in general all agree that climate change is caused by human behavior. And we need to stop climate change by changing human behavior in ways that will kill humans. Very close to connect to agriculture and watch world politics carefully. What's your view of what causes climate change? I don't think it's so important to tell the truth. I think more important it's a fact that temperature of the surface was a plenty of change. That's a matter of fact. Yes. So it's also true and very possible that the numbers, the dangerous anomalies, nature and the numbers will increase like consequence of the warming of the surface of the planet. So intensity of hurricanes, more floods, more droids, so this kind of things will increase. It's very possible. Very possible they will bring more damage, material damage to the property or damage to the way of the living for the people. That's all nice. That's all understandable. But I think what's wrong if from this fact we are jumping to the question and starting to discuss who is guilty. That is what is I think very wrong because of course it's more natural way to start discussion from this because we're all following certain type of the sinking which is maybe it's coming from really how you said before from religious perspective for whatever because it's always the same circle. Maybe it's coming from really how you said before from religious perspective for whatever because it's always the same circle. Firstly, exist a scene. Somebody done something bad. Then exist punishment. Something bad happened because somebody done scene. Then exist how you say it on English. You recognize basically you admit that you call this repent or atone. Yeah, so that is next stage. No, and then after only after basically you can come back to the paradise or whatever people call it. So that is more or the same pattern. In the same pattern when you speak somehow distract from the issue on the table because what is the issue? Issue is how to deal with the problem. So instead of the question how to deal with the problem you suddenly start to think how to deal with the person who calls the problem. That I think that's a problem. That's what I think. I think you're exactly right. Well, it's just a bit as a matter of fact. Okay, so if you assume that CO2 emissions drive climate change, which is an assumption. I don't think I don't have to be proven that, but that's everyone's assumption. What percentage of CO2 emissions come from people and human behavior as opposed to natural climate? Okay, so let's look on it from the different perspectives. Then if I may. So first lesson, it's not important for calls the problem. So the same answer goes to everything in the climate change. I don't think it's important who calls it. It's a question is we need to address it. All right. So let's start from there. Let's start there as the problem. Okay, of the looking for person who did it. By the way, the same pattern goes about everything in maybe in some conflicts instead of the looking for the whole that we don't understand about casting blame. I think you're absolutely right. And it does become a political vehicle to punish your enemies and people who vote for you. It's clearly what's happening. But you also can't solve a problem if you don't know it's source. If you don't know why it's happening, how can you fix it? Okay. So how you can fix it? So in the case of the climate, I think it's better to start from the facts. Normally, there are two types of the people, people, two kinds of the people, people who like to learn and people who like to believe. Yes. I think in this type of the question, we need to concentrate more on learning on understanding. So coming back to the learning. So surface of our planet, I guess you've radiation from the sun approximately. I don't know. So you hand it forte megawatts per square meter. So that is what what happened. What? So yeah, not megawatts. Because after that, that is heating the source of our planet. But part of this heat, it's reflected. It's going back to the space. In case if you don't have that much here, what happened? So temperature of our planet will be perhaps such a five degrees lower than it is now. So why it's not lower? Because we have atmosphere. What is atmosphere? Inside of our atmosphere, there are certain gases which we call greenhouse gases. Yes. Major of them, it's water vapor. Second, it's CO2, then methane, then acid. So what these gases do, they reflect heat back to surface about three quarter or the heat that's reflected. It's going back to the surface. So we experience kind of infrared sound effect when basically closely eject some exposure and after that reflected heat waves coming. So that's how it works. So why am I explaining of this? Okay. So let's imagine we are not looking home to blame for the problem. But in reality, we are just trying to put temperature little bit down. Let's say a degree or two down. We are trying to find these knobs how you call it on the thermostat. Yes. To turn them down and make temperature little bit lower. So what you normally would consider? So question number one, you want to increase a reflection of the heat from the surface of the planet. Would not you? So that will be first question. That's what inside the call albedo. So it's a ability of the surface to reflect waves coming on the surface. Yes, I'll be at that. So white color, basically, if you have a mirror, you all be at that. It's one. If you have a completely dark assumption, you'll be at zero. Everything else goes in the middle. So if you want the surface heat at last, what you do? You increase a better step number one, step number two. What you want to do? You want to decrease a reflection in that mass here, which is going back to the surface. In other words, you want to decrease a concentration of the greenhouse gases. Right. Mass here. That's two. So the heat can escape. Then we'll not go back, but we'll escape. So that's actually two action which you want to take as a any difference. No, because it doesn't matter. Either you basically sent more out of the surface or you allow less to come back back to the surface. It's way since the same direction. You want to get this all now one more fact to it. So when we're talking about greenhouse gases, so another just numbers. So our planet, emit about 800, 20 gigatons of it really into CO2 per year. Humans emit about 54 gigatons out of this 800, 20. So it's about 6%. So that is input of the human greenhouse gases emission is 6% of the total. Yeah. That's why if you look on all of it combined, it's really unexplainable. Not mean from the logical perspective. Why? Well, attention given not to the change of the, I'll be at the of the world of the surface of our planet. And not to the adoration as a 94% of the emission, which is coming from the nature. But why all attention concentrated on this person is 6% of total. That's very difficult to explain from the logical perspective. So that's what beginning after that naturally question number two can be asked, is it possible to address? Is there a main in 90 4% of greenhouse gases? Or what does it really means to change albedo of the surface? Is it feasible? What does it means? Of course, it's feasible. So what means to change natural emission is this 94% plan forest that's about it. So, meadows, it's about this deal with a permafrost, which is covering big storages of the carbon in the undernies. It's also to deal with this CO2. So, which is trapezase. So there are different ways to affect natural cost emissions. That course natural based solutions, exist estimations and numbers which shows the potential of it. It's about 18 gigatons so numbers like this. So it's more or less about half of the anthropogenic emissions can be much more cheaply mitigated by natural based solution. So that's target number one. Storgent number two about albedo. I'm sorry, I'm going to let you see. We ask you this puzzle. Question two, planting forest is number one. It's one. It's one of the options. In the natural based solution, planting forest, it's one of the options. That seems easy, cheap. It creates beauty. It helps everybody to plant forest. Why is that being done? Yes, it's done, but not on the very big scale. Where is it being done? In many places in the world, planting of the forest happened now, China, by the way, the biggest place where about 250 million tons of the emissions now absorbed by the forest planting China during the last 20 years. Why isn't it being done in more places? We will come to this, I promise. We will come to this. I like that idea so much that I had to pause. But forest is only one of the possible solutions. There are many houses. There are many houses. Forest is one of them. But once again, so there are opportunities to react to the greenhouse emissions from the natural sources. That's story number one. Second big story, which is unlike, let's say, natural based solution almost not used at all, almost not used today at all. That's to affect albeda. It means to affect how much energy, basically reflected out of the surface of the planet. What does it mean? For example, to paint rough whites, that means change albeda. It was black, become white. Or to change color of the roads. For example, to plant certain types of the grass, of meadows or something like this, I give you numbers. So, typical, let's say gas power plant in Texas will produce maybe 2.5 million tons of CO2 per year. So, in order to absorb it by albeda, it will need to be, I would say, 15,000 hectares. You need to change albeda for 0,000 for, I'm sorry for technical details. It's not very much. So, for example, when you plant in the black soil cotton, it's increased albeda about five times bigger. So, that's how you can compensate one by another. Well, you can fight climate change by planting cotton. It's very good. It's very good instrument to change albeda of the surface. It's one of many. You can plant, you can paint surface of the buildings. You can, I don't know, do certain techniques which allow ice to melt little bit later because when it's ice, it's kind of mirror. So, albeda of the ice, it's very high. It's reflect a lot. And when ice, for example, melting during summer period of time, what's happening is basically what is underneath ice becoming exposed to that mass. Yes. And that is usually black color. So, albeda, it's increasing. So, if you can find solution, which allow ice to melt little bit for the shorter period of time in arctic, that's also very effective. And you mentioned painting the roads white? What's wrong about it? Or not? Because it's hard that. Or chair or painting the roofs. When it's very hot, what you do on the street, you're trying to wear white. When it's very cold, you're trying to wear black. Why? Because black makes a warmer white reflect sun. Same goes about any other things. But amazing thing is that it's very simple, very cheap and basically numbers which can be achieved by this are comparable to what we are doing now with anti-pagan emission. Like I said, Texas two offset emission dine by the typical power plant gas power plant. You need 15,000 hectares. Maybe 10,000 hectares will do. So, one versus another. So, what I'm trying to say is that the cause is a problem change of the temperature. There is a desire to do it. So, exist very strange way how we do this today. We found someone who to blame human in this case and trying to reduce what humans do. But exist a number of other options, not as good news. You can do something with albed and you can do something with a number of the natural base solutions. And for my understanding that we don't have other way forward. I mean, they say if you're really serious about this question. You're a private sector businessman. I'm around politicians a lot. So, it's obvious to me why we're pursuing the less effective way, which is that it gives political leaders more control over their populations. If I paint every house roof, white, or if I plant cotton rather than some other crop, it doesn't give me any more power. But if I control what kind of appliances people use or if I close down coal plants and replace them with ineffective means of electricity generation, then I'm more powerful. Doesn't that the answer to the question? This partially announced this in reality, I think if I go back a little bit to the history, how happened that suddenly like humanity started to concentrate on this climate change, climate change story. Actually, it started, I would say, in the end of the ages. So, it started maybe from the speech of the Prime Minister of England, Margaret Thatcher, which was delivered in 1989 in the United Nation. So, what was the moment at that time? Basically, it was a moment when world seems to move away from the previous big danger, from the nuclear war. That's right. That was a moment of kind of a organization of the world. And that was exactly the idea of your speech. So, she said that, okay, now when one problem passed, we have a ability to concentrate on another, on dealing with the climate change. It's always good to have something. What's your finds again? Don't you think so? Yes. So, that was the beginning of the story. After that, see, yes, after that, in real the genre, convention was signed. In the day of the expansion was signed, convention, which started to put in place for a moment mechanism of combating possible climate change implications, etc. There are many strategies which can be applied in order to move forward with the task. But at this moment, particular strategy was chosen. Strategy, which was considering competing fossil fuels or reducing dependence from the fossil fuels in different industrial processes. So, that was a moment when it's happened. So, question is why it's happened at that time? Exactly. In this way, I think it's happened because at this moment of time, international institution, which we're concerned with this issue, United Nations and others, we basically demonstrated exclusively by the Western, let's say, Western influence at this moment of time. They were basically because it was not as a power in the world at this moment of time. So, how some people call it, it was in terms of the history moment. So, it was one power and all institutions in one way, one another, basically, move towards goals, more, let's say, beneficial for this power at this moment of time. So, why Western countries took away of the combating climate change through this specific mechanism? So, the combating of the dependency on the fossil fuels or dependence of the industrial processes from the fossil fuels, very simple because it was to benefit. Benefit number one, to reduce dependence of energy imported from the far away place. Yes. Energy security. So, that's a good reason. It's a pretty good reason. And second reason was that new technological new technologies we just needed in order to produce energy, not from the fossil fuels, but let's say from renewable and other sources. Or new industrial processes, we need to be developed to do other jobs without using fossil fuels. Basically, country, who the idea was that country, who will start to do it first, will get a technological advantage. And we'll create not only something good for their own economy, but later, we'll be able to provide the same solution to other countries and like this maintain technological leadership. So, that was allergic. So, why, basically, the directions move towards this. Think about it. If you're talking about plenty, it's plain to cause it is. It's nice, but wait a minute. In Russia, in Brazil, somewhere in Africa. So, definitely not in Europe. So, because not so much space, available, which basically not used for other purposes, for agriculture, as a productive purposes. So, that's why idea moved towards this direction. Also, it was more easier to, let's say, to sell to the voters. Because investments done at your home, working places created at your home. But at the same time, you're kind of fighting a global problem. In this situation, climate change is very specific story. Because we have one atmosphere for all the planet. It's very unusual compared with other problems. If you want to give people access to the water, you need to do something with this people leave. If you want to do something with climate change, you can do investment in your own territory, benefiting your industry and your taxpayers. But still fighting global good. So, this is kind of a symmetry. That's the idea. And that's how it's been sold. But in effect, you know, climate policy has reduced the standard of living of people in the United States and Europe. It's made energy more expensive. It's made them poor. Actually, what happened exactly what it should happen? So, by applying Samsung, what is arguably expensive? Slowly, slowly local industry start to be not very competitive. Like result, we can place it and production start to shift away to the countries where it's more competitive. Yes, more competitive to do. So, like result, that is what really happened. So, who is leader today in terms of the solar panels in the wind basically? Of course China electric cars. So, that's what happened. So, basically, western countries started print with the organization trying to achieve one result. But in reality, another result was achieved during the same period of time. What western countries do today? First of all, I will tell about Europe because in forefront of all of these processes. So, okay, domestic industry become not competitive. So, what you do? So, firstly, you try to subsidize them using basically different budget money. Okay. But then you're competitive starting to do the same. I'm talking about China or other countries or United States like famous inflation reduction act of the president Biden, which is bringing a lot of money to subsidize renewable energy. So, we start competition of this. Okay, one story. But poor countries cannot compete. They don't have money for this. Second, what Europeans doing and what will happen in another countries as well. You start to create a barrier for the goods which is produced in other parts of the world. But which should enter your territory? Meaning, if carbon reduction in your domestic place cost, I don't know what it cost today, maybe 80 euros. And if some producers produce goods in another place of the world where carbon reduction costs zero. Yeah? So, his products when they're coming to the Europe, he will need to pay duty. It's so called CAPM Mirrenius. They will need to pay duties to compensate the cost for difference with the cost with the European producers. In other words, the story is pushed for other countries to follow the same agenda. So, that's basically where we are. Step number one, it was logical to choose from the perspective of the Western countries to choose this course on the certain moment of time. So, number two, he did not brought them too many goods because basically simply they start to kill the industries which start to move to another place. Yes, I noticed. Now, they're starting to do step number three, trying to be protective to create certain type of the trade barriers based on the different carbon prices. So, that's where we are going. Every single kid is nice. Only it has nothing to do with the climate. Has, I mean, if you're focusing on reducing the activity that produces only 6% of greenhouse gases, then I mean, you probably not going to have a big effect on global climate, right? No. What do you know? Whatever we do, temperature, keep rising. Yeah. Consideration of greenhouse gases in the machine, it's keep rising. But at the same time, when we read numbers of the resources allocated towards fight with human pollution, what we see today. Numbers, it's about five trillion dollars annually in order for the world to be on the tragic story till 2000s, church where we are kind of trying to be. It's required about five trillion dollars to be spent annually for this. It's roughly 5% of the world GDP. Yeah. It's comparable with the numbers which spend for all different globally. It's about 3.5 trillion, for example. So, of course, this resources are not easily available. Especially, they're not easily available in countries which don't have financial means to attract this money from the market or don't have strong budgets or as a possibility. So, like result, what happened? Ability of the humanity to react on other important issues was greatly reduced. United Nations counted 17th sustainability development goals, like fight poverty, access to the Eastern etc. So, climate, it's goal number search in this list, really, number searching. So, but let's go allocate most of the resources and that's a problem. So, what I'm trying to say, maybe on the certain stage, it was good idea. The Western countries start to follow particular way to combat climate. Who cares if each guys want to spend their money doing something good for the world in their own tutorials? You can only say, think, nothing else. But now, this story is that to affect others very much. More poor countries, countries who cannot really compete with the Western countries in this type of segment. And what it means? It means this Polish share more or less clear now for everyone. It's not about climate anymore. It's about of something else. It's about business. Clearly, the concern, I think, just as an American, is that the country runs on electricity, on energy, and the alternatives to hydrocarbons don't seem like they work very well. I mean, how? I mean, you're in business, use a lot of energy in your business. Could you run the United States on renewables? Will that be possible anytime in the next hundred years? What would happen if you tried to run the United States on wind and solar? I mean, price of energy will be higher. That's what will happen. Price of energy will be higher. So it will be much higher than we do have now. So is it good or not? It's very much depends what will happen in other countries. Because by itself, it's important if American industry will be competitive with these prices. Because if it's competitive with these prices, market will adjust itself. And at the end of the day, it will be good for American people rather than bad. But I don't think other countries will follow this agenda. Agenda where just all basically added profit in the supply chain staying in few particular places in the world. I think this type of world order is not sustainable. And unlikely, it will be possible to maintain it for very long time. And also, to don't forget one thing. So all of this done, in order to fight climate change. What I'm trying to say, what all of this arrangements have nothing to do with the fighting climate. I've noticed they have something to do in order to justify certain type of the trading polishes. Last question about energy before I get into the solutions that you think would actually work. And that's AI. It seems to, you know, service farms are a massive drop of energy. And AI seems to as projected be one of the biggest electricity in the United States. If so, I mean, doesn't that kind of make the transition away from hydrocarbons impossible? How could you, how could you power all that? Everything possible if you have money is that he's in a bill to do everything what's possible usually in life is not a good point. I noticed that AI seems to be exempt from climate concerns. Like your car is bad, but server farms are not bad. Yeah. What did you mean when you said specifically permafrost if you wanted to reduce greenhouse gases, you would deal with permafrost. What would you do? Lotus permafrost. So beneath the permafrost, usually the organic matters. So me and some time ago it was focused, focused. It was I don't know, uh, meadows. It was something else. And then the way she came cover, but what was there before? I mean, Sandra. So what's happening when permafrost that's melting and it's melting now, uh, by the way, I should say that average temperature of our planet increased about 1.5 degrees. That's more or less number, but arctic over what period? I mean, compare with the pre industrial level. How do I say? Yeah, but, uh, that's not distributed equally. Yeah. So arctic, it's a warm and much faster. So temperature anxiety can increase maybe a 4, 5 degrees on average. So so like result, I said smelching permafrost as melting. Uh, it means doing some period of time exist longer period of times when what seats beneath permafrost organic matter meets atmosphere. So what happened during this period of time? It's same what happened in Brazil, Apple when you eat part of it and left it on the table. It's getting arrested. Yeah. How to say it. Yeah. So basically microbes start to work with this organic matter. And like result, uh, emission of the greenhouse gases happening, it's just a rod. Yeah. So it's basically is a CO2 or if it's very wet, then it will be NH4 methane. So that is what's happening. So what what I'm saying is that more exposure, uh, for organic matter, which is an underneath permafrost, uh, longer than six pose of is that must here more emissions coming out of there. So that is what's happening now. So what is the numbers? Actually, it's strange, but numbers not well known now. Not so good research existed in this area. It's actually a chunk now, but for now, we don't have reliable numbers. There are number of of publications, but differences and measurements very big. But mostly, estimation will be about seven eight gigatons of emissions in the, let's say 10 period of time. So number is like this. It's a slightly bigger than United States, uh, anti-apagant emissions. So basically, it's a significant numbers, which is coming from there. So when we talk about natural based solutions permafrost, no, if I understood the question project. So I did it's very simple. So how you can reduce time, uh, which, uh, organic matter exposed to that must hear how you reduce this time. Basically, you need to keep surface cooler for a little bit longer period of time. That's what you need. And the number of techniques, how you do it exists, techniques, which you basically apply some things on top of the ice and it's not much slower than it's your mouth otherwise. Exist things, which include natural solutions. For example, you can put animals in the certain area and then then animals walking in this area, the pressure in snow. And what means pressure of the snow. So if snow is, uh, let's say, three meters, uh, then on top of the snow, you will have temperature, maybe minus 40 degrees. But beneath, you will have, I don't know, minus five. It's kind of blunt. Yes. But if you pressure it, then, uh, basically, uh, temperature beneath the snow will be much less like you're walking on your, I don't know, uh, country house on the, let's say on some walk and you will see that snows will melt much later than will be exactly. Then we'll be small somewhere else. Exactly. So, so, so you can see the footsteps. Of course, the ice footsteps. Yeah. So like result, uh, temperature, uh, beneath the snow, which was pressed by the animals will be lower than like result exposure of the, uh, surface, uh, to the atmosphere during summertime will be shorter. So no, that's another possible techniques. So in the United States, the techniques aligned to mitigate quite a lot in terms of the emissions. What kind of animals? I mean, what kind of animals love to leave in this kind of environment? Right there. For example, for example, yeah. So many solutions, is anyone trying that? Yes, people trying people trying. And is there anybody to know whether it works? Uh, it definitely works, uh, but again, so natural based solution, it's a area where, uh, exist very, very, many problems with accounting, with, uh, correct measurements and everything. So problem is that we don't have a system which allow us objectively control flow of the greenhouse gases to that last year and, or, or absorption them from the, from the world's permafrost. 65% of our should say, totally permafrost. I'll ask it's permafrost. You can't, not be part of the Canada permafrost and little bitons Canadian countries. Those are the four big four big four. But 65% You call them a big part of the Canada Paramount Frost and little bitons Canadian-Canadian countries. Those are the four. Big four. Big four. It's 65%. 65% of the National Security it's a part of the Russian's trying to do it. No way. Today, basically, why you will do something? No, what doesn't make sense for you? Okay, step in backwards. If a woman calls a planet, it's good to bat for Russia. Honestly speaking, it's rather good than bat for number of reasons. Of course, some areas they will experience may be more complicated condition for agriculture and everything. But on average, our agriculture production will move more, north, which will allow to grow more rather than less. In terms of the ability, because we are north and country, so we spent a lot of energy to allow people to live in this country. So when temperature going up, again, you spend less. So what I'm trying to say, economically, increase of the temperature, actually it's good in Russia if you take it in combination of the factors. So why somebody will do something in case it's good for him to do nothing. Right. It's one question. No, it's possible. But then it should be some market for this. So for Russia, it's good. But for somebody, it's bad. Perhaps some arrangement can be done. Somebody praying for the basically decrease of certain emissions and use it against the conterebligation or something like this. What I'm trying to say, so market is needed. Who makes these decisions? United Nations budget exists so-called pay a agreement and exists a certain bureaucracy, certain bureaucracy, which we can collect, but security at all of this agreement. So today, today, that is how it's organized. So today, basically, countries concentrated on the reduction of anti-apagale emissions. But it's perfectly feasible without changing anything in the pay a agreement to organize two things which is needed. Firstly, to go to the other solution, natural based solution with the emission, and actually to include our better effects also in the consideration, like another possible option to affect temperature on the planet. So that can be perfectly done like part of the pay a agreement. Step number one. And step number two, we need a global market for the carbon. So when basically, because only global market can distribute resources in the best possible way for the unit of economic resource, you can get more value. In this case, value is how many emission you can cut. So we need two things. One, technological meteorology. To don't concentrate on the human guilt. Or but try to do all what works regardless how you're done it on nature with human. And second, what you need to do. You need to do a world market. Pay a seagaming division world market. This is actually called 6264 of the pay seagrement. But the seagrement is blocked today and they're not a parentional. If you were to say to a leading spokesman for the climate change agenda 2024, whether it was John Kerry or Al Gore, Greta Thunberg, actually what we need to do is put more reindeer on the permafrost paint the roofs white and plant more forests. How do you think they would respond? First, I'm not saying we need to do this. I think we need to do whatever. Whatever. So market should decide. But if you were to make the case you just made on the basis of what emissions actually are and what might, I mean, is there a market for these ideas? I guess that's why I'm asking. How I said, pay a seagrement. It's a creation of the certain historical period. So it was sold to many countries at this time. It was very strongly supported by developing countries of this time. Why, for example, because developing countries did not do abrogation to cut the emissions. Another part of this. But they expected to receive a lot of support in order to fall in the agenda, which did not realize at the end. So actually it's realized. But in a way that now you can take money for something green, but you cannot take money for hospitals, water or other things, which is important for you because it's the same money. What I'm trying to say. So basically, movements, any case, will move towards the direction where anti-apagan emission will not be enough. So that's happening in any case. Firstly, because it's fighting just in the agan emissions would not bring us where we want to be. And second, because this course creates so many uncertainties in this proportion of the world. But one by one, by one, by one, different players will find it. That doesn't make sense for them. I will just do the part in this agreement. That's what will happen. That's why what to say here. So if time comes, that this question should be a de-assieriously. I mean, question of the fighting temperature of the surface. Not question of fighting of economic activity of the guilty humans. So if cautionally in a study to be de-assieriously, then it's take, of course, strong leader just to say it. What is this leader? It's a question when it will come. But I'm pretty sure it will happen. But right now, I mean, there's no lawmaking regulatory, political body rational enough to say what you just said. Is there? Today, this pay-as-egriment process basically ran by the bureaucracy. What? How to ask, for example. What I told you that article 6.2 and 6.4 is blocked. That's a good example. So by whom they block? By Europeans? By European Union. So I explain why it's pretty simple. So press in the Europe today. It's about 80 euro per ton of CO2 reduction. So let's imagine the Czech Republic market where basically you don't need to reduce emissions just on the European territory. But when European company can basically buy a reduction which happened in the places where it's cheaper to do. Let's imagine the end of this market. What will be price of such global market? I would say 30 dollars will be my estimation. So it will be much less. What will happen with the countries which already exhausts their opportunity to cut emission cheaply and brought the economy on the situation when prices are 80 euros. What let's imagine price tomorrow collapse from 80 euros to 30 dollars. What will happen then? Or crisis will happen. Huge financial crisis will happen. Because who basically took risks that certain investment will be paid back, banks or governments. So if prices are going down, so basically many renewable sources become and not competitive compared with the fossil fuel sources. Because this price of 30 dollars moving prices down. What is the result? Big financial crisis. So that's why from one side we are talking about how nice we have to fight climate. And from another side we are blocking the best possible mechanism to do it. Because they bet too much on us. Exactly. The United States, not in this situation. The United States did not done this bad. Because it's more recently run system. The United States today basically what is does its subsidizing many producers like part of the inflation reduction act. Subsidizing producers. Giving money from the federal budget towards companies which is touching the emissions. Very big money by the way. $100 sometimes per ton of CO2. $80 from the 10 for certain applications. So why you need to spend federal money on something which is like $100. If you can purchase the same for about $10 somewhere else. Well for example in the African country. Why you are not purchasing something? Because you can purchase for 10 dollars and give jobs in something to the African country. But at the same time, why are you sending grant money? Basically it shows. What is it making a sense? Why do you think you said at the outset that you think a lot of this is a religious impulse? It follows a religious template where you identify the sin. You find the sinner. You force the sinner to repent and then you get to paradise. Why do you think Western countries which are not religious have chosen that rather than a scientific approach to a scientific problem? I mean, firstly climate was not the major issue. Climate was a nice slogan to resolve other issues. Like for example, issue of energy security or issue of the financial new engine for economic growth. So that was logic number one. Now you are asking question from other areas. Cultural question. So how happened basically that society become so much involved in the process of financial humans in this process? I don't know. But what's interesting is I personally think energy security is a valuable goal. It's important. But the United States achieved and so after 9-11, you heard people say, well, these countries are crazy. We can't rely on them. They're driving our foreign policy. We're getting all these wars because we need their energy. And then the fracking revolution happened in the United States and we were energy secure with gas. We had more gas than we could. We flare it still. So why didn't we just declare victory at that point? That's exactly my hope. Because it exists only one country in the world who can actually change all of this packaging in the climate agenda. It requires strong leadership. And I see only one country in reality who can really do it. And that's United States. And why this reason can be because exactly what you said. So as a consideration, like energy security, etc., basically not a problem for United States anymore. So because it's not a problem, it's not objective reasons to basically go against the state. You remember President Trump went out of the pay-as-agreement on his, you know, when he became a president. He suspected that pay-as-agreement, it's not exactly about climate. He suspected that it's kind of the instrument to redistribute wrecks, wrecks' workplaces or investment between different parts of the world. And perhaps not for the benefit for the American citizens. Perhaps. So time show that basically he suspicion where we correct. We spoken some minutes ago about achievement of China in terms of the electric cars, wind turbines or solar panels. So basically, yes, that was like this. So after that, when President Biden came back to the White House, he reversed decision of President Trump. And idea was, of course, because it was Nobel-Gold, still, climate crisis need to be address somehow. So that was basically decision from another side. So that's where we are. To be honest, I don't see why something cannot be done which achieve both results at the same time, which keep United States very much engaged in the process of the global climate agenda from one side, being the leader of the pay-as-agreement or any other agreements which may come in its place. But at the same time, to propose solution, which is basically beneficial for the whole system and specifically for United States. Because now, in situation when United States, it's not depends anymore from the impact of energy as such. I mean, it's a little bit exported, a little bit imported, but total balance is good in United States. So it will be economically much better for my understanding. So American economic records, whole, to move to the direction where it's not market which is closed in terms of the carbon market, but open market. Where basically American companies can do what they do and find a way how to deal with the emission in the best economically possible way. Either decrease it domestically or go and purchase assets produced in some another places. So do what American business always knows to do the best, adapt and see better opportunities. But I think, I agree with everything you're saying, except I think that this is what we're watching is less rational than you assume. I think if you said to people what we're going to do is increase the number of trees and big mammals, which seems to mean inherently good, they would say that's not enough punishment for people. They're not suffering enough for their sins. I do think that would be the reaction in the West. What good is that? It doesn't hurt us enough. Do you sense that? What I can say? It requires the required, the required, the required, the clear to basically move people towards solution like others and towards looking who is guilty. Is that required not only in the climate? Why are there no strong leaders in the West anymore? Those people follow public opinion. They follow what public wants. So they adapt what public wants. Strongly they should translate some new senses, should translate innovation, should, that's what leader means, give them your senses and then make the people understand to you. And like this, you move people with you. Exactly. Exactly. But the West has had leaders like that through history. It has none now, not one that I can see. It's strange when the entire West, every leader of every country is weak. It's all happened. It's all this does. What's China's thinking on actual thinking on climate? So Trump made the case that China is playing us. They're benefiting from this. They don't care about the climate, global temperatures they care about in industrial capacity they care about their economy and they're using the Paris Accords to help them to help their economy. What is their thinking on climate? Do you think? I think they behave like responsible global power. And today, actually China, in more or less same situation, Europe was some time ago. Basically energy security also a big issue for China. Yes. Because a lot of energy imported and also domestic production of energy. It's mostly coal in China. And what's happening with the coal production, depths of the shafts and everything increasing because most profit- or reserves get them exhausted. That's why energy security gets an issue for China. So that's why for them to build more and more renewables, it makes perfect sense from their perspective because they deal with two problems, not only with the climate. So that's perfectly competitive, I have to say. It's perfectly aligned with what Western countries do today. So for them renewables, it's needed. For them energy transition, it's needed because firstly, they need it. For the energy security. And second, they're really able to create new industries in the very fast and very organized matter because the system allowed to concentrate resources on strategic goals maybe faster than normal market economy would do. So they can establish a group of industries, coal and champions, support this industries by all government means and perhaps this industries can take global leading position much faster. That is what's happening in China. So yes, the insight of this packaging of the fighting of the fossil fuels. Yes, they have the reason why it's works for them. But at the same time, China also doing a lot today. It's the biggest actually contributing to natural based projects. How set the plant most of the trees than other countries did in order to offset emissions. The Chinese company looking on the other markets in order to do projects, they are set their home emissions. So I think they are doing pretty well, pretty logical from there from there. Does coal have a future, or people be burning coal in 50 years? I think so. I think so. Because again, it's nothing bad to use any fossil fuels, especially if you can offset emissions out of it. I would say that emissions from the coal, again, maybe I will need to step back one step before. So people sometimes mix between ecology and climate. So ecology is something good, pollute. Yes. I don't know. Do you have a particular question? The particular question. The expansion of this. Can modern coal power plants deal with these questions? Yes. Yes. Modern coal power plants don't produce black smoke. They don't destroy nature like previous generation of coal power plants used to do before. So I'm saying, on these questions, yes, ecology can be basically resolved. Question number one. Another question, it's emissions. So let's imagine that global prices, $20. In this case, coal will fly forever. If the global price will be, I don't know, such a $40, that will create little bit difference scenario. So in reality, it's nothing wrong. Do you meet when you produce something, be it from the natural gas or from the coal or whatever? As long as you can offset and if price of offset, it's low, no, it gives particular types of the fossil fuels longer future than it will be in different scenarios. What about natural gas? I mean, the emissions from natural gas are much lower, correct? Also, it's not like an away. So natural gas is NH4. It's methane. So methane and CO2, it's two different greenhouse gases. So question is, how you compare, let's say, carbon, coal by one greenhouse gas. There's a carbon-coast, by a natural greenhouse gas. It sounds like a simple question, but actually it's not. Why? The molecule of CO2, when it sits in atmosphere, your half-life time will be much longer than half-life time of the molecule of methane. So what it means? It means you have 100 molecules of methane in that atmosphere. Seven years after it will be 50 molecules, three months after this year. Physical basically it will take, let's say, 100 years before half-life will veg if something about 100 years. That's why you don't have a clear answer on how harmful it's one molecule. Very so scenario, color. So how you can answer now on this question. So if you take period of time, let's say 100 years, today, number 32, it means one molecule of methane, more harmful in terms of global warming than one molecule of CO2, 32 times. But it's on the period of time, 100 years. But if you take not 100 years, but 30 years, numbers will be very different. That's 83. So during this period of time, a molecule of methane, more harmful than a molecule of CO2 on another number. You understand the logic? Yes. Because half-life is very different. That's why, so if you use a ratio of 32 on the 100 years time, and if your goal is to equalize two harms on the 100 years term, then most of the basically power plant which is running on the gas will be better than power plant running on CO2. CO2 will die. But if you're trying to re-end basically on the short period of time, like 30 years, for example, that is something that's interesting to you. Or positive, will be the true. That's why it's not so simple question. Well, given how hard it is to measure even something that straightforward, it seems straightforward, how do we know what global temperatures are doing? Approximately. Approximately. So basically, it's this measure, it's pretty good right now. So as you can do, you have such a light, you have a certain network of things in the oceans. Is sea level rising? Apargent is not. That's what? Looks like, looks like in some places, rising in some places, getting probably a little bit less, but an average in the planet, definitely rising. You hear that this is going to unleash a series of catastrophes on humanity. Do you believe that? Exist certainly there are slopes. And we don't understand how exactly is the real work. So when short process of the planet, it's heating. For example, ice, it's melting. When ice, it's melting, more emissions coming underneath of this ice, if it's permafrost. For example, more water vapor coming in case if it was ice on top of the oceans. That's increased the effect of the heating once again, because all of this gases coming to atmosphere. So short on a loop, exist. Exist has a loop in the climate system. So where is the big danger? Seeds. Dangeries, we don't really know. System is so complicated that total balance in that atmosphere is so complicated that we don't really know what can be what they call a tipping point. A moment when system will start to behave abnormally. When number of events, not good events, will start to increase faster than it's doing now. So we don't know it for sure. We don't know it for sure. So again, there are people who believe and there are people who learn. So of course, more complex question you go, amount of believers becoming much bigger because it depends on what you're going to ask. Why not just admit that? Why don't leaders just say there's some things we don't understand. They're very complex and there are too many variables and we don't really know this is going but we're concerned. Why not just be straightforward with the global population rather than predicting in a way that's impossible to really know what's going to happen? Simplicity, people learn to do very simple messages and thought means that you don't know something. It doesn't sound like we're just thrown message, right? Yes, but it doesn't it? Don't you discredit yourself? It's hard to believe you when you lie a lot and it does have a counterproductive effect. I mean, if they're telling me that the Maldives won't exist, you know what I mean? It's like I, but they still exist. I just don't believe you after a while. Don't they destroy their credibility talking like that? Apart from that, you see, we're still working and people still think that basically loads of shots, it makes perfect sense. So last question which I really don't understand, but climate protesters in Europe have been destroying in Renaissance paintings, but no modern art, but all Christian art in the name of ending climate change. How do you get from a concern about global temperatures to destroying art? What is that? It's a way to express yourself. Why certain people in the certain moments of change choose them to express themselves in this way? How do I know? That's a realm of another science and not specialist in biatic or other types of the... But you'll admit there's something very deep going on here. When there are too many changes happening in the very short period of time, it's increased basically stress in the humans. In Greece, the stress going to very different manifestation. So maybe it's not so bad that global warming chosen like bikini, which we need to fight. Just little bit change there and go. Do you think that not everyone's... But what are we beginning a change period or we in the middle of it or are we coming to the end of a change period globally? We're starting. We're starting. We're starting. Most dangerous time I've shed. Well, not happy note. I'm Trevor Monechenko. Thank you. Thanks for watching our YouTube channel. We hope you'll subscribe to it. And by the way, you can hit the little bell on there and get notifications every time we produce a video. We hope you'll do that also.