the general gonna experience. So I feel like there's like a backlash happening. You know, I feel like it's interesting, like being pregnant, you really, I've started getting like obsessed with, you know, everything you put in your body, you know? And just the idea of just drinking water. It's like a full-time job, like where am I getting my water? Right. Because it's either my choices are fluoride or microplastics. And I'm not having a baby with a small taint. I'm telling you that right now. Yeah, do you ever check yourself for Thalley? It's while you were... Shit. No. No. What do you do that? I did the Thalley age test. It's different. Oh. Thalley it's your microplastics. It's like chemicals that leach out of plastics. I mean, I for sure got them. Well, everybody out of it. No way I don't. Yeah. There was a study that they did recently that was like, what is it? Was the number like 90-something percent of people with Thalley's in their body? Something nuts. Also, there's this guy I don't want to plagiarize his work. I think he's a chief con. He wrote that DNA waybook about how their micro, the forever chemicals in women's yoga pants. Right. In the club. It's in Astra turf. Why? It's about fucking baby power. Dude, we used to put it in our underwear before basketball game. Yeah. 50, there's been 50,000 lawsuits. They've paid, I think over eight or nine billion, which is probably nothing to them, but women getting ovarian cancer from the asbestos in it. Yeah. The minors of the talc. Yes. Yeah, that's what I was reading that talc and asbestos are offered in the same spot. And they don't filter it out well. To what? They didn't even test to see if the talc has the spestus in it sometimes. Johnson and Johnson's gotten away with some wild shit. Well, that's a wild one. I just do. Did they know? They were thinking these. What I want to know is did they know? Like did they know that sometimes their talc has asbestos in it? It was just too problematic to sift it out and figure out what's what? What is the deal with that? Find out what's the deal with like talc and stuff. I think the minors definitely complain. My guess is it is a similar trajectory to the. Oh, here it is. Because talc and asbestos are minerals found close together when talc is mined and may contain traces of asbestos. Talc and powder still in the ingredient in a number of cosmetic brands. As recently as November of 2020, a study found that 14% of the talc containing makeup tested contained asbestos. That's wild. Can I tell you a lot of my girlfriends when they act insane? I asked a couple questions like what birth control are you on and what hair products and makeup are you using? Because you're just putting chemicals. And I mean your skin is your biggest organ. Right. You're just the amount of chemicals women just put on their bodies in their bodies. They knew for decades. To the asbestos learned in its baby powder. Oh my God. That's crazy. This is Reuters. I want to say it was in St. Louis, but it was over 50,000 lawsuits. Oh my God. That's so crazy. John Sir Johnson didn't tell the FDA that at least three tests by three different labs. From 72 to 75 it found asbestos in its talc. In one case that levels reported as rather high. Who's as rather? This is rather than that context. What kind of numbers were we talking about? They were rather high. The thing that really freaks me out is even natural remedies are starting to be bought up by these corporations. So you know, Bragg's apple cider vinegar. Bill Gates bought it. Oh God. Bill Gates now owns one of the few natural healthy tonics we had and he's putting the apples in it. Oh the appeal. The appeal, the creepiest. Oh, what is that? That's like a coating that they spray on the outside of vegetables. Some schmegma to keep the apples preserved longer. Is it just apples? It's not a big apple, bro. It's just a simple apple. It's just an apple computer. It's just the poise of the green apples. You just asked too. But yeah, it's like for Costco apples to stay fresh or longer. But what is in it? I would love to know. I would love to know. These motherfuckers, they can, they get stuff out there before anybody's aware that these things are a problem. And then like years later, like what's in it? Talk asbestos. Yeah. And then you don't find out to later. So they're talking about this and just being like, not being suspicious about like shit apples last for four weeks. I feel like Bill needs a hug. Like why are you working so hard? Did you see the video of him against trees? What? Bill Gates, look at Bill Gates against him. Oh, he thinks you should bury all the trees. He's like, I don't plant trees. Like he doesn't believe in trees. Someone needs to blow this guy. I volunteer his tribute. I'll jump on this for me. I don't know what. I mean, between, and then I guess he owns half of the McDonald's potatoes for the franchise. Bill Gates gets real about climate change. Planting trees is complete nonsense. But the end of the oil and gas era is finally in sight. Planting trees is complete nonsense. We don't think planting trees is good. All right, planting trees, don't they make oxygen? How would it be nonsense to have something that filters carbon dioxide and makes oxygen? I think he's done too much of that appeal. They'm circling the Microsoft founder, Bill Gates and supporting chopping down 70 million acres of trees. But the truth is more complicated. Oh, is it? What's complicated? Shock. There's a video of him, like being very glib about it. Yeah. Promoting deforestation. OK. Cool cause. Well, I think he kind of wants to regulate the weather, right? Let's start up company. There's a unique concept for the removal of trees to protect California forests.