You arrive at the same conclusions I do. 100% of the time, at least on Twitter. Yeah, it's an instinct. It's like, I think you begin with a certain inclination, like view of who's running the country and how you feel about them and why you hate them. And then everything else just kind of falls from the ground. It may even be deeper than that. It's like, what's important to you, loyalty, honesty, children, dogs, totally. Yeah, you took it. You got in life too. Yeah, I'm like, we're roughly the same age or obviously. Right. Like, a lot older, but in general, like, where the same older? I think I'm like a year older. Where do you go? 1967. OK, so you're two years older than that. OK. Congratulations. I'm here. Probus, do you? Yeah, it's interesting. I think about lies the way I do about alcohol. I just don't want it in me at all. Yeah. Yeah. Well, because you end up deluding yourself, which is the one of the times you can consciously deceive other people for whatever goal. You can tell yourself it's justified. And maybe sometimes it even is. But the worst thing is to delude yourself. Like to deceive yourself. There's nothing worse than you did yourself. You did not know it. I mean, I've repeated so many lies in my life. If you're unknowingly that I just don't want to do that again. But wait, thank you for setting up that Snowden meeting. Oh, I knew you guys were going to love each other. I was actually hoping he would change his mind and doing an interview. I think it was a good step to doing one of those. How is, yeah, and even if I never interviewed him on camera, I was just grateful to meet him. But so you are the reason that we know any of this information. You were the guy who broke the story. It did feel to me like Snowden was more important for the US government to capture and kill Ed Snowden, an American citizen than any foreign terrorist. Well, it was the biggest leak of top secret documents from the US Security State by far. He won't any like planned it. So I'm going to take you. I mean, you're talking about the NSA, which is supposed to be like our meeting intelligence agency. He was in it stealing all their stuff over months, figuring out how not to get caught. He walked out with it. He went to Hong Kong with it, having, they have no idea any of that happened. And he was just waiting for us to come and then passed it all to us and like put it in all secret places. Like the only thing he cared about was getting that out before he ended up, you know, imprisoned or killed or whatever. He was so desperate for us to get there. Why did he do it? I mean, I really think it's for the reasons he said. like he really felt portrayed. You know, he went to enlist in the Iraq war. He enlisted in the army. He wanted to go fight in Iraq. And obviously you do that because you believe the mythology 100% country. And the more he saw, the more he realized it was, you know, a fraud and it makes you like feel betrayed, like ethically betrayed. Like people who want to go fight in wars, obviously have like a code of ethics already, right? They're saying like, I can wish my respect life for something that is greater than myself. And then when you realize that like what you're told is greater than yourself is in fact a total lie that you're fighting for completely different reasons. You feel betrayed and then the question is like, what is really bigger than myself? And he, like I said, he thought he was gonna be killed or spend the rest of his life in prison. If I had to bet we, we weren't even discussing the possibility that he would end up free. It was inconceivable. That was the darkness that hung over this whole thing. The whole time when we were doing it, I was very excited about the story. We were plotting, we were strategizing like it was under but the whole time I felt this like sadness that this person had come to like admire and respect so much. I was never gonna say again, he was gonna end up in prison for the rest of his life. I think that was for, that wasn't like a possibility. It was like almost inevitable. And he knew that. Yeah, of course. Yeah, I mean, like obviously you don't, if you're at all ethical, like not just a journalist person, you don't use somebody as a source without making sure they understand the risk they're taking in the like consequences. But he, you know, I remember the first conversation that happened when I started talking to him, he was like all well versed in the espionage act and like every single law that would be used against him, he fully understood he was sacrificing his whole life. He had to hide it from his girlfriend, who he wanted to marry. That was the, he was totally, we're totally in love but he couldn't have her own know anything because she would in them and complicit and he was concerned she'd be vulnerable. You know, they would go after her, start charting where their crimes to get at him. So we had to keep it all from her. He just disappeared. It was like I need to go on a trip provided to business. So I mean, you're describing like one of the most ethical people I've ever met, one of the most principled people ever. Totally. It's kind of revealing that he's considered like the criminal. The criminal yet because he actually exposed real crimes and that's what always happened is the people who exposed the crimes. I mean, like Daniel Ellsberg had documents showing that the US government was telling American citizens they knew they were gonna win the war at exactly the same time internally. They said they knew they could never win the war in Vietnam. And like many other eyes too, he was like, you know, Daniel Ellsberg worked at the highest levels of the government forever. I mean, he got a PhD in nuclear policy and then, you know, was at the at the rank corporation with some of the most secret access ever. And then he just couldn't believe what he was seeing. Like inside these documents comparing them to the public statements. And he was like, how am I gonna live with myself with the rest of my life if I don't, you know, make this known. And he was exactly the same thing. But of course, at the time he was completely vilified as a trader, a Russian agent, but they think a hater of America. Yeah, I mean, everybody like who wasn't on the lactated in Ellsberg, and the only reason he didn't spend the rest of his life in prison is because of the misconduct of breaking, they broke into a psychoanalyst office to try and discover his psychosexual secrets to discredit him for. That was like that whole CIA group that did the Watergate break and they also broke into his psychoanalyst office and tried to steal all those files. And then when they couldn't, they wanted to break into the psychoanalyst home. And then that was like the one thing that he had permission for. But when that was discovered, he had judged through the case outs solely because the government misconduct, had they not, he would have absolutely been convicted. But he had the, he had the support effectively of the American media. I mean, Daniel, he bit because he, he commandeered them. That's like the first thing I do with Snowden was I went to, we went to every major media that we wanted to work with in order to get them on our side because if we didn't, we would have just been to like outsiders who weren't, they were to paltocyg non-dronoa. So they tried to do that. Mike is a cop piece reported on them trying to assassinate Snowden, but also create theories to arrest myself and war are calling us information brokers and like eight or like the whole time James Clapper would always, when ever referred to us, he would never call us. Journalists, he would always call us Snowden's like eighters and the betters or Snowden's co-conspirators because they were trying to create a theory that they could arrest us. That's why they didn't go back to that's why another war and I traveled for a year. They were being super threatening. You know, I had the best lawyers for the writing and the kinds of get air called on the phone. It worked with Pam, you know those type of lawyers and they were like, if he comes back to New York, it becomes back to the US. Can you guarantee that you won't be arrested upon arrival? And they're like, right now we can't. So that's why you live out of the country. Well, no, I mean, I had to live in Brazil already, but I was always going back to the US. But for a year, I couldn't travel outside Brazil. The Brazilian government said we will always protect you because I did a lot of reporting on how the NSA was spying on Brazil. So in Brazil, like reporting was considered heroic and they were like, we'll never turn you over but we can't guarantee your protection if you leave Brazil. So I stayed in Brazil for only year. It's just a funny year. The Guardian was one of the places that ran the state of this information. And WikiLeaks, they partnered with WikiLeaks as well. But do you think the Guardian would run something like that now? No, zero chance. Why? I mean, they got taken over by completely, like the editor at the time was like one of those old school British editors. Yes. And now it's remembered as woman who's like best friends with the editor in chief of the, who was the editor for the intercept. You degraded it into a partisan outlet. And they're both the like standard liberal white woman. And they're all into the whole like everything and all that matters is Trump. They have no animosity toward the security state agencies any longer because they perceive them correctly as their political allies. And there's no chance that they would have, you know, run a story like that. So they're just totally correct. Whoever here any left liberals ever anymore talking about the evil of the CIA, the FBI, the NSA, the US security state never, never, ever. Maybe Homeland Security for being too aggressive with immigrants, but other than that, like that discourses gone. If you talk about the CIA and the FBI now, people back to its code, it is like Trump Trumpism and like more than you have deep state, the deep state. Like they mock the idea that there's a deep state. That's like been fundamental to left-wing politics for as long as I can remember. And now it reads as like, you know, Trumpian right-wing. But it's just, it's an, you know, any country run by its Intel and law enforcement agencies as an authoritarian country. It's not a democratic country. They were built to be outside of the democratic system. There's no, there's built to be a secret agency within the government that is immune to democratic accountability. And the amazing thing is when they had those hearings like after the Twitter files and all of that, every single Democrat stood up and said, like when Matt Tavey went testify, they were lecturing him saying like, have you ever considered the fact that the people at the CIA and the FBI and our security state agencies are doing this to protect us not to harm us. Can you imagine like, and like even though the, like AOC same thing, like even the left-wing sectors of the Democratic Party, there's no space to criticize. Are there any, are there any left liberals holding office that we started by the way or no? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, we're on, we're on. Yeah, I think we're on. Like we're useless. Yeah. Okay. I didn't know, but I'm fine. You know what an Irish exit is, right? What is this, what you mean by any way? This is how we chat. So I was like, okay, we're just waiting until, but yeah, I'm not sure that I'm a Irish exit that I'm not Irish for the record, but is when you sort of leave without saying anything. This is the Irish entrance. You sort of start with that. I'm sorry. Exactly. Just sit down and start with no formal start. Yeah, but I mean, that to me, you know, because it's always still bizarre to me that, you know, for a long time, I was considered, you know, like a left wing kind of leading journalist and finger. And then at some point, like with the emergence of Trump, I had this huge breach with the left. And my ally started becoming people on the right. I think that's now changed a little bit more since October 7th of the night. But I haven't changed a single one of my views. I think the primary, the two primary views that I hold that used to be identified with the left are now identified with the right is free speech. Yes. Which began as a left wing movement. I mean, the free speech movement began at Berkeley. Some of the most important first amendment free speech and a president were written by the most left wing journalist. And like it was left wing Jewish lawyers at the ACLU who are fighting for the most absolute is versions of free speech. And now free speech codes as a fascist value. And then the second is this critical scrutiny and focus that I've always had on the CIA, the FBI, the NSA. And that two now codes as right wing. And the reason for that is so disturbing. It's because those agencies became among the leading enemies of the Trump campaign and the Trump presidency. That's where a Russia gate came from was from the battles of the CIA at FBI. They were anonymously leaking every day. The New York Times and the Washington Post. All kinds of information that turned out to be false. But that was designed to sabotage Trump's campaigning and presidency and Democrats looked at that and said, why would we have any problem with these agencies? They're on our side. And they are on that side. And this inversion of politics. And then you have things like, neo-cons almost entirely migrating to the Democratic Party where when I started talking about politics in 2005, neo-cons were being talked about as bloodthirsty hyped variant types, not season-like. That's how liberals talked about them. And now the most influential pundits and liberal politics are like Bill Crystal and David Frum and Nicole Wallace and all those Bush, Liz Cheney. Liz Cheney was hero of the year. By Mother Jones in 2022, Mother Jones is, you know, like a hardcore leftist radical. Who like you? I mean, the idea that 100 years from now when these paper named after her were be naming Liz Cheney as hero of the year. Like when people say like why have you changed, what have you changed? I'm like, you're the one naming Liz Cheney hero of the year. I hate the Chinese as much as I hated them 20 years ago. And this inversion of politics is so radical and so visible and so transparent and so abrupt, but it's changed almost everything. It does seem like maybe a lot of the kind of ACLU positions which for the record I always liked. I always like Nat Hentoff for example. Oh, wonderful man. But it seems like maybe a lot of it wasn't sincere. And it was as soon as, you know, the ACLU kind of took power over American society then it was like now we have something to protect. Now we're not on the side of the underdog. Well, it's over the other day. I think there was authenticity to the ACLU in the sense that, you know, like the, I remember this from childhood. It was like one of the most influential events for me. Even though it was only 10 at the time when it happened, I just became like very interested in it and started reading a lot more about it as a teenager. In 1978, which was when the American Nazi party, which was, you know, like a band of like 30 losers and misfits. But they like were walking around and not see. Yeah. Costumes and stuff. They applied for a parade permit in Skokio, Illinois. On North Shore, Chicago overwhelmingly Jewish suburb. Not just overwhelming in the Jewish suburb, but particularly known for having a huge population of Holocaust survivors. People were in actual camps. So imagine the trauma for people like that to see people in actual Nazi uniforms marching through their town. People with swastikas on their, you know, armband. Pretty heavy. Yeah. They had their permit rejected on the grounds that it was a threat to public safety or whatever. But obviously it was politically and ideologically driven because the people of Skokio hated the ideology of the Nazi party for obvious reasons. And the ACLU, despite being composed almost entirely of leftist Jewish lawyers and having donors that were overwhelmingly leftist Jews who were donating to the ACLU in part because they were also defending the civil liberties of communists in the 50s and 60s. You know, communists were barred from becoming lawyers and being admitted to the bar because their ideology was considered to prove poor character and fitness in the lake. And a lot of those precedents came out of, you know, the idea that you can suppress communist speech in the ACLU fought to preserve those free speech rights. And then they did the same for the American Nazi party. That position that they took and ultimately prevailed on was something that destroyed the lives of almost every single one of those lawyers in the organization. I mean, almost every Jewish supporter of the ACLU, including one who worked there, Clinton discussed, turned off their donations and discussed, it basically destroyed the organization, came very close to bankrupting it forever. And that's what made it so interesting to me was that they were so devoted to this principle that obviously was in defense of a view they obviously found not just disagreeable, but horrific, to the point where they were willing to sacrifice their careers and reputations and pursued that principle and I just remember being so enamored of that posture. So they have proven that they, and even now you have like a few of the remnants, you have a few of these remnants of like old ACLU lawyers. For example, they represent right now the NRA because the Cuomo, the Intercomo administration sought to destroy the NRA explicitly by threatening banks, by threatening advertisers, by threatening anyone who's doing business with the NRA that they want their state contracts cut off. And the ACLU, like the old lawyers at the ACLU, like the real free speech ones looked at that and said, obviously you can't have the state government setting out to destroy a political advocacy group because they're hatred for their ideology and represented the NRA and sued the state of New York and actually won on the ground said Intercomo had violated the free speech laws. But primarily like so many institutions in the wake of Donald Trump, they became completely corrupted, in part because they were for the first time, you know, they would post like we're gonna take Trump to court on this and we're gonna take Trump to court on that and they were turned into heroes. Like the ACLU had been pretty marginal while their whole existence, they were flooded with tens and then hundreds of millions of dollars and they became this very well funded powerful organization and they knew that they were captured as a left liberal advocacy group solely to destroy Trump and now essentially the entire organization is unrecognizable. You know, and you have that key event where they defended the right of Nazis or White nationalists to march through Charlottesville, they represented them and then you had that woman who was killed by one of the parade protesters, the White nationalist protester who ran over Heather Hire and that caused this huge uproar in the ACLU, people who worked on like LGBT issues or like immigrant issues saying, why are we representing white nationalists in their free speech rights? And it's like, do you know anything about the organization that you actually applied for a job and then joined but they didn't and that was on the ACLU for the first time you're treated by issuing this memo saying in the future we're gonna weigh the value of free speech versus other political values. So many other instances and where they've taken positions that would have been completely anathema to the ACLU and to me this is so illustrative of what happened to like left liberal political culture the parts of it I used to really like is that it was renounced all in the name of defeating Trump which in turn had all kinds of financial values and benefits and benefits and power like. So if you're paying any attention to all of what's going on in the world you probably asked yourself what would I do? Not just for myself but for the people who love me and I'm responsible for my family what would I do if things really went south either for a short period or a longer period if there was an emergency, how would I respond? Well of course you need food and water, you need security somewhere to protect yourself and your loved ones, you probably have taken care of all of that. But one problem you may not have addressed is what do you do about medicine? There's a medical problem when there's not readily available medical care what do you do for your family? And that's a tough question to answer actually but another is an answer and it comes from Jason Medical. It is a personalized emergency supply of medicines you might need antibiotics, other life-saving medicines to treat a long list of problems. You get that bacterial illnesses, respiratory infections, skin infections, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Things that could come up and happen when you can't just drive over to the doctor. This is preparation and for its cost, probably well worth it. But find out for yourself, go to jacemedical.com to get emergency stock of common medicines for yourself and your family. It'll all be reviewed by a board certified physician and dispensed by a licensed pharmacy at a fraction of the regular costs, not crack pot stuff, it's essential. I have it, you should too. Use the promo code TUCKER at checkout for an extra discount but don't wait until you need it. It's worth doing now. jacemedical.com. So many questions, just take a quick detour. What's so scary is, I never liked any of the people in the ACLU, like I don't think I wanna have dinner with them but I like you absolutely admired almost revered their commitment to principle. You know, I'll die for your right to say something that I hate. Okay, so I love that and I still do love it. That was on the left, it was the best thing about the left, that in their anti-war instincts, in my opinion, it's all gone. So it kind of migrated right and considered to start talking a lot about free speech to my joy. And then, you know, I also credits some of the US security state around the whole area right now on the way to prepped all of that. All of that conversion happened. But then, you know, six months ago, all of a sudden you have people in the right being like, no, well, you know, that speech is violence. If you're making people threatened by saying things they don't like, it's like stealing almost word for word, the language of the, what are these two called? Snowflakes? Yeah, we're like the social justice work. So maybe we need hate speech laws now. And then all the Republicans vote for hate speech laws. And so it is, first of all, let me just say that like, this has been there for a long time working this huge contradiction in right-wing politics. And I actually have done shows well prior to October 7th, the you know, lots of people who said like you, oh, I used to really put my trust in the NSA and the NSA and the CIA and there was a Snowden reporting and all these other things seeing their abuses politically against Trump that made me realize, you know, you were right. So I had a lot of new right wing. I've not allies like people who were followers of my work and readers and like, but I was always aware of the fact and even saying you have a huge Israel exception embedded within your world view because it wasn't just in October 7th. It's been for a long time that while a lot of right wing speech has been targeted with censorship on campus. And I've been very vocal and objecting with that. Among the most common and frequent targets of censorship on campus and generally in the United States have long been Israel critics, professors who have lost 10 year because of it, who have gotten fired because of it. There was Norman Finkelstein who had this scholarship approved for 10 year at the Paul University in Allen, Dersha, what's went on in jihad against him to destroy his career and one and basically made him unemployable. There was a professor at the University of Illinois in 2014. Steven Silesha, who was given a contract for 10 year, they found tweets of his criticizing very harshly Israel for its 2014 bombing of Gaza. And he got fired. University of Illinois had to pay him a million dollars. They were but they were pressured by donors and vice. There was students, Jewish student groups saying, we don't feel safe on campus with someone who's so harshly critical of Israel. So this has been going on for a long time. This is not a new development. But since October 7th, and you know, I have a lot of friends in my life who are Jewish, you, but you know, were either skeptical of Israel or kind of apathetic to it. Who got really radicalized after October 7th. So Israel has kind of been on the back burner for a long time. So those contradictions weren't very apparent. Now you listen to the pro-Israel right. And they sound not ironically or like, you know, as parody or some strategic maneuver, they sound exactly like the left liberals who they've been heaping scorn on for the last decade. You cannot enter a discussion with an Israel defender without them immediately accusing you of being a racist if they disagree with you. Oh, you're an anti-Semite. And this is one of the primary right wing grievances against liberals for the last decade. Oh, the minute you disagree with the liberal they call you a racist, they call you a bigot, they call you a, you know, transphobic, they call you a misogynist. Try and have an argument, even like a substantive civil argument, disagreement, criticize their little, just a little bit and count down the number of seconds before you get accused of being motivated by bigotry and hatred. It'll be, you know, seconds. And these are the people who say, oh, I hate the tactic of accusing everyone. You disagree with the being a racist. That's their only tactic. They're go to tactic. The minute you question like, why is the US financing Israel's military and its wars when it not only hurts our own country, but when millions of Israelis are having better standard of living the millions of Americans, your Jew hater, you hate, you know, you have some kind of problem of Jews. So it's the same tactic there. Do they say that to you constantly? Yeah, being Jewish is not in any way does not give you any kind of immunity from that accusation like zero. Do are you an anti-Semite? What? It's so crazy. Yeah, I mean, well, it's the same thing. You know, it's like black. The other, the amazing thing is I did a debate with Alan Durchowitz and Matt Hatton Tuesday. It's about to come out, which nominally was about whether the US should go bomb yet another enemy of Israel in the Middle East, this one, Iran. But in reality, turning this broader neo-debate about neo-conservative dogma. He actually wants regime change. And they did a vote before and after and like 70% of the audience was with me, which was bizarre because it was the upper West side, but the 30% who were not were extremely evocal both during the debate. But then as I was leaving, I was accosted by, I would say, like two dozen of them. And they were hurling in salt and screaming and trying to be menacing. And their main argument was, how can you be a Jew and say these things in man Israel? And I was trying to say like, I don't think my being a Jew compels me to have a certain set of ideas about foreign policy or this foreign country. And the amazing thing about that is there has been the sense all the time. Like if you know, if you have a liberal C is a black conservative or a gay conservative, they'll immediately say, oh, you're an Uncle Tom, you have some psychological problem that yourself hating. How can you be a black conservative? How can you be a gay conservative as though being part of these demographic groups somehow compels you to embrace a certain political ideology. Like there's a relationship between your skin color and the political ideology that you have to embrace that was always some argument on the right, like why just because someone's back, are they automatically enslaved to the Democratic Party? And yet, so many people on the right now say, oh, if you're a Jew, you have to have unquestioning support for Israel. But like what if I don't? What if I think the government of Israel is actually wrong? But it's that tactic like you hate Jews or if you are Jewish, you're self hating. And then the hate speech, you know, I've been hearing from liberal for the last decade. Oh, yeah, we want free speech, but some things are over the line in our hate speech and the endangered minority groups because words or violence and words can incite violence. And this has been the thing that the right has been scoffing out like, oh, these little leftling snowflakes on campuses want the administrators to intervene and protect them from ideas that make them uncomfortable. There's nothing that we've heard other than that from the last seven months from right pro Israel conservatives, other than, oh, these poor little Jewish students at Harvard and Yale and Princeton who grew up extremely wealthy and go to the most elite colleges are now somehow endangered, even though there's no record of violence at these protests, like almost none because hearing chance that are pro-Palestinian or anti-Israeli make them feel vulnerable. Like the conservatives in Congress, they go least to Fauna and Virginia. Oh, Mike Johnson, they had like a horde of Jewish students from Harvard coming and saying, I don't feel safe at my school. The very things that conservatives have been mocking so viciously when that came from black students or trans students or immigrants or Muslims or whatever, the hypocrisy, the stench of it is suffocating and nauseating. Let's, from my perspective as an American, I think you're going to have any opinion on one in Israel. I'm not actually that interested. I personally like Israel. Whatever. The red line for me is this is my country. My birth rate is free speech. God gave me that right. You cannot take it away. And if you're telling me what I'm allowed to say in my country, your my enemy, I just kind of that simple. You can't tell me what to say or think period because I'm an American. Exactly. And if there were a consistent standard, like let's say there were a consistent period, like let's just walk back from there. But right. But if there were some consistent standard, like Western Europeans have hate speech laws, whatever, that kind of, they don't really apply them consistently, but at least there's like a dogma, like hate speech is not part of free speech. In the United States, we don't have a hate speech exception. The perfect. There is no such thing. So if you suddenly now start, you know, Pat, and it's not just in the discourse, they're passing laws. Oh, I'm aware. Like Greg Abbott issued an executive order that said there will be no more anti-Semitism, meaning anti-Semitism speech, anti-Semitic speech or ideas allowed in the state of Texas. And you have, I don't know if you saw the video this week, but there was a video emerging where a school administrator went to a group of pro-Palestinian protesters and said, I just want you to know if you chant from the river to the sea, Palestine will be free, or globalized the insipatta, you will be turned over to law enforcement. We will call the police on you and you will be arrested and held legally accountable. That is now a crime in Texas. They passed the law. Did you say that? Actually, yes. Yes. Yes. The whole point of Greg Abbott's executive order was to say no anti-Semitic speech is permissible in Texas any longer. You're allowed to have anti-Black racist speech. You're allowed to have anti-Muslim speech or anti-gay speech. Yeah. You can have anti-white speech. You just can't be anti-Semitic to the point where these students are now being told that if they do these political chants, no violence, no obstruction of buildings, nothing illegal, to chance themselves, the ideas themselves will be decreed illegal. Now, as you say, you don't have to hate Israel or whatever, but we talk all the time, you have at every pro-Israel rally in the United States, you'll hear people saying, wipe out all the Arabs, turn Gaza into a parking lot, Gaza belongs to Israel. We constantly talk about bombing this country, bombing that country. We're always advocating violence against this group, against this country. This country is a legitimate. There's only one country that has the protection of these laws, which is the country of Israel. You can't have these laws in the first place. No. If they were chanting expel Tucker Carlson from the country, well, I am Tucker Carlson. Obviously, I'm opposed to that. I would have exactly the same position that I have on this or any other speech-related matter, which is I'm an American. Every American has the right to see exactly what he thinks at all times, period. Period. I thought that was the whole point of the country. Listen, let me just say too that just because I hear this argument so much and I think a lot of people who are conservatives who understand that they're now veering into this territory, trying just to buy it by saying, look, we're only doing this because the left is And I think a lot of people who are conservatives who understand that they're now veering into this territory, trying just to buy it by saying, look, we're only doing this because the left has been doing it. We're not going to allow the left to do it. We're not going to do it constantly. That's the justification. And the thing is, this is the big delusion as I was saying, you know, about these protesters being fired as pro Israel critics have long been one of the most common targets of censorship. I'll just give you an example. There were 23 different red states, including Texas and Greg Abbott, but also New York and Andrew Cuomo, who well before, you know, in the Obama administration, and then in the Trump administration, past laws that said this, it said, if you are a contractor and you work with the state from now on, you have to sign a pledge that you do not believe in and will not participate in a boycott of the state of Israel. And I interviewed this woman, profile her once she was this speech pathologist in Austin, Texas. She was her speciality was she worked with children who had to be a boycott. So you can't refuse to buy Israeli products. Yeah, like there's a movement like, you know, when the 1980s, there was a movement to divest from South Africa, the boycott South Africa, not to go to South Africa, not to buy its goods in order to bring down the apartheid regime. So there's a similar movement called the boycott, divestment and sanctions movement. Like, let's not invest in Israel. That's not real. Israel, let's not support its products in order to end the occupation and give the the palettes in the United States in 24 different states. There was a, there's a law that says you cannot get a contract with the state. And last, you now sign this pledge saying you don't support this boycott and will not participate in a loyalty pledge to a foreign country. Only one. This is the amazing thing. You're allowed to boycott any other country in the world, including your own. You can boycott Peru. You can boycott South Korea. You can say, I'm not going to buy an Oregon boycott South Dakota. That's the other thing. It was constant. Andrew Cuomo, who has a, who, who did this by executive order said that anyone who boycott Israel has no right to have a contract, he wrote a Washington Post op. The headline was if you boycott Israel, will boycott you. Not six months before that and six months after by executive order, he required state employees to boycott the state of North Carolina and then the state of Indiana in protest of their bathroom bills that they enacted for, you know, if you, you have to use the bathroom of your biological choice. So not only are you allowed to boycott your own country and harm economically, the citizens of other states. Andrew Cuomo actually ordered boycotts of American states while at the same time banning anybody from boycotting the state of Israel. It's a single country that has all kinds of special privileges and rights. And let me just tell you another thing. Do you think it's saying anything about this? Well, I was writing about all the time, but few people cared. Finally, those cases got brought to the courts and thankfully courts of overwhelmingly almost unanimously said, this is a great violation of the First Amendment are being struck down. But the, I'll tell you something so amazing. This just kind of encapsulates it for me. So Ben Shapiro, a good friend of yours, and a long time political ally. Obviously, one of the main kind of unifying views of conservatives is that we shouldn't have job sell aside for certain groups. We shouldn't have, we shouldn't judge people based on the color of their skin or their ethnic group when hiring, or their religion or it should be a meritocracy or can you do the job best? Exactly. So Palantir, which is a intelligence, uh, agent, an intelligence corporation that was started by Peter Thiel and that has all kinds of contracts with the CIA, the defense department, but it's run by um, Jewish vocal supporters of Israel announced in October and November after hearing all the stuff about Jewish students being discriminated against because of the views or whatever. And it was never really Jewish students. It was pro Israel students, students who support the war because a lot of these protests have overwhelming numbers of Jews inside these protests. Oh, yeah. So it's not a hostility towards Jews hostility toward anyone who supports this war that the protest agents. Palantir announced that they were creating a hundred and eighty new jobs that were available exclusively for Jewish students on campus who felt like they were being made uncomfortable. It was a hundred and eighty jobs. No Christians could apply. No Muslims could apply. No atheist could apply. No black people only for Jews. Ben Shapiro saw that and he went on to Twitter and above that Palantir announcement said something like, wow, this is fantastic. And then after his own followers spent the day saying, what do you mean? This is exactly the thing you're supposed to oppose at the end of the day. He was kind of forced to say, yeah, you know what, maybe it would be best if it were open to everybody. But then like what's the point of the announcement? He would never have commented on obviously he was happy about that. Very wise same thing, you know, Ms like anti woke. This is identity politics is pure as it gets creating a hundred and eighty jobs solely for Jewish students. And I think very hard to make the case that Jewish Americans are like an endangered or marginalized minority in the United States. Very, very hard to make that case when she saw that announcement. She put this like very excitement. Wow, on top of it. And so you see this like utter and complete abandonment of what these people have been claiming were their principles, not even in defense of their own country or people in their own country, but this foreign government in Tel Aviv. And to, you know, when you watch something like that and you see a political movement expose itself as a complete fraud. Now, I should say there are a lot of exceptions to like hardcore conservatives like Chris Rufo has often condemned some of these bills you have to. Candice Owens has to. Tom Massey in Congress has been like incredibly steadfast to the point where a pack tried to take them out and failed. He just won his primary with like seventy six. But overwhelmingly, the pro Israel sector of the American right has proven itself to be such utter and complete frauds about virtually every value they spent the last decade pretending to champion and believe in. And it's been sickening to watch. The reason it's scary is, again, has nothing to do with Israel at all about which I have like less emotion than most Americans I apparently. I just don't care that much either way. But what's scary is if there's an alignment between left and right, which is to say everyone with institutional power, on the question of speech. In other words, if you say something I don't like, I can put you in jail, then it's a totalitarian country by definition, by definition. There is no totalitarian country in history that has offered free speech. And conversely, there's no totalitarian country in history that has refrained from using censorship, which is one of the reasons why it's so bizarre that if you now wave the free speech banner, you're accused. It's code is like fascist. It's like, show me the fascist country that actually offers free speech and that doesn't use censorship. It's like a hallmark of fascism to do what you're doing. But you know, I think well, I know, and I've been attacked recently for just asking questions on by the right. I've been on the right my whole life like since childhood and just asking, oh, you're just asking questions like, oh, yeah. That's kind of important to be. But here's the other thing. It's my job. There's another amazing part of it is like, you know very well that under Trump, and I think this is one of the things that Donald Trump has has done that has been very positive is he dragged the Republican Party away from the kind of Bush, Cheney, Neocon, orthodoxy and even like going back to the kind of poor war of endless wars and stuff by saying like we shouldn't be focusing on all these other countries. We should be focused on our own citizens, especially because they're not doing very well by every metric. Right. Every city is filled with like addicts and communities that are being devastated and falling infrastructure. You compare the infrastructure in the United States. Every time I come here, I like come to an airport and see roads and you go to, you know, Asia or like places in the Gulf or and even in Western Europe, you know, the difference is so obvious. It looks like it's a crumbling country on every level and we're spending all this money to benefit other countries. So the Republican Party has basically rebranded as America first, you know, based on the idea that our primary priority should be the people of our country. I can't tell you how many Republican members of Congress or Republican journalists or pundits. I've interviewed over the last two and a half years who say, we can't be financing the war in Ukraine because we don't have the money to be financing other countries' wars. And we should be doing that. Our focus should be on our own country. And every single time well before even October 7th, I would ask him, does that also apply to Israel? And they would kind of stammer and stutter and not want to say it. But now, you know, you say like, you don't care about Israel and I totally understand that. The problem though is that Israel has received far more aid from the United States than any other country by far over the last three to four decades. We pay for their military. We pay for every time there's a new war. We send them billions and billions of more on top of the $4 billion a year that Obama negotiated with Netanyahu. Not only do that, but we arm them the bombs that they use to kill thousands of billions come from the United States. And I think worst of all, we isolate ourselves from the entire rest of the world. Do you know how many votes are been at the UN over the past seven months where the entire world is on one side and Israel and the United States stand alone on the other with, you know, a couple of those tiny little countries that we often bribe, like Micronesian, Virgil, islands, the part of the coalition of those who like to call that Micronesian. Yeah, exactly. Micronesian. So, you know, it's also just the standing in the world like our sacrificing of soft power. So we give up so much for Israel in so many other ways that if you're an American citizen, you have to care about it even if you don't want to. You know, one of the stories we did. What I meant was I'm feeling emotional. I just have like gut level affection for because I've had such a nice time there. And I like so many Israelis personally and know a lot. And I just like there's nothing more wonderful than having dinner in Jerusalem on a summer night. It's just I just I have a lot of affection. I guess that's what I'm saying. So I'm not sort of animated by, you know, any anything really. I'm just like trying to I live here, sort of my kids, so did my ancestors. It's like I just care about this country. And if you're changing my life or stripping my rights from me that we've had for 250 years on behalf of any other place, you are my enemy. Like it's just that simple. You're my enemy. I mean, I don't know what to say. I don't want even to even have this conversation. Well, that's the amazing thing is that the devotion to Israel is so great and so incomparable the motion of any other foreign country that it's to the point that their supporters, supporters of Israel are willing to deconstruct and erode and sacrifice the core basic rights that is Americans by definition we're supposed to enjoy. Won't accept that. That's another point except that is what's happening. This is my country. I'm from here. I'm going to die here. I will not accept that. And I don't care what you call me. You can't take away my right to say what I think. That is the foundational right in the United States of America. And it's the only thing that prevents us from becoming, you know, Stalinist period. Who came up with the idea that you only vote in November in elections? No, you vote every single day with your time and your money. You show your preferences. You put your support behind things you believe in and you withhold support from things you don't. You can do that with your cell phone, by the way. There's a wireless company that if you're not on board with what's going on in this country at the highest levels, you can make your preference known. It's called pure talk. It's probably something you should consider. It is proudly veteran led. It is led by veterans of the US military and it supports American jobs by their customer service team. All of them are right here in the United States. Whether company can say that, by the way, not many. It proudly supports great charities, charities that you would support yourself like America's warrior partnership. Every dollar you spend some of that money goes to those charities every single month. When you switch your cell phone service to pure talk, you know what you will not be sacrificing coverage because pure talk puts you on America's most reliable 5G network. And with playing starting at just $20 a month for unlimited talk, taxed lots of data, you can literally cut your monthly cell phone bill in half while doing something that you can feel good about and believe in the average family saves almost $1,000 a year. So no contract, no cancellation fee in a 30 day, a 30 day money back guarantee. It makes switching easy. Go to pure talk dot com slash tucker and you'll save it additional 50% off your first month. Once again, that is pure talk dot com slash tucker to switch your cell phone service to a company. You can be proud to do business with. Well, I remember you and I talked about this on your show. I think three, four weeks, maybe after October 7th when all these calls for restrictions on speech were starting to emerge. And one of the things you said, which I remember was by some weird inversion or collection of various events, it has been the American right over the last decade that has been defending because of free speech, which is absolutely true. It's one of the reasons why I've had more alignment with the right than with the lap because that's a primary cause of mine always has been always will be. And you said if the right now starts abandoning that and advocating for censorship because now the views that are being targeted are no longer ones they love, but ones they hate namely criticism of Israel, the right will never have credibility ever again to pretend that it believes in free speech. Because you know, if you go to North Korea and you praise the government, you're not going to be bothered at all. You can go to any country, any tyrannical country, if you express the views that people on power want to hear, you're always going to enjoy the blessings of free speech, free speeches for dissidents, free speeches for people who have opposing views, minority views. And so to watch the right wave the banner free speech because it was conservative speech being targeted, everyone will always be in favor of free speech and defense of their own views. The only real task for the authenticity of a free speech advocate is when it comes time to the fan free speech for the ideas you hate most, which is why that what the ACLU did was so admirable. I search out on purpose the cases where the views I hate most are being assaulted and censored to defend free speech there because that's the only way you can really defend that value in a meaningful way. And defend your country. Like what does it mean to defend the United States? It means to defend the bill of rights. The thing that makes this country, it's on our market economy. It's our system of government is based on the idea that you have rights you were born with. They were not conferred to you by government and cannot be taken away by government. And that is that's the unique idea. That is the idea. And if there's any idea worth defending is that. And if that goes away and people who have more powerful computing power or more money or you know access to the levers of power can use violence in a state sanctioned way. If they can stop you from saying what you think, if they can force you to believe certain things, we're just done, we're done like that. You're not a little wrecking my country. Actually, that's how I feel about that. Well, and also, you know, the we're talking about snow earlier. I mean, one of the real cause that motivated that ever snowed in was not so much the right to privacy. Obviously, that was a big part of opposing this balance date. What it really was was preserving this incredibly new and powerful innovation that had emerged in his adolescence that he became very enamored with, which was the internet. The internet is a remarkable weapon for citizens to communicate with one another to spread information to organize without the ability of state and corporate power to intervene and control it. And he saw the degradation of the free internet, which was always the principle. You go back to the mid 90s with the the proclamations about the importance of the internet was always a free internet. Keep your hands off the internet. That was the whole point. Yeah. And they degraded it into the one of the most powerful systems of surveillance ever created. But this cause of free speech really means now mostly free speech on in the place where we communicate most, which is the internet. Now is why the Biden administration systemic attempt to force these big tech companies to remove the scent that two separate courts have now concluded where one of the gravest salts on the first minute was so offensive to me. But the similar thing it comes from the other direction. And if you take away the right of free speech, it not only means it doesn't only mean that people who descent lose the ability to express that descent without being punished. What it means even more seriously, and I think more destructively that we don't have to think about is that it enables power centers to propaganda is without challenge. We drown in a closed system of information that power centers approve of because they've eliminated all these other ideas as disinformation or hate speech or incitement of violence or whatever theories they invent to erode free speech. And then we're hopeless. We're totally impotent. Every other right we have doesn't matter because that's the, that's our minds are controlled. Our mindset, what we believe is manipulated. So we'll be obedient. We'll be conformist. Those other rights won't be necessary because we'll be good conformist obedience citizens who don't realize how propaganda is we are. And that is the, what's at stake. And so when you see any group of people, especially ones who claim to be believe in free speech, suddenly abandon that and start cheering for censorship as a framework, it's incredibly dangerous because even as a self interest matter, you know that this system will eventually be used against you, even if it's not at the moment. And conservative of all people should know how easily will be weaponized against them. And yet they're cheering for the very systems that they've spent a decade now claiming to hate along with all these scripts about everyone's a racist who disagrees with me. And no, this isn't free speech. This is hate speech, you know, all or hate hate speech hopes hate crime soaks is like Jesse Smollett hate crimes hoaxes like Barry Wieseside pushed this idea that there are Jewish students walking around and suddenly being attacked by violent hordes of anti-Semitic mobs and being stabbed in the eye with Palestinian flags. And it all began with this one woman who is a long time Israel activist who claimed that it happened. And she went all over the media claiming I was stabbed in the eye with a Palestinian flag. There was nothing wrong with her eye. There was nothing wrong with that all because it didn't happen. A someone waving a flag was walking past her and it brushed by her. And that was a hate crime soaks. And then Mike Johnson, the Speaker of the House, went two days later the Holocaust Museum and turned that one hate crime soaks that this one single or incident said, we are now a country where Jewish students cannot walk out on the street without being endangered or being stabbed in the eye with a Palestinian flag. So every single component of left-wing culture that the American right has been heaping scorn on and viciously mocking and deriding for a decade are now their defining beliefs and tactics in defense of this foreign country. That it's so interesting. So you mentioned Barry Wieses. Barry Wieses, I think, pretty popular, I don't have strong feelings either way, but she seems very popular on the right and some parts of the right. So here's someone who's a liberal, who's opposed to free speech and is a liar. How did she all of a sudden beke? Oh, it's like she's everything concerns are supposed to dislike or oppose. Maybe not personally straight charming actually. But like how did she become like a darling of conservatives? Well, I think we talked about this before, but Barry Wiese got hired away from the Wall Street Journal by the New York Times on the same day that they also hired Brett Stevens away from the Wall Street Journal. And all the liberals were focused on and obsessed with Brett Stevens. They were all up in arms and angry that Brett Stevens was a climate denier and now he was going to have the spaces in New York Times columnist. But I was trying to get everyone to understand that the far more significant higher, the far more consequential person was Barry Wiese because I had seen her, she's extremely shrewd, she's very cunning. She understands how media work, she's very smart. And I know I've gotten to know her personally and she's impossible to dislike as a person. She's an incredibly charming and I think like genuinely compassionate, like you cannot dislike her as a person. And that's an important weapon. But what the one of the reasons why she became a folk hero is because she resigned from the New York Times with such a kind of denunciation of the New York Times like ideological dogma. There was a lot of truth to that for sure. But then, you know, if you actually look it and I think this is one of the things that I've only become, I've only come to understand recently is that there are a lot of, there's been a lot of focus over the last say decade under the banner of anti-woke and that's really Barry Wiese's kind of of brand. It's like I'm against woke ideology. I'm against media capture by ideology. And there was all this fixation on college campuses. And a lot of times people were like, why are 40 year old pundits in journalists constantly talking about what 19 and 20 year olds are doing on college campuses like almost not just this proportion of but a little bit creepy, especially Ivy League college. Like actually who gives a shit in a country that's dying of fentanyl these where people are so unhappy that life expectancy is declining. Like we're spending a lot of time talking about Columbia student exactly. And like you can say, we're looking at future leaders and it's true. But 19 and 20, you know how fucking stupid I was when I was 19 and 20 like the kind of ideal, idealism and naivete and just like my view of the world was so simple because that's part of being young. Like you kind of want that youth energy. But the real reason is that the thing that is very waste is obviously animated and cause is the cause of Zionism in Israel. That's I don't think she would even deny that. And there has been this fear on the part of the Israeli government in the pro Israel movement that the greatest danger of the Israeli cause is faces is the activism of students on college campuses where it's the only place where robust criticism of Israel is tolerated. And it's the movement as we were describing where this boycott, divestment and sanction movement has taken hold. And that was in part the thing that brought down a part that South Africa, which is a very close ally of both Israel and the United States and they were petrified that at that took hold, then that would become a very effective movement against Israel. We can get its position, we can get standing in the world. And so there were all kinds of strategic members of saying we need to target college campuses and make sure that this is that this climate is transformed. And the whole reason why people like Barry Weiss and Bill Ackman, who uses his billionaire status, something to become political activists, focus so much in college campuses wanting professors wanting a university president inspired. Bill Ackman led the way of saying any college student who signs that anti Israel petition will be permanently black bald and all his billionaire friends and hedge fund managers and corporate CEOs and people up, how long you're joined in is because they identified college campuses as the place where Israel criticism was bubbling over and was really being active. It's the same reason that TikTok got banned. You know, this TikTok ban, if you think about it, I thought it was because of China. No, okay, so I'm just kidding. Right. I know. So when it was first introduced, that was the idea, right? Like we can't have the Chinese Communist Party. Sorry, I'm gathering data as though like all of that data is not available on the open market. Like there was a big scandal that the CIA and intelligence communities were buying on the open market, huge amounts of data about American citizens. They're listening to us on this right now. Everything is tracked. You don't, why would China need to create an app to get all this buying information that they can buy from anywhere else? So and at the same time, like the people who run TikTok are pure capitalists, like the guy who's the CEO was born in Singapore, he went to the London School of Economics. Then he went to Harvard. He worked for McKinsey or Goldman Sachs, like their classic, all he cares about is money. But this idea of banning TikTok has been around for four years. And it couldn't get passed. It was what considered way to extreme, like banning American citizens who voluntarily choose to use this app to find communion, to spread ideas, to make themselves heard, to renews, taking that away from them or forcing a sale was considered and yet suddenly after October 7th, instantly an overwhelming bipartisan consensus formed in order to ban it, to ram through Congress and President Biden signed it. Why? You go to ask any one of the sponsors of this TikTok ban, why it finally got enough people to support it after spending so many years, not even near a majority. And they will all tell you that the reason is because they became convinced that there was far too much Israel criticism being permitted on TikTok. That was the issue that became the tipping point for banning an app that 180 million Americans, a third of the country, voluntarily choose to use. It was because of the Israel issue. And I think like we're required so often to tiptoe around this. You know, you get accused of like pushing anti-Semitic tropes that like Jews are behind everything. And I'm just not to live in a free country. Just leave me alone. They just want to live in a free country. That's it. Also, it's not just American Jews who are inculcated from birth with the idea that they have particular results of like evangelicals as people in the national security state. Like this country has such a special status and it holds and it's not me like speculating that Israel was the reason. The people who got the bill through Congress say that the tipping point was that all these members of the Democratic Party who previously resisted and demanding TikTok became convinced that that was one of the major sources that was allowing Israel criticism and pro-Palestinian speech, meaning like lots of videos circulating about, you know, gos and children dying. They wanted to ban the app or force it to be sold to an American conglomerate that would be far more susceptible to pressure from the administration like Google and Facebook have been to censor it that that was the reason they felt like the reason why young people turned against Israel because they were getting too much information on TikTok and it was too free. That should alarm everybody. Well, it's it's again, if you're an American and you just want to live in a free country, that's completely unacceptable. That's like there's no way to describe that as anything but a state clamp down on free speech, which is not allowed in the United States. That's totalitarian. Super simple. I'm really struck by how non-obvious that seems to be to everybody and I'm wondering like where's the, you don't have a bill of rights. You don't have a free country unless someone's fighting for it. And I don't see anyone with power fighting for it. So no, I mean, well, it's so interesting. I mean, first of all, I think we have to acknowledge the reason, you know, the founders when they created the bill of rights, guaranteed rights that they knew would otherwise be vulnerable if they weren't guaranteed for their rights. Like, that's the whole point. And the very first right, guaranteed in the bill of rights and the first amendment is the right of free speech. That was for a reason. They were kind of children of the enlightenment. The idea that there's no more ability for us to put our faith and centralized authority to decree truth. We were endowed with the capacity of reason and we're supposed to figure that out for ourselves without being so foundational to every way. Because we're not a slave. That is the marker of being a human being the right to think what you want and to say what you want. If you don't have that right, you are not fully human. There's right. And I feel that way is a Christian. I'm just going to say, I think God created people. There's inherent value in every person. And that's why it's so important to me. It's, it's actually bigger than America. It's like, are we going to treat people like human beings with dignity or we're going to treat them like objects? It's one of the things that ultimately distinguishes us from other animal species. It's exactly the reason to engage in critical analysis. And so, but conversely, the reason that right needed to be guaranteed is because we are all tempted to look at the views we find most threatening and to hate and to want those band and to kind of invent theories as to why they should be even if we believe that we're supporters of free speech like somehow these views that we hate most and find most threatening, those are something different. And you see the left having done that for the past 10 years by claiming that people who question gender ideology or inciting genocide against trans people or people who are opposed to racial reforms or affirmative action or people who hate black people, people opposed to immigration, hate non white people. So this is how they created these justifications for supporting censorship. And now the American, right, I don't want to say now in the sense that they suddenly started because like I said, it's been predating October 7th for a long time. But that's, you know, I don't think it's like so conscious that over where political central, I think they view Israel criticism as very dangerous and very threatening and they don't fight the human temptation that we all have to want the ideas that we most hate to kind of be out of you. You care about your own country, comma, which you run, which you run, you have an obligation to care about your country since it's your job to administer and run the country and preserve what we have for our children. You can't reach these conclusions like if you office holder in the United States, you have one job and that's to preserve and improve your country. And if that's not your main, you know, driving desire, then you're betraying your country. Yeah. And I mean, I think first of all, you know, we are all inculcated with in driving desire than your betraying your country. Yeah. And I mean, I think, first of all, you know, we are all inculcated with the idea from birth. I know I was that the United States is the greatest country. The world around the river then it's free to mind me. We were born in the Cold War where it was really horrible. We were not believed that, but even after, and we were given explanations as to why that was true. It wasn't just, you know, a declaration. And like one of the reasons was that we have freedoms guaranteed that other countries don't. That was free country. Do you mind when people would say exactly? Look, and we were taught to review the Constitution and the Bill of Rights and all of the values that it represented. So if you're willing to abandon those and sacrifice those, and this is the thing, it would like the left, the American left has been accused of being, I think quite valid, embracing censorship. But at least they're doing it. I don't mean to justify them just saying distinguishing it. At least they're doing it in defense of what they consider to be other Americans who live here. My Nordic groups who live here, and they think censorship is important to protect the ability of other Americans who are part of minority groups not to be endangered. They're, it's a totally misguided idea. They exaggerate the extent to which everyone's being endangered. I think racial relations on its states are better than they've ever been. But that's at least their idea. What the censorship we're talking about now is designed to do. It's to sacrifice the rights of Americans that is in order to benefit this foreign country. to which people in the United States have obviously more loyalty than they do to their own country. And I don't just mean American Jews. I mean a lot of evangelicals, I mean a lot of non-transition to people. And that is the part that is so bizarre and disturbing that the reverence for this foreign country. I mean, you could say anything you want about American leaders, about the leaders of your own country. You can say they're evil, they're criminal, they're corrupt, they're just a little more of a lot of people. Yeah, you could do any of that. You cannot do that about the leaders of this one foreign country, you can imagine, leaders about any other country you want, just not the leaders of this one foreign country. And like I said, I think the time to stop tiptoeing around that has long passed. Well, I agree with that. And I say that as someone who spent, I don't know, a couple of decades is sort of avoiding the topic just because, I mean, almost all my friends love Israel. I have no problem with that at all. Great love Israel. I mean, it doesn't bother me at all. I, as I've said three times, and I mean it, I just have great affection for the country and the people who live there, I'm like, hardly anti-Israel, like not even a little bit. I just care about my country and all of a sudden, there's like such a massive threat to our foundational rights stemming from this issue. And I think, of course, you face all sorts of, I mean, I've had people I know and really like and have known for decade, many decades, call me or text me, you know, you're really attacking me actually. And I always, I say exactly what I'm saying to you because I mean, I want to be asking you, I perceive and I'm wondering if you do. I do think like for the last say five or six years when you had your Fox News 8 o'clock show, I think it's not controversial to say that you were, if not, I think I would say the most popular and influential voice in American conservative politics may be second only to Donald Trump. And I've seen that for a long time. Only in the past seven months, when you started expressing some dissent on this particular issue. And it wasn't even anti-Israel, it was just, hey, why are we doing all this for this foreign country? Something you've been saying about Ukraine and many other countries, is there a real animus for the first time among certain factions of the conservative movement in the United States, including very prominent people, not just to criticize you, but to try and exclude you to try and destroy your reputation. Like we were talking about that fake report that you had launched a new show on Russian TV. And I watched the people who were celebrating that and spreading that, and there were people who a year ago would never have dared criticize you. This one issue, and same with Candace Owens, who was incredibly popular among conservatives as well, and you can point to other people, two, it's this one issue that can just be the ultimate wedge. And I'm wondering if you perceive that. I really try not to think about it. I think I don't want to become angry at all. And I think that just being as honest as I can be, I do think, and I have noticed this, if you start focusing on the Israel question, people get really angry about this stuff, really angry, and it takes over their brains. And I just don't want that. I think a fundamentally happy person, I have a wonderful family and wonderful friends, and I live in a wonderful place. And I don't want to focus, I don't want to go crazy and be like mad. Okay, and I also don't want the concerns of a foreign country or the arguments about that country to define my views. I care about where I live in my family and preserving what I grew up with. And I don't mean money. I mean, you know, your values and your rights and your structure. Exactly. So I just have really tried to ignore it and tried not to get involved. And I know that people love Israel so much, which again, which doesn't bother me at all. but that it makes them super emotional, whatever. But when you start to tell me that as an American, I can't say certain things in my country, I won't have it. I just won't grab it. So I just really feel like I was pushed into saying something. And I also have a special concern for Christians in the Middle East. And so I did, I've only done one interview in my life that challenged any. Which was about that pastor in the West Bank. Yeah, I don't know. I don't think there's nothing about him. And you know, I'm not like carrying water for him. I just think it's a totally fair question to say like, well, how are Christians doing in the Middle East? And the answer is not well at all. And maybe we should hear from them. That was my only agenda right there. And all of a sudden, like, you know, I get attacked personally as some sort of crazed Nazi or something that was too unreasonable for me. But even then, I was like, I'm not going to engage. I don't want to have these arguments. It's not worth it. I've got a million different interests. This is not a great interest of mine. And as I've said five times, I just don't care that much. But then the speech thing, when you're wrecking my country and lying constantly in encoding those lies into my laws, then just as my patriotic duty to be like, no. And yes, or you do get destroyed for that or do people try to destroy it. Obviously. And all of a sudden, very wise, who's like, you know, I've always gotten along with very well. I'm not a good, you know what I mean? Super charming. Right. Woman, totally agree, done some, a lot of things I like. All of a sudden, she's like telling Eli Lake, who I know I went to St. College. Just him, I've always liked Eli Lake. Write some hit piece on me saying that I'm anti-American. And like Ben, Ben Shapiro in the whole day, why are you not a lice actor? Totally. So I actually, I was shocked. I don't read anything about myself. I'm a little bit cut off. So I didn't know this happened. Someone sent it to me. Eli Lake attacked you. Eli Lake, whatever. I know, you know, a huge part of my life. But I've never disliked Eli Lake. So I text Eli Lake and I was like, you said I hate America in this piece. You've got my text, of course. I texted him. Why didn't you just call me and ask me if I've used an American? I would just tell you, because I think pretty transparent about my views. No response. I said, you wrote a piece about my views when you have my text, when you know me. Why don't you just ask me if my views are I'd happen to go on the record and tell you what I think of America. He didn't respond. So I hit him again. He's like, I guess I should have done that. I'm like, no, this is, I mean, again, I'm not gonna dwell on it or I don't wanna wine. I've no cause for whining at all in my life period. However, that's so dishonest that it's like, oh, that's how it works. But I think it's such a foreign point because you may have come to the obvious conclusion that the real debate is not between Republican and Democrat or socialist and capitalist, right left. The real battles between people who are lying on purpose and people who are trying to tell you the truth. It's between good and evil. It's between honesty and falsehood. And we hope we are on the former side. That's why we created this network of Tucker Carlson Network. And we invite you to subscribe to it. You go to Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. Our entire archive is there. A lot of behind the scenes footage of what actually happens in this barn when only an iPhone is running. Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. You will not regret it. So does let me say two things on this. One is I think the thing that you've talked about most on your show when you had the Fox show. And probably the thing that I've talked about most too over say like the last two to three years has been the war in Ukraine. And for very similar reasons. Not because like who runs Eastern Donbas or the crime meal is of significance to me. It's really actually not. It's because our country has become so involved in it, not just with money, but with like our weapons and risking escalation that you feel obligated as an American given that these policymakers in Washington have decided that our country that is now our war. And I think that's the same thing with Israel. It's not like I have some special. I mean, I grew up very much in American Jew. Like all four of my grandparents are Jewish. My parents are Jewish. Most of the people I went to school with were Jewish. I consider myself a Jew. I think like Jewish accomplishment is something to be proud of. I have family in Israel. I have no enemies at all. It's to me. It's the same exact policy principles that led you to criticize the war in Ukraine. That I've led me to criticize lots of wars including the one in Ukraine. But the reality is, and I think this is so important is that it's just is the case. And as someone who grew up embedded in American Jewish culture, my grandmother fled Nazi Germany in the late 1930s to come to the United States. She was a Jewish immigrant. Literally German Jewish German immigrant who had a big German accent until the day she died. And only she and her younger sister came and the rest of her family stayed in where I'll kill the holocaust. So these were the things I grew up with and fed on and all of that. And for that reason, I know, I went to my, she sent me to like Jewish summer camp. I went for like five straight summers. And you sing Jewish prayers. And like you're indoctrinated with like the principles of Jewish culture, Americans Jews are told and indoctrinated from birth that one of their duties is to be loyal to and defend and protect the state of Israel. Even if you're an American, you're a Jew in Argentina, you're a Jew in wherever that is something that being Jewish, kind of you're told from birth, obligates you to do. And then recently Evangelicals have also taken on this view that Israel is this country of great special, you know, religious and theological value. And so we do have a lot of people in the United States who for various reasons have decided that this one foreign country has such great importance that if forced to choose between the two and of course, we have different national interest and different strategic interest all the time that protecting and venerating and elevating Israel is a more important goal than even defense to our own country. And that is just the reality. And you see it manifesting in so many ways so that the emotion and that's why people can tolerate disagreements of almost every kind. You know, but we lost I think like 15 to 20% of our subscriber base and our viewership like in the first four weeks of the after October 7th because of my position on Israel and people you know, people say I can disagree without anything but this is the one issue I just can't tolerate. I got to run me out this direction. And I think it's important to acknowledge how many people are inculcated from birth to believe that. And that's the thing I think is our greatest obligation is human beings, why free speech is so important as well and the ability to access other information. Like I want to read what Russia is saying. The EU made it illegal to platform Russia state media. Adults in the EU, even if they want to can't read Russian media because it's illegal. I want to have different information sources other than what my own country is telling me because one of the things you have as adult, I think it's the greatest obligation is to go back and reevaluate what you were trained and indoctrinated, inculcated to believe and not just reflexively continue to believe that in adulthood because it was indoctrinated, but to reassess whether or not those really are your views as a result of your own critical analysis or whether you have different views including the role of our own country. Like all of these things are so important to not being a propagandized kind of automaton. And it is just true for a lot of American Jews that this indoctrination is so extreme. I think now for even dollars as well that it's become the paramount view, like the view that subsumes every other. And I think that's why when you see this conflict between a devotion to protecting the civil liberties and free speech rights of American citizens, when that comes in conflict with this other goal of shielding and protecting Israel so often the shielding and protecting of Israel wins out even when it comes time to protection. So that's gotta be the red line. That's gotta be the red line. And again, even for people like me, you know, again, I don't have any problem with Israel and I'm any problem with people who love Israel, people think Israel's great. I love the country. I love Israel. I love Brazil. I love countries that I visit. You can love other countries. I love Israel as a place to visit. And I'm not against it. If you don't allow me to say what I think you are not treating me as a human being, period. And the defense of human dignity has to be the highest goal. Period. And you cannot treat me like a slave. And it's just gotten to this point where, yes, of course, obviously there are massive drawbacks to saying that out loud, but like you don't have a choice at this point. You just don't have a choice. Well, and I also think, this is what I really believe too, is that, you know, you've obviously gotten to a place in your career where you have a lot of security, where you have, you know, even with this descent on this issue, a lot of people who's to listen to you and trust you and are going to pay attention to you no matter what. I feel the same way. I mean, if I've like a success in my journalism career, I'm at the point where, you know, I feel, I don't ever feel like I need to be captive to my audience or feed them what they want to hear. I've always tried to cultivate an audience that knows that they can't expect to come to me and hear what they want to hear. They're at times, they're going to hear things that they violently disagree with. And I'm always going to respect them enough to make an argument, but that's part of what I hope they're coming to me for. But for a lot of people in journalism, especially with the destruction of jobs and the erosion of job security as, you know, every major media outlet is laying off people in huge numbers and it's kind of a collapsing industry. The pressure and need to conform is greater than ever because most people don't have that privilege or that security that you and I both have at this point in our lives and career. And, you know, I can't tell you how many times during Russia gave, when I was as vocal of the skeptic of Russia gave, it was like it possibly be from the very moment I first heard that script, get unveiled by the CIA, through the New York Times and the Washington Post. So many journalists who work at major media outlets like CNN and the Washington Post and NBC News and others would write to me and say, I'm so thankful for this skepticism that you're expressing. And of course at some point I was like, why aren't you expressing it? But I know why, because if they did even one time, they'd become the target of the liberal mob on Twitter, that would pressure on their editors to fire them, they'd be the first to get laid off, the last to get hired. And so our journalism profession has become one where conformity is by far the highest value. And I think for those of us who aren't quite as vulnerable or as insecure in terms of our, you know, career position or you need to keep a job, it's almost like you have an obligation to create that space that a lot of other people can't create. That's really what I feel. And so, of no one likes having people who are your readers or your viewers or previous supporters, like kind of turn against you or denounce you, nobody likes being called names. It's not fun for anybody. But you know, if you're gonna do a job and have some kind of meaning to it, some kind of purpose to it, some kind of value that it based on, I feel like if you are in that kind of position, you have the obligation to take those risks. Or should you do? And to be as honest as you can be. And by the way, to keep, to the extent that you can, but try really hard every day, to keep the hate out of your heart. If you do find, I mean, there are some people, I don't talk about not many, thank God. But there are some people, I don't talk about or write about ever because I'm too mad at them. And I just, I don't wanna feel that. And I can smell hate on other people. Uh-huh. Hate is one of those words that's been weaponized and of course, right. But hate is real. And we do feel it. And in my religion, you're not allowed to. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us. Like hate this in, but not this center. You absolutely are not allowed to hate people. We have to forgive people. So there are a few people, individuals who I feel like really betrayed by Bill Crystal. I don't talk about Bill Crystal because I'm like, I'm not rational. So I work for him for someone. And he's gone and saying in my opinion. But on this topic, like, you're not gonna stop me from saying what I think is true by accusing me of hate when I know that there isn't any hate. I'm not motivated by some weird animus or something. Some irrational dislike of anything. I'm just not gonna be, that's not gonna stop me. But I think that is like the attribute of being secure in yourself and your own values that you don't feel like you have to prove anything or there's an accusation made against you that you know as false, that you have no, it doesn't affect you at all because you know deep down how you live, how you feel, how you smell it, and other people. I see people and sometimes like, wow, that guy, there's a lot going on inside and I don't wanna be anywhere near that because I may agree with some of his views but he's this rage, it's just, oh, it's, well, I always had like, and I think this has been so important. Like I used to be a lot more bit too pretty than my rhetoric. I go out more aggressive in my rhetoric and I heard, yeah, you too. I heard you by in that show where you talked to Chris Cuomo and you guys were kind of laughing you in particular, talking about our friendship but you were saying how like nobody was mean or to you and I don't even remember that because that was equally mean to everybody but I never felt, it was like a, I never felt like I was condemning the person because I didn't know the person. I felt like I was condemning their views, the role they were playing into the political but so many times people who I, you know, like viciously condemned or denounced, I end up becoming friends with. Because I never wanted to, even when I'm, I think it's important as a journalist to very harshly criticize and denounce, you know, especially people with influence and power. It's one of your jobs but it's important not to let that effect who you are because it's so corrosive dis-harboring hatred. And by the way, what matters is people and I would argue animals also. But that's what matters. And that, I mean, that's why we're having these debates because we're trying to figure out what the best way to govern people, to live our lives, especially with a structure or country but all of those tasks are designed to produce the same outcome, which is happier people. So if you cease to care about people, then like what is the point of the exercise, right? Well, I had this really fascinating and like actually transformative experience when I was a law student at NYU. I was like, you know, in my early 20s, you know, I grew up in the 80s, came of age and the 80s as a gay teenager and like the moral majority and Reagan were like, you know, the things I was taught to hate, like where the threat to me, so anything conservative or socially conservative and I had a roommate and she started dating, when I was in law school, she started dating this guy whose family were like, rush-limba fanatics and she would go there on the weekend and come back and then she told me she came back once and said, there's this form on the internet where all the rush-limba conservatives go, it's sponsored by the National Review and Heritage Foundation. It was an comfy survey. It was some like political forum. She said, you have to go in there and just like provoke them, and troll them and you know, create all the disruption. So I did and I started with all malicious intent of just like angering them and like creating like all kinds of division in there. You know, and just saying the most defensive thing is like a possible thing. Even though like the more I stayed, the more I started like having debates with them and like conversations with them. And these were like hardcore social conservatives. These were not like the nice conservatives who just believe in some conservative dogma but then like are very like socially egalitarian. And this was like in the early 90s as well when these, you know, debates were much different than they are now. And just my being gay, my being like a lawyer and man had these were like, you know, very evangelical people and like the most world parts of the country. And then I got to the point where I stayed there for so long and debated with them for so long and talked to them for so long that we started finding commonalities and then they had this yearly event where everybody would go and meet in person. And they invited me to go and it was in some like suburb of Indiana at some like Hilton. And I was like, you know what, I think I'm gonna go. And my friends were like, don't go. You're gonna be killed. It's a trap like this. You know, this is how you're taught to perceive your other people. And I went and I spent the weekend there and everybody was so warm, so happy to see me. I was so happy to see them. And these were the people I was taught wanted me dead. These were the people I was taught, but I was supposed to hate. And it doesn't mean like I agreed with their politics anymore than I did previously or that they agreed with mine. But seeing them is like actually good human beings who have the same concerns in their lives. I know it sounds so simple, but it's such an important lesson that to learn because our society is constantly trying to divide us. And I think that's very purposeful. It's what actually the real nugget in the stories the fact that you went. Well, why didn't you do that? Because I've been there like eight or nine months and I felt like these connections were real. I just felt, you know, it was almost like I had become part of this community. And some of them are like around stone. They're like writers, like some work for like conservative outlets and we always like laugh about that. But it was like my first introduction to like internet debate. It was at the time when the internet was still like segregated with AOL or a copy server. It was like that it wasn't like interconnected internet. It was like very the insipient stages. But I went because I felt like I like these people and I kind of felt like they liked me. And I originally went in solely with the purpose to promote their hatred toward me and to hate them as well. That was like why I went in. And just being around them daily, after day after day like first debating and then convert it, like made me see their humanity and they saw mine. I was just as a mouth of my to them as they were to me. I was openly gay and I was a Jewish lawyer and I was working in Manhattan and these were like even Jollard called like housewives or like business men and like you know, rural Georgia or like Idaho. And I don't know. I guess we just discovered each other's common humanity. And like it's a very transformative experience for me about how you look at other people. What a wonderful story. Well, obviously in you, maybe latent was like that priority. Other people matter more than anything. Yeah, I also, I think that again like so much of the reason why we end up with the political vis we have. Like sometimes you see people with political views that you just can't comprehend. You think are like malicious and destructive and insane. A lot of times it's because that's what they were formed to be. That's like the byproduct of their culture and of their upbringing. And if you had the same upbringing, maybe you would think the same things. And I think like the people who do that for a living and keep these destructive ideologies, those people really weren't your contempt. You know, like the milk crystals of the world, the Victoria Newtons of the world, like those kind of people, those Chinese. But ordinary people who don't pay much attention to politics, like before I started writing out politics, you know, I was like just reading the New York Times and the Atlantic and the New Yorker thinking of it as like highly informed like a high, and then when I started writing out politics and have like full time to go and read original documents and not having information mediated anymore for me, I realized like pretty rapidly, like almost everything I believed about politics was based on a fraud. It was not like my own, you know, my own process of arriving at things critically. I just was stuck with all these ideas that were not mine that I kind of passively ingested. And that too was a very eye opening experience because yeah, you know, you think you're a very smart person, you think you're educated. And then you realize like, well, you're just as susceptible to propaganda. And I do think smart people are people who believe they're smarter of high verbal IQ. You're clearly in that category. To a lesser extent, I am also, they are better at self deception. I think than any other group, because they're smart and they read the Atlantic and the New Yorker and I read the New Yorker. I read every issue of the New Yorker from 1993 until 2017. Right, me too. Every issue. Yeah, and I thought it was so informed and so, I think it was a really interesting magazine, the Atlantic under Mike Kelly and after his death, even wonderful magazine, like that, you know, younger people don't even know what we're talking about, but like magazines were the way that you sort of, they were like the think pieces and they had like a bunch of different ideas. That's right. I get on an airplane with my bag and I'd have like nine issues of, you know, the New Yorker, the Atlantic, I read every single word and all of them. And then as I got older, I realized, like I had no fucking idea. What was going on? I was actually more misled than someone who hadn't been told anything. It was coming at a cold. Like I was completely propagandized. I didn't even know that. And I thought I was a free thinker. Exactly. I didn't have those experiences. I don't want to romanticize these kind of things, but I was once in Milwaukee and I like in a suburb Milwaukee and I don't mean to like romanticize like the middle of the country diners, but I was in a diner. And it was right at the time that the intercept had this scandal because they very poorly mishandled this source reality winner and unintentionally out at her. But the whole story was like, she had given a document trying to prove that the Russians were interfering in the election and it made the front page of the New York Times. So these people who were sitting at this like adjacent table who were obviously just like ordinary people. Not like on their phone, they saw the top store of the New York Times and it was about this intercept story. Obviously that no idea was sitting at the next table. But they were really, what they were really saying was like, yeah, with all this Russia stuff, it's so hard to figure out what's real and what's not because it's all anonymous and it seems like it's all driven by some agenda. I was like, I almost know nobody who's paid to write about politics, who writes about journalism, who has that recognition. And it's like, through that distance, they're able to see things so much more clearly than the people who are immersed in it. That is absolutely the true thing and the most dangerous thing because the people who are immersed in are the ones that they're going to see. is just like exactly exactly exactly. So I don't even really want to get into Russia. I just can't resist asking you about Navalny and his death. That happened the day I left Russia. Right. Right before the Munich Security Conference. I know. It's all so perfect. Perfect timing for you. And I'm literally on a plane going through Serbia, the Geneva, wherever, you know, like I'm totally cut off. And all of a sudden I land on my phone and I was just exploding, you know, Putin just killed Navalny. What was that? I mean, I actually don't have full perspective on it just because I was so far away. But like, what was that story? Well, first of all, we did this on our show actually. For two weeks after Navalny's death, it was definitively asserted over and over in the most authoritative terms on every cable channel and in every newspaper that Putin ordered Navalny killed like he had, he was his murderer, he had ordered his death. And I think you talked about this before, but this was at a time when the House Republicans were holding up the $60 billion. Exactly. There was no reason the world that Putin would have. And by the way, like you go back 20 years to every president that ever dealt with Putin, starting with Bill Clinton and going on. And every single one of them has said he's an incredibly rational, restrained, trustworthy person. It was only when he had to be turned into the new Hitler whole thing reversed. So he is obviously rational, whatever else you want to say about him, he's very sophisticated. He's very restrained actually. We can say that conclusively. Exactly. And so like why would he just suddenly, tell people it's time for you to kill Navalny? Like it never meant any sense, but we were told this. And also like we have this like cartoonish idea that he like not only is manipulating every event in the West, but also every event in Russia like he's, must never sleep. And he must have cloned 100 of him given how much credit he gets for having like manipulated and controlled every event in his country and in our countries. But it then turned out like just three weeks ago, this happened so many times before that the intelligence community admits that there's no evidence whatsoever that he participated in any way, let alone order to request it or wanted, Novani's death. And we obviously have, you know, we're always told, like we have everything in the Kremlin like under this microscope of surveillance. And you know how many times this has happened where media outlets have made some kind of assertion. No, Russian prisons are incredibly brutal. Like a lot of countries are, they're very, very cold. They don't get good medical care. So I have no, it's not surprising that a prisoner put in the most brutal Russian prisons would die, but that's a completely different claim than what they were saying, which was that Putin had ordered him to kill. And if you look at how many times, you know, the resistance. completely different claim than what they were saying, which was that Putin had ordered him to killed. And I, if you look at how many times, you know, there was this like story in the New York Times, exactly when Trump was trying to withdraw from Afghanistan that the CIA planted with the New York Times and Charlie Savage, the claim that the Russians had put bounties on the heads of American soldiers and were paying the Taliban money for every American soldier that they were killed. And then when Liz Cheney and pro word Democrats were working together to prevent and block Trump's with the desire to withdraw from Afghanistan, that was the only story they cited. They kept saying, how can we leave when the Russians are, you know, paying to, we're going to reward Russia. And then three months later or two months later, the intelligence community has very little confidence that that even happened. That has been the story of Russia gate from the very beginning. I mean, every single claim that came out as part of Russia gate, I mean, they unleash Robert for 18 months with the dream team of prosecutors, unlimited subpoena power, unlimited amounts of money. And he then submitted a report when he was done with his investigation that said we could not find evidence to establish what became the core conspiracy. The whole thing that initiated this scandal that drowned our politics for three years, which was that the Trump campaign colluded with the Kremlin to break into or hack into the emails of the DNC and John Podesta. And everybody just was like, okay, I guess we'll just move on to something else. Like the editor in chief of the new of the New York Times said, we have to confront the fact that what we've let our readers to believe was going to happen, but this information was going to be discovered, these smoking guns, Robert Moer was going to unleash it all and everyone was going to go to prison. None of it turned out to be true. This whole story was a fraud. This was the scandal that the media drowned our politics in for three years, starting with the middle of the of 16 2016 up until 2018 or 2019. So again, I'm sorry to interrupt you. I'm waiting to explain to volume. I really want to hear that. But you just passed over one of the most interesting moments in the last 10 years, which was the hack hack. I don't know what was the theft of emails from the DNC and from John Podesta's personal Gmail account that wound up on WikiLeaks and the Russians were blamed for that. I thought from the first day I don't know, but I suspected that was not true. What is true about that? So let me just preface that because I know how people react to these things. Like if there's something that gets presented and then implemented as gospel and then many you challenge it, you're accused of being like a crazed conspiracy theory because there's something everybody knows is true. So let me just say if you look at the last say 40 years of American history, the one thing that is is a constant is that so many of the things we are told are not just true, but unquestionably the most consequential thing and not being complete lies. The claim that led us into the Vietnam War that caused the Senate to authorize the military force and Vietnam was a claim about the Gulf of Tonkin that was a complete and total fabrication. I was 64. The claim about the claims that led us into the Iraq war that everybody was so certain up was a complete and total lie. The thing that drives me the craziest to this day that I feel has never got enough attention is that one that reporting happened from the New York Post based in the documents from Hunter Biden's laptop about what they were doing in Ukraine and China. Everybody in the media united to say this was Russian disinformation went all along that archive was completely authentic and had nothing to do with Russia and it wasn't just information so many times for told things so definitively that end up being proven to be lies Russia get another example. So the question of how those documents made their way to WikiLeaks, obviously WikiLeaks insist that they had nothing to do with the Russians and didn't get it from the Russians. Now that may be true and yet at the same time the Russians say used a middle setup. Yeah. So WikiLeaks might think they're telling the truth. They might actually be into hell. The truth, but it doesn't say that Russia wasn't involved. Their problem is that there are a lot of people who oftentimes won't say it, but who in public, but we'll tell you in private, I mean, like very well connected people that they radically disbelieve the claim that the Russians hacked it. And the thing is, Aaron Mate is one of the best people most knowledgeable people on this, but there really isn't a lot of evidence that the Russians did the hacking. This firm that they got is a democratic party propaganda firm, which is CrowdStrike, the FBI purposely hit a lot of the information that would have been necessary to examine it. I'm not saying the Russians didn't hack it, but I'm just saying conceptually, if you don't question, especially the truth that are most aggressively shoved down your throat after everything we've seen, I think you're an extremely gullible person. And in this case, specifically, there's also a lot of holes in that story. And I think the big problem in this was always my problem with Russia getting from the start was not that the Trump campaign and then Trump administration was being sabotaged by the US security state with a evidence free scandal. That did bother me, journalistic this evidence free assertion that dominated our politics. But bother me much more was the real agenda, obviously, was to blame Russia for everything to such an extent that the Americans started once again, viewing Russia as this existential enemy to the point where American diplomats couldn't speak with Russian diplomats and Washington, everybody was petrified of meeting with the Russian because they would be accused of being a Russian spy. You're talking about the country with the largest stockpile of nuclear weapons. And I believe there's a straight line from the Russia gate fraud, from convincing people to feed on this anti-Russian narrative to what we're doing in Ukraine, which is sitting on the brink of nuclear war, which Joe Biden said has brought the world closer to the brink of nuclear catastrophe than anything since the 1962 missile crisis. And for some reason, we're willing to risk what even Joe Biden says is this massive risk of nuclear war that the economic, the bolt in a atomic scientist has said brought the world closer to midnight, which is extinction level catastrophe. We're willing to risk all that over what? I mean, it was Obama who always said we have no vital interest in Ukraine. We obviously have no vital interest in Ukraine. And so so much of this, deliberate intent to once again convince Americans that Russia was our grave enemy was the existential threat was interfering in a democracy based on so many lies had a lot of geostrategic implications and goals as well as domestic political war. What's the truth of Navalny's death to Putin killing? I mean, I can't pretend to know, I know that the U.S. intelligence committee, the U.S. intelligence agency admits he had no role in Navalny's death or like at least what we were told that he ordered it. I again, I think it's very possible that Navalny died from the kind of conditions that people often died from in prison. Yes, there those are very brutal. It's extremely cold in those parts of Russia. Yeah, exactly. And you're not exactly like given heaters in yourselves and blankets. I'm sure he was treated very poorly and so you can make an argument I guess that like Russia, the Russian government ethically is responsible. Right. But what we were told was that Putin ordered it and that was a complete and utter lies like so many of the things we were told definitively about Russia and the Russian government over the last, you know, eight or nine years. That's one of the most insane disinformation campaigns sustained enduring and consequential disinformation campaigns that comes from the very people who insist that they are the sole guardians combating the dangers of disinformation. When does America become a free and honest country again? I think that there are a lot of encouraging signs, even though they seem negative. I love the fact, for example, that Americans hate the media and distrust the media pretty much more than any group that exists except for pedophiles and the margin is not that large. I think it's incredibly well-deserved. Like Americans have an intuitive understanding that corporate journalism that dominant wing of the media has renounced their journalistic function in our propaganda. They don't trust them. They believe that they lie on purpose for political ends. All of that is completely true. So they're turning away more and more from these media outlets. They don't trust them any longer. They're still in, you know, they're gigantic media conglomerates. As you know, you work for one, they have a lot of influence and power, but less than they did before. And again, for me, the cause of the free internet, it's the reason why I moved my shoulder to rumble and moved everything to rumble. It's one of the few platforms truly devoted to preserving a space of free speech on the internet, which for me is the biggest cause because the internet and the ability to use it to challenge establishment orthodoxies, to organize against corrupt power centers is for me, the real cause of hope, but that only can happen if the internet is protected as a free weapon. And that's what's being assaulted, establishment sectors always know the greatest threat to them. They always seek to destroy it or to come and deer it. And that's what this whole fabricated disinformation expertise that appeared overnight after 2016. Like these are the people who are the disinformation experts. These groups that are now designed to identify disinformation that gets censored. All of that is about eliminating dissent from the internet and and disguising political censorship as some sort of apolitical expertise or science safety measure. Yeah, online safety experts or online disinformation experts like where did this credential come from? It's a it's a fake credential. Like, but they, you know, like Nini anchorage is like, got online disinformation expert. Have you ever heard her speak? Like, would you trust that woman to like even identify, like, you know, truth of anything, let alone like a floating arbiter of what true is true when falls to the point that what she decreases is false gets censored. But that's the interest. What really happened is in 2016, you had these dual traumas to Western liberalism writ large. One was the decision of the British people to leave the EU, which was an extraordinary thing for a country to do, followed three months or four months later by Donald Trump's obviously traumatic victory over Hillary Clinton from a liberal perspective. I mean, like real trauma, like psychologists were saying they've been flooded with patients who are neurotic and like can't cope with reality because of their devastation that Hillary Clinton lost that like a real thing. And what they decided, meaning like liberal Western elite was that we could no longer afford a free internet because when the internet is free, they can't control how people think, how they behave and how they vote. And that is when you can trace, you can follow the emergence of this extremely well funded disinformation industry that was designed to assert an authority over controlling what information is and is in the mind. So for me, as long as a free internet continues to exist, you see this all throughout the West in the democratic world, people are abandoning their faith in institutions of authority and that abandonment of faith and trust in institutions of authority for me is the most promising development. I think I couldn't agree with you more. I would say it's followed in the close second position by the collapse of the Neocon governor of South Dakota, Kristina. I mean, I've never seen a more instant act of self-destruction so how would you describe it? Like give me the timeline on Kristina who, by the way, is like a screaming Neocon and sort of a conventional liberal posing as a conservative or whatever. I mean, I've had a lot of problems. Kristina over the years makes me say that people bought or bullshit, but what happened in Kristina makes me think that Americans are really nice people actually, it turns out and that was reaffirmed for me, but describe what happened. First of all, she's always been an obvious lightweight. She got it elected to the house in South Dakota, working her way through the political system and then from that became governor. And I think people attributed to her a lot more talent and substance because of that than she actually had. So she was never an impressive force at all. She's a very mindless, kind of hurt animal who just follows whatever dominant ideology she has to embrace in order to answer courage. But I think her calculation was this kind of culture work calculation that if she talked about what she perceives to be, these like farming values that it was going to provoke the disgust and anger of the liberal elite and that conservatives would rise in her defense and say, no, these are the kinds of traditional values that have been lost and that the American liberal elite are too divorced from. The problem is is that not putting bullets into the skulls of puppies in order to kill them because you hate them isn't just an liberal elite value. One of the things that has happened is that Americans love their dogs for a lot of really interesting reasons. I think it gives people a sense of spirituality of connection. All the things have been lost when we now live in cities and working cubicles, like people crave this kind of connection. People don't have children. They don't like across the political spectrum and dogs open people up. Dogs have evolved to love and be oil trusted companions of humans and humans to dogs. It's a very deep bond developed over thousands of years of evolution. So there's a lot of things she could have done that might have worked in that way. But talking about how she pumped this puppy's skull full of bullets because quote, I hated that dog is something that provoked almost universal contempt. And that was gave me a lot of optimism. And it was even a worst story. Like the listen to our audio book. She has an audio book where she tells the whole story. She shot the dog but didn't kill it. She had to go back to her truck while the dog was suffering and from a wound. She had to then kill it with a second shot. She then took a goat. Like minutes later that she also hated because she said it smelled and was mean, put him in the same gravel pit and murdered him. And then she tells the story that her brother and her uncle are, I think that's two close relatives said when she came back, we heard about this like rampage, an animal slaughter that you went on. We're going to get that here before you shoot us. And this was in her book that she read in her own voice. Like even the members for her family thought she was like a psychopath to the point where she was being endangered. They were endangered because she was off on some like murderous rampage. And how she thought that that would engender any sympathy for her of any kind rather than making her look like this deranged monster is completely beyond me. Well, she was trying to pose as some sort of rural, exactly. Exactly. And as someone who actually has bird dogs and hunts them a lot, it was preposterous. Like she's no idea what she's talking about. she shot the dog. She killed her on puppy because the dog chased and killed chickens. Now it's a bird dog. Right. Chickens are birds. It's instinct is to do that. No, you get those dogs. Of course. And the idea that this is like common in rural America. It's a bird dog. It's definitely. It's definitely. It's a nation against farmers. I go. Farmers just go around like repeatedly murdering their dogs the minute that they don't like their personality. She could have obviously given it a late kinds of animal rescue groups or all sorts of things she could have done. But I do think it was that calculation, but it was a huge miscalculation. I do think there was like this legitimate conflict between, you know, East Coast, cosmopolitan rivers and people and like more traditional farming communities. And that that's a real issue. But it's not about murdering your dogs. And then it's it's it's cruelty masquerading as strength. Well, I think cruelty is not strength. Strong people are not cruel at all. Why would they be? Strong people are compassionate actually. Right. I think we need to inflict gratuitous suffering or death on others is a sign of extreme physical and moral weakness. And this is why you see all these people in Washington, neocons like Bill Crystal and David from, but then also like people like Lindsey Graham. And you see this in the British commentary it where you know, they had this empire that they've now lost. There's this like weak broken, impotent, irrelevant marginalized empire. And they speak about the glories and importance of war more than anybody because it's a way that they feel strong and purposeful. And you have all these people in Washington who constantly, whenever wars proposed a media embrace it because it's a way that they get to feel strong themselves like compensating for the internal weakness and cowardice that they have. I mean, if you live your whole life and you never display moral or physical courage, you know that about yourself. It pains you. And instead of then doing something that requires courage, you instead send other people to go risk their lives in a war that you cheer lead. It's like such a psychologically warped way of finding it. It's like stolen valor. It's a, it's, it is obviously courageous to go and fight in war for cause, but not to send other people to fight in a war for cause that requires no courage at all. But that is the kind of courage that in Washington, people constantly embrace and lieu of actual courage. It's really like a psychological pathology and it's so transparent. The weaker the leader, the more arbitrary and cruel to other people the leader is. Yeah. And you see it on the interpersonal level too. Like the way, you know, people who treat people who have less power than them, who have less influence than them, who have less control. There are a lot of people who abuse those kind of people and it's almost always because those people are weak. And that's the way they feel strong. People who are secure in their own strength, create everybody, as you say, compassionately. I think that extends the animals as well. How many dogs do you have? 26 at home and then realizing that that was unsustainable. We then started this shelter where we have another like 200 or so. What are you with so many dogs? It just happened organically. I mean, both my husband and I love dogs. He started rescuing dogs. And then, you know, I remember when we had five, we were like, no, five's are a limit. And then, you know, someone calls up and says, oh, I just found two dogs that were hit by a car on a street and they need, you know, surgeries or they're going to die. They're suffering. And we were like, okay, let's take those because what's different from five and seven? And then you're like at seven. And you're like, yeah, what's different from seven and nine? And then that's how you get to 26 dogs. But, you know, there's, they're all rescue dogs. They're all dogs who have been found in the street by us usually, but also by friends who were in various states of distress. Lots of them have been in band-inned. They're like, you know, petrified and traumatized and abused. And when you have, you know, the ability of like the blessing of financial security, you can use it for pure material consumption just buying more things, you know, trying to get another house, a private plane, whatever. Honestly, it just provides me with no happiness or satisfaction at all. It really doesn't. It just doesn't do anything for me. And the ability to use it, to help those in need gives me so much more happiness and gratification. You can almost say it's like a selfish endeavor because it just provides me a happiness of other things. Don't. And, you know, also like when you have a shelter, there's nothing more beautiful than connecting a dog with a family. And then hearing like three months later about how the dog is integrated into the family's life and seeing pictures of that dog laying on a sofa. You know, with this family when they had been on the streets over your just narrow, like virtually dead from starvation or from disease. And you were nursing them back to health. And then you place them in a family. Like you have to figure out what of things that actually give you meaning and purpose and happiness in life. And often non-mes or not the things that society tells us are the things we should strive after. And that was the lesson I had to learn by chasing all the things that society teaches you you're supposed to chase and then when I grabbed them. And I thought it was going to make me happy and found it actually made me more vacant and emptier than I knew that I had to find the things that actually gave me happiness. And I think it's one of the most important lessons you can learn. How old are you when you made these realizations? I mean, I always love dogs like when I was young, like we had these two dogs that love next door and I was like get home from school and the first thing I would do was look for them and call them and they would hang out in my house. And I remember they just opened things up for me and so well. But it was really like in my late 30s and early 40s when I had like professional success and financial stability. And none of that was, you know, my work was known and it wasn't really providing a lot of personal happiness. And so I was like I don't want to keep chasing after things that don't actually provide me happiness even if society respects those that we started being open more to the things that gave us happiness. And like ultimately I'll tell you this quick story which is I never wanted to be a father ever. It was never part of my identity. I never thought I would be a good father. I hate imposing authority on other people. I hate telling other people what to do. And my husband's like was always like being a dad was his dream. It was who he was. And he spent years like convincing persuading, controlling, pressuring, manipulating me to want to adopt kids. We would go out to dinner and coincidentally there'd be a couple at the next table who he had arranged to be there. And we were talking. They had adopted kids and what Tal talked about all the joys of it took years to convince me. And when I finally said yes, we more accurately will say found the two perfect kids in this like orphanage in northeastern Brazil. And the transition obviously to our lives couldn't have been a more radically or abruptly different. It's like adopting a kid out of poverty and Mississippi and bringing them to like a high rise apartment in Manhattan. It's obviously everything is different. And I think the thing that helped most in the transition was as soon as they got there we were like you have all these dogs. They had a dog at their orphanage. So they are like dogs and we were like pick one and that dog is going to be your dog. You take care of it. And they picked like one of the sweetest like most affectionate dogs in the pack. And she became like the thing they were always hugging. And I think she did more to like give them comfort and security and safety being ganked out of one environment and put it in total. You know what? And so the capacity for dogs to like transform people or you know, there's all kinds of studies about how animals can reach autistic children when nothing else can or to even like rehabilitate prisoners. You know, you get these like herd violent criminals. Now they have these dog programs when they take them in and they connect to these dogs and care for them in ways they've never done with humans before. Obviously there's something you know, that's the reason why if you see cruelty to animals, not just dogs, it's the thing that like riles people up the most on the internet. Obviously animals are here. They're beautiful. They're majestic. We've always hunted them and killed them for food. But we've also obviously have something in us that makes us feel an extraordinary empathy to them. And to me they're like the thing, one of the most beautiful things the planet has to offer. And especially dogs. I mean, I don't think we understand why dogs are here, why we have this relationship with them. Dogs are the only carnivore capable of killing people that people have ever domesticated. And that domestication occurred much earlier than we ever thought. I think at the beginning of recorded history. Uh huh. And you see those old fossil drawings of like man and dog, 100%. Yeah. And you know, it does make you think that there's some purpose, some supernatural element here. Like what is that? I mean, that's the thing is, you know, I've seen just over and over and over and over. Not just in my work with dogs, but personally like in my real thing with dogs, they can do things for you and reach you and connect to you empathetically and emotionally in a way that other human beings can't they? Obviously, you know they perceive things physically that we can perceive. They hear sounds that we can't they anticipate things they feel things in the atmosphere, that are threats and react to them before we even know that they're here. So we know they have perceptive abilities that human beings have in my quote signs. Yeah. I mean, yeah. But I'm saying even emotionally, like you can deceive another human about the state of your emotion so much more easily than you can deceive your dog. Like your dogs know when you're sad, they know when you're happy, they know when you're excited in a way that you can't hide that from them. Like they just perceive it. They're so connected to you. And obviously there's the whole thing about teaching about unconditional love and loyalty that we can learn from dogs as well. But yeah, you just see and that's why I think the Kristi Nome thing was such a fact because there are very few things at this point that can unite everyone in America, all Americans, independent of political ideology or socioeconomic background or anything else. And the fact that she was so cruel to this dog created a revolution that transcended almost every single category. She really united people and contempt for what she had done. And I found the ability of dogs to do that so fascinating. It's one of the great joys in life I've experienced it, really intensely. Let me ask you about Brazil. So you have this kind of a fearlessness about you that puts you in these coalitions for a time. And then you sort of, you're abandoned by them and attacked by from allies or whatever. But you're in this weird position where you're living in a country that would the former president, dribble scenario at one point threatened to put you in prison. Now and they bought, I was criminally indicted. I forgot about that. And now Lula is running your country, I guess sort of at least a name in the name. And there's a very left regime in charge left, whatever that is. But global, you know, global type government, how has life in Brazil changed under this new government? And how is it affected you? So there's this phrase, Brazil is not for amateurs, which is basically designed to indicate that there's really oftentimes no ideology or no like obvious political lines. This is very transactional. Usually the people running Brazil are not the president or the elected officials or these permanent power factions similar to in Washington. And you know, my I never wanted to be involved in politics, but my husband ended up as a, you know, elected official. He was first elected as a city council in Rio and then an elected member of Congress in Brazil. I started Brazilian version of the intercept, the intercept Brazil. So and I did a lot of reporting during this noting thing on Brazil, so I became very integrated into the Brazilian media. He was obviously integrated into Brazilian politics. And so we both were part of this kind of faction that we never really wanted to be part of. But like just takes you there went the most significant reporting I did was in 2019 where there was this sprawling anti-corruption probe and the judge was leading it became this national hero. And when Bolsonaro was elected in 2018, a big break from prior Brazilian elections were usually central after a left wing party is one. He made that judge who led the anti-corruption probe. The most powerful person in the country. He was the minister of not just the minister of justice and national security. It was like kind of this fused position specifically for him that put the entire security service under his control about two months into the whole of the judge. He was a judge, but he then left the judge to become part of the, and he led the probe that put Lula in jail when Bolsonaro was elected in 2018. Lula was in prison on corruption charges that this judge Sergio Moro oversaw and convicted Lula. There's not a jury trial in Brazil. Convicted him and then sentenced him to 11 years in prison. I mean Lula was a two-term president a giant on the world stage left office within 86% of approval rating and they turned him in to a criminal and they arrested a lot of other people on corruption charges like billionaires and oligarchs and a way that a lot of people were supportive of it first, including me. Two months in the Bolsonaro presidency. I got a contact from a source who had hacked into the phones of that judge, prosecutors, the most powerful people in the country said there was evidence of all crimes of corruption, turned it over to me the entire file. Similar to what happened with Snowden and we were able based on that reporting to expose this judge as one of the most corrupt people in the country. I mean, he used corruption and illegal means to put the people he wanted to in prison including Lula. And so six months after we began the reporting, Lula was a lot out of jail as a result of our reporting. I became enemy number one along with my husband of the Bolsonaro movement. I mean, it's hard to overstate like the level of threats we got, the attacks on our personal lives, like the fabricated stories, you know, and then ultimately culminating in a criminal indictment that charged me with like 126 felonies as a co-conspirator with my source. So it wasn't a game, you know, and Bolsonaro hated me. But you never did you ever consider just running away? You're not Brazilian by birth. No, but by this point, you know, not only is my husband Brazilian, but by now we have children and their Brazilian. So and I'm a permanent resident. I consider America my country on the citizen of the United States. This is the only country of which almost it has never happened. But you know, the fact that my children are Brazilian, I see it as their country in a country that I want to fight for, not flee from. I never for a moment consider leaving. I just like absent some very imminent threat. I just would never do that even if you can't look yourself in the mirror, like Snowden taught me that a lot, you know, Snowden did something and sort of joined Assange that they knew how to serious risk of putting them in prison. Daniel'sburg, one of my childhood heroes did the same. And so that to me became kind of the thing that I aspire to. I like the idea of running away from a threat because you're scared of something and sacrificing our cause you believe is right would just make me look at myself in a very negative way for the rest of my life. I would not want that I'm unconscious. I wouldn't want to think of myself that way or my life having been formed by fleeing or by running away at a fear. Amen. So it was very trying though. And but we stayed and you know, everything we did ultimately ended up having a huge effect. It changed the course of the country. I mean, war was out at a prison. trying though, but we stayed and everything we did ultimately ended up having a huge effect. It changed the course of the country. I mean, the law was out at a prison. His convictions were reversed. This judge went from universally beloved hero to a hated figure, handed up leaving the Bolsonaro government. So that all happened and we were heroes of the left and hated more than anything by the Brazilian right. At the same time, when Bolsonaro was elected, they're starting to become this reaction to him, not just by the Brazilian left, but by the Brazilian establishment, by the Brazilian center right. Very similar to the way that in the United States, those kind of never-Trump center right establishmentarians, all of our institutions of authority had this like extreme fear of Trump because he represented a populist uprising, this like challenged to establish power. The same thing happened in Brazil. And you had this one judge on the Supreme Court and supported by a lot of others. He was never a leftist. He's not a leftist. He comes from this very center right politics. He's sort of like a Paul Ryan or Mitch McConnell figure. And he became the leader of this effort to crush the Bolsonaro movement and Bolsonaro himself using extra legal means, just like we're seeing in the United States with these fabricated prosecutions of lawfare against Donald Trump. And despite the fact that there was a hero of the left and utterly hated by Bolsonaro and his movement to the point they really tried to imprison me or deport me, I began speaking out very vocally against this judge. And one of the main tactics he used was political censorship. They started imprisoning people for questioning COVID, but particularly for defending the Bolsonaro movement. You started having exiles like journalists and bloggers and activists fleeing the country from very good reason to the United States to avoid prosecution at the hands of this one judge. You became completely lawless. But he became a hero of the left because he basically imposing authoritarianism and tyranny against Bolsonaro and his movement. And this was a guy who because he was on the center right was hated by the left for years. You know, as a racist, fastest, all the things they call people and when they hate them, but he became through this consolidation of judicial power and his use of it in ways that are classically authoritarian as a hero of the left and the number one figure of the hated right. And I was only people who was not a Bolsonaro, he was not on the Bolsonaro right to speak out. And I didn't just speak out. I mean, I denounced it constantly. I'm a columnist of the biggest Brazilian paper. I was using my column to just attack him constantly. And he was the same kind of hero as that prior judge was who had the anti corruption probe who's reporting we were able to use our reporting to expose. And so overnight I started to become an enemy of the left and made a lot of new friends. Among Bolsonaroistas, including the ones who are trying to imprison me just two years earlier. And I have to say like, you never really think you're going to see actual tyranny. And this is the closest I've ever gotten like you have to be thought authoritarian things in the United States that have happened. It's what impaled me to write about journalism, the abuse of civil liberties after the war on terror in the name of terrorism. But nothing like a figure of this sort. And this is the first time my career as a journalist where I ever had a fear of what would happen if I actually criticize this political figure. And you know you're living in an ever press a regime. When you feel a fear, even somebody like myself who has a lot of protection, a lot of platform, a lot of like international notoriety. But I really did worry about what would happen if I was going to criticizing because other people who did were punished and put into prison. And I'd been doing it very vocally and loudly since they've attacked similar people. He opened a criminal investigation into Michael Schallenberger and the journalists who did the Brazil Twitter files, they they actually opened a criminal investigation into them. They've never done it against me. I think again, because I have a certain kind of platform and protection, including the fact that the current president of Brazil is out of prison because of my reporting, something he's often publicly stated. The minute he got out of prison, the first person he called when he got home was me to thank me for everything I had done. So I think it's very difficult to do that. But again, like if you have that kind of platform, I think you're obligated to use it in ways that other people can't because of their fear because if you don't, then who will? Who is the judge? The Alessandro Demerice is his name. It's the person that Elon must begin attacking because you know, rumble, which is where my show is, is no longer accessible in Brazil. Let's use a VPN. I can't watch my own show in Brazil because if you try and access rumble in Brazil, you'll get a thing saying this site is blocked because of how many censorship borders, rumble was getting from the Brazilian courts that they refuse to comply with. And that was what Elon must about to do was he said, we're getting so many unjust censorship borders that we're going to refuse to obey them, even in means we get kicked out of Brazil. Now he didn't follow it through on that. But the fact that he made that a scandal, he talked about this judge, Alessandro Demerice being this kind of like repressive figure, created a kind of debate that was well needed. But Twitter didn't end up following through. They actually ended up saying no, no, we will obey all the censorship borders in order to stay in Brazil. But you know, this is real repression, but it's not a left wing kind of of repression. It doesn't come from Lula. This guy is not a leftist. What he is is part of that establishment power that was fearful of and contemptuous of Bolsonaro and used authoritarian power to stop the Bolsonaro movement to protect establishment authority very, very similar to what's happening in United States with respect to Trump and his movement. How long can you stay there? I mean, I'm going to stay in depth. I mean, get my kids are, you know, teenagers, they're, they're now teenagers. They're, their life is in Brazil. They're Brazilian. They've never known known in the country. I'm not going to approve them to force them to live in another country. I've obviously not going to abandon them. They're the thing by far most important to me. And I feel like the work I'm doing is in defense of a country that I want to be free because that's theirs. I'm not saying there's never anything that could force me to leave Brazil. But I really felt an immediate imminent threat to my personal safety or my families who knows. But if you find yourself running away from those kind of fears, it defines the person that you are completely agree. And as you, as you said correctly, you know, you can't face yourself if you know that you're empowered. On the other hand, Brazil, I think is a wonderful country for the record is also the kind of country where they could, you know, have you killed a make a look like crime? Yeah. And I mean, you know, obviously during this note in reporting, we took a lot of precautions because we had an archive that was the most valuable archive, not just in the US government, but to every other government on the planet and to all kinds of non-state actors, I would carry around with me on my backpack, the archive on thumbnails because everyone leave them at home that contained, you know, some of the most sensitive documents that exist on this planet, there were obviously a lot of security risk at the time. We had to have security at our house constantly security everywhere we were left. Same thing when I was doing the reporting that freed a little from prison. We had constant threats to our physical safety. I couldn't leave the house about armed guards. Neither could my husband or my kids. So, you know, I don't just walk around freely on the street because I realized that there are threats that I'm not paranoid about them. I don't want to turn our house into a fortress. But you know, you take precautions again or something, but there's never risk that you can completely eliminate. Do you think that my last question, do you think this, the authoritarianism that's obviously descending on the world, is it a permanent state? Is this accelerating or is this just sort of an interlude that we're going to laugh about, ruefully in 10 years? Well, this is what the point I always make, you know, because I talk a lot about on my show, which primarily has an American audience about what's happening in Brazil, and I stress the reason they should care isn't just because Brazil is this very large country with huge resources and a lot of importance on the geopolitical stage. The second largest in our hemisphere, which would be reason enough. It's because the United States is not exactly the same trajectory, maybe just a couple of steps behind. And what all of these countries in the Democratic world are doing in Western Europe, in Canada, you know, it's just in Canada because they're shockingly repressive law that provides for prison sentences, for hate speech on the internet, prison sentence up to seven years. Yeah. And actually, if you're accused of inciting or defending genocide, you can be put into prison for life under this bill. I mean, this bill is shocking. I went to Canada to do events against the central law, not because I'm Canadian or care back Canada because what's happening is everyone in these countries is using the other as a laboratory for how far they can go. So every time one country takes another step toward consolidating control over the internet and what can and can't be said, that shows other countries, the space that they now have to go forward as well. It's completely interconnected. Every time the EU or the UK or Ireland or Canada or Brazil takes steps forward to consolidate censorship control over the internet. It's norms change exactly. And it completely transforms what the population comes to think is normal. Again, though, is it inexorable this move toward 1984? The internet is such a fascinating innovation because it has such a dual edge potential on the one hand it can be this unique and unprecedented tool of emancipation and liberation that was its promise and potential. On the other hand, it can also be a tool of unprecedented coercion and control because if it is no longer free, if it can be used as a method of ubiquitous surveillance and information control, I think it can become a closed system that is almost impossible to work your way out of. And that's why to me there is no more important battle than keeping the internet free free in terms of privacy and free in terms of speech because it is increasingly the only way that we really communicate and spread ideas with one another. Does AI technology make that more or less likely to happen? Think it makes a lot more likely to happen. And that's why it was so alarming to see those original versions of AI like CHF-GPT that obviously had all kinds of political ideology imposed on it where you couldn't even get factual answers to certain questions because the designers of CHF-GPT wanted ideological lines to supersede factual accuracy. And so you would ask questions of it and the answers that you got were completely dependent upon the ideological perspective of those who had designed it. And I found that extremely alarming. Is there any indication that that's going to change? I mean, again, it goes back to what we talked about a little bit earlier, which was I think there is this extreme unrest and dissatisfaction on the part of populations in Western governments that even if they don't follow politics closely, even if they're not very engaged, it's amazing that the biggest voting block in the United States or people who just don't vote, which is not to vote because they don't think it matters one way or the other on somewhere where they're probably right about that. But even people who aren't very politically engaged have this intuitive sense that there's just something deeply corrupt about power factions and institutions of authority. And I think that kind of dissatisfaction that is being exploited by some clever politicians in positive ways or in negative ways is obviously a prerequisite of everybody is content and happy and beliefs they're free. And if things are going well, then it's impossible to get people to uprise and change. But when they start really believing that things are radically awry, that's why there's all these politicians who have nothing in common other than the fact that they promise to hate and wage war against the establishment forces that are controlling and people's lives and people want those agents of disruption and subversion in there because they know that the status quo is something that is kind of very evil and very repressive. And that sense is incredibly important to preserve. Do you think that the forces of light have a chance against the forces of darkness? I think everybody who does what you do or I do who wakes up and talks about these issues and works on them inherently has a sense of optimism because you didn't you wouldn't do it. What would be the point? The only reason to do any of these things is because you believe that what you're doing can actually have an impact to make a positive outcome and help to contribute to a positive outcome. So I really believe in the capacity of human reason of human persuasion, but also just like an intuitive sense that human beings have to understand almost intuitively when they're being threatened, what kind of when they're being deceived, when they're being subject to corrupt and abusive power. And all of history is uprisings and rebellions and revolutions against establishment authority, including ones that seem completely entrenched and vulnerable. I mean, the whole enlightenment was to overthrow monarchs and churches that had dominated intellectual life for centuries. And we've seen that over and over and that's very hard to look at human history and conclude anything other than any kind of structure that is built by human beings can be weighed, word against and torn down and replaced by other human beings. And I absolutely think that the tools are here and those are the tools we have to defend. Glenn Greenwald. Thank you. Yeah, it was good talking to you. We're always great talking to you. Thank you. Thanks for watching our YouTube channel. We hope you'll subscribe to it. And by the way, you can hit the little bell on there and get notifications every time we produce a video. We hope you'll do that also.