All right, Dan. Welcome. Thank you. Hey, thanks for having me. You live in Naples, right? Yeah. Yeah. Let me see. What's it been like down there since the hurricane hit? Well, a two weeks ago? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's, you know, it's funny right now in these Naples, they're, uh, we're doing all this cleanup. We're doing a lot of, um, stripping houses out, getting all the water out and stuff like that. But, uh, down in Goldshore, which is the, you know, more, uh, stout, more richer part. Uh, I seen it today. It was a wreck. And yesterday. Yeah. Yeah. I was down there working and they're not so quick to clean it up. It's almost like they're cleaning the, the poorer parts up first this time. Yeah. That's, that's the first time that's ever happened. All I see is the, obviously, like the pictures and videos on social media and stuff like that. And that's all like one bridge was completely demolished. And then there were like houses that were. Captiv, uh, all that down there is, is Santa Bell. My buddy's got a bunch of stores down there. They all wiped out. He was flying around in the helicopter, taking pictures. I got a bunch of pictures of it. But the whole causeway is knocked out, you know. So what was it like driving up here? Um, or people that are listening on, not that I'm 75 that I see. Yeah, but go ahead. So yeah, I was just saying people are listening. Dan lives in Naples, which is, uh, we're in St. Pete right now. So he lives well. You like like three hours directly south of us. Yeah. Which is almost exactly where Hurricane Ian made landfall. Yeah. Yeah. Fort Myers work came in and, uh, we got, we got hit with the flooding real bad. Like quick, my sister and, uh, my nephew got wiped out completely. There was like five feet of water in their place in no time. Like they were calling me and saying, come over, we got power and I'm down down Naples. I'm right on the beach. It didn't hit around my place. But the water came in and it came up the whole East trail was just like all those houses flooded all those first floor houses. Five feet of water in like two minutes. So crazy how depending on what side of the storm you're on, right, the fuck in because of the counterclockwise rotation. If you're south of the storm when it hits land, you're going to get flooded. Yeah. We were north of the storm when it hit. So all the water got sucked out of the way. So dropped on us. It was the opposite. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's how Irma went out. Yeah. When Irma hit me and, uh, the guy we were just talking about earlier, we were on, on golf shore and the surge came in and it died right now because of a cold front. And, and it just came in five feet real quick, but it went right back out. Before that water came in, the Gulf went out of mile. You can walk like a mile out. Yeah. And he got caught on a news cast or whatever. He was down there and, uh, and he was just walking around looking at the muck of all the, the Gulf being dried out. No, it was a good mile out. You can walk out in the, in the TV reporter says to him, uh, hey, is low tide usually like this? He goes, they ain't low tide. He goes, I don't know what's going on, but you can never walk that far out. on dry land, you know, I mean, muck, like, you know, sand all pulled back with the water. Irma was one of the craziest storms I've ever been through around here. Yeah. We were terrified of it here. Like what it was what was going to happen. Everyone was, and then, you know, it turned the last minute, I feel like, yeah. And went, and when, because it was supposed to hit Tampa directly, and it was lit, maybe a couple of hours before it just made a random turn right and went, right. There was three factors that happened. We would have all been wiped out. Like three, you know, just flukes a cold front, some other thing. But it just made it to where it changed the whole dynamic just enough for, for, you know, for us not to get wiped out. You know, and this time we got hardly any warning. We thought it was going to hit Tampa or Fort Myers, you know, north of Fort Myers. They said it was coming in, but we didn't expect that surge. You know, I didn't see it. I don't watch the news though. That's my fault. The news is everything they can just a fear monitor. Yeah. Yeah. And it's never accurate. I mean, if, yeah, it's never what they say. And if they do get lucky every now and then it's, you know, you can just get, just as lucky, guess. So the worst thing that happened to you with Ian was you just got like five feet of flooding real quick. Yeah, I lost a couple of trucks, but, yeah, nobody got hurt. I got pulled some, some people out of floods and, you know, some people were stuck down there. And so what is it you do? What, what were you doing? I have a moving company. Yeah. And then I have a semi demo company too. I was doing that first because when I came out of corrections or whatever, be locked up so long, I really didn't have any legal ways to make money. So I just started picking stuff up and putting it down like the, like the, you know, big muscle guy or whatever. I could pick anything up and put it down. So I started doing that and it just started making more and more money. And people just kept using me. So you're, so what were you doing to help people after the hurricane? Just like helping people get out of their houses, get out of their floods. Yeah. Yeah. Some of them, they were okay with drinking and hanging out there, but they were really dying. Yeah, they were gonna die. Yeah, they would have died. And then, you know, my sister, it looked like a bunch of refugees running up to my car. Yeah. I mean, like you're talking water and, and one guy went to the hospital like a bacterial infection from it. Yeah. Yeah, like a bum leg or yeah, and we're cleaning his place out now. And he's just a mess. Serious burning. He couldn't stop burning. And so finally he goes to the hospital and, and yeah, he's got some serious infection from that muck or, or they call that brackish waters. Mm. Yeah. Yeah, man. I mean, fuck, they got really fucked up in that one area, but I keep, I keep thinking like how much, how many more bullets are we going to be able to dodge? Like, especially right here in St. Pete, you guys in Naples, like you can be just a couple, like 10 to 20 miles away and get away from kind of like the worst parts of it. Right. When you see like the photos and videos of like the worst parts of Irma or the worst parts of like even Hurricane Andrew, like there's whole entire neighborhoods that got just demoed. We're in a brand new prison one Andrew hit and it was brand new and now it's condemned. But in Miami. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so we got evacuated. We got sent to Lake Butler, which is not that far from here, I think. We're in the reception center there at that time when the hurricane Andrew was coming and they, that place was wiped out for, I mean Miami was a wreck at Homestead and all that. Yeah. Yeah, dude. It was totaled. Yeah. I heard you talking to Matt on the other podcast about, you know, how they keep you kind of safe, you know? Yeah, he was saying that like a safest place is to be. Yeah. Unless you're getting flooded. Yeah, unless you're getting flooded and they ship hold that happen to us too. We got evacuated. Did you guys on Con Air? No, no, no, you know, the funny thing is though, I wasn't dided on some charges. I didn't do and they put me on this bus and I was in Clayton County, Missouri and I was wanted down in South Florida for triple homicide in an armed robbery. I didn't do it, but they swore I did it and they had people saying I did it. But anyway, I was, I was running and I'm on, they get me and I'm in the fugitive block on the A floor in Clayton County jail and they come get me and they locked me out of the clique. Silence of the lambs walking down the street like a, you know, and I get on the bus and this, this bus when you said the Con Air thing. That's what they showed. They showed Con Air lock up. They had like a grayhound that was restored into a prison bus and we're on this thing for like weeks and I'm traveling. They're, I ended up in Cook County in Chicago. All these places and I'm sitting next to this guy and I go, is everybody on here wanting for murder or not. And he goes, I'm wanting for child support. I was like, what? He gets up walks away from me, you know, and, and you know, I get down the Naples and, and this is a long time ago, but my daughter lives in, in, in Missouri. And so I was going up there trying to, you know, at the time she was still a kid. So I got, you know, trying to do legit, trying to do the right thing. I get picked up like, you know, 500 cops hit on me, you know, they hit me at the place I'm working and they bring me back down like a month later I get back to Naples. And, and I couldn't believe the whole ride and they take it all these county jails to park overnight or, you know, after so much driving they have to stop at a county jail process. You process. Yeah, you kind of sit in, you know, no man's land and you don't get fully processed there because you're not staying. But, but so I go to all these different kinds of, I get back to Naples and, and, but the whole way, what was funny was they're showing all these breakout movies like, everything. Like they're trying to give you ideas or something. You know, they got, you ever see the, the best, they're still on lock up or, oh yeah. And they're in and out breaking out of prison con air. You know, and it was like, I was like, what are they trying to do here? They're trying to encourage you to, you know, try some stupid, you know, escape move. Cause you're, you know, I wonder why they do that. I don't, I don't know the, the people they must have been minimum wage workers that were driving these things. Cause there was a guy on a girl that were fighting with each other. And it was, it was like a, like this is what we got here. And it was just, I don't know. It was, so you got actually charged with this homicide? Yeah. I got, well, yeah. I was, well, what they do is you, you, they get probable cause they lock you up. And I don't know if they do this everywhere, but in Florida, they lock me up a lot first and found out if I was guilty later. And so, this is what happened to me. I got, they had enough people saying they witnessed me being there or me being around there or whatever. And they had enough probable cause to arrest me and dame me on it. It didn't have enough to get me because an arm robbery, which I did do, I robbed this drug deal. I didn't know you get arrested for that. So I robbed this guy and, you know, it's not a very nice person. So I didn't have a problem with it. And at the time, and I took his stuff and he called the cops on me and told them, you know, and, and, and so I couldn't believe it. So I get there and they're like, look, if you give us a three-lide-attected test, do a hare and blood sample. It took a hair, a swab, and prove you didn't do these murders. And we'll let you go on this arm robbery, which I know I did do and I could have got screwed. Right there, they could have got me for 40 years or something. And I already had a priors and everything else. So I was like, sure, you know, let me get my lawyer down here and, you know, I couldn't afford a lawyer on these charges, but I had a friend that was a lawyer. And he's always looked out for me. So he came down and made it all official. I only failed one question that had nothing to do with this. But they slid it in there and it wasn't, you know, it was a very generic. It didn't make me look too good. But I beat the whole thing. So I ended up walking out on that. And that's happened quite a bit. Like, I think, I don't think they do very good police work. You know what I mean? I think they do a lot of, you know, they got like a force there and they don't have a lot of people looking into stuff. So they just kind of lock up who they think did it and hope they tell them themselves. Yeah. Somebody tells on you or something. Yeah. It's getting better now. Like the more it was very in the dark ages down there when I first moved there, like 30 something years ago and I got so much trouble so quick. But yeah. So let's let people know like how this whole journey started for you. I believe the stories you got sentenced to five years of prison at the age of 15. Is that right? Yeah. Yeah. My first, how did that, how did that happen? I got into a fight with a, what a cop and I was coming out of, you know, someone's house at late at night, kind of snuck out of her house and I was walking home. And they said I was, they rolled up on me and said I was loitering and prolly. And I said, you know, I don't know what that is, but I'm going home. This is the quickest route to my house. You know, I live here. She lives here. They wanted to call and her dad was, you know, Spanish and wasn't going to understand nothing. He's just going to know I was there. Like nights I just said, oh, well, it's not in your business. I'm going home and I walked away and, and he horse-called me like pulled my shirt back like by my neck real hard. And I wasn't really thinking. I just kind of spun and hit him and I cracked his jaw and, yeah, ended up having going to pay his hospital bills and everything. You got some hammers for fists. Yeah. I don't want to get hit by one. No. And I boxed a little bit and I was just quick with my hand. I've always been real quick. I don't look quick because of, you know, huge, but I just always been real quick. My dad was quick and it's just genetic or whatever. So I got him more troubled than I, you know, signed up for. And so I just ran. I took off home. They were at my house. They came deep, you know, and then the judge kind of made a, at the time single, single moms with their kids was not really something they wanted down there in Naples, Florida. And, and not to make, you know, excuses. You know, you had a copy. You should go to jail. But I kind of got made an example out of, you know, I was a big kid. About 315 pounds at that time. Six, four in my ninth great year. And so, you know, the, the judge didn't have any kind of, you know, I just told the truth. I said, look, this was a fight. And, you know, I know him wrong. But we can work this out. And he's like, yeah, five and a half years good luck. Son, he set me on my way. And that was it. Yeah, it seems insane. You're punching a cop. Right. And I understand it's way worse if it's a jury assaulting a police officer, but just like a punch. Yeah. Yeah. They're very strict about that down there. Like you can't even get in a fist fight without catching a battery charge. Like if that's probably normal now, or where I grew up in Jersey, I mean, a fist fight. You know, it was just a fight. Even if a cop challenged you in a fight, and you know, and they said, you know, I'll put the gun down, put the badge down, they fight you. It was, it was a total different thing where I was from than where I moved into. That's wild. Yeah. Yeah. It was pretty wild. By the time I counted you from originally, yeah, well, I was born in Camden. And I was raised in Newark in Jersey. Jersey. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then I moved to Florida though. When I was 14, I think I had like one good year there and then I went to prison. Yeah. I won't all right here. I did good in sports, but I couldn't concentrate in high school. Sports was the only outlet I had. So this is an interesting question. And you're, if you could summarize it, what is the difference between Jersey and Florida? Oh, man. If I could summarize it. Well, not all of Florida, but not necessarily not necessarily like the geography rather than nature, but the people, the people. Yeah. That's what I was going to say. What is the difference in the people? I found my kind of people that I grew up with that I'm comfortable with in Miami, like inner cities. And I found that this is a nice place to live if you know how to live there. Naples or same Pete. I don't same Pete actually. He's got a rough. Yeah. A lot of people don't know about it here, but I was caught up here one time in a concert or whatever. One dude got slammed on his head and another guy got shot. I mean, this place gets off to change. So I'll say Pete gets pretty new. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And now the front of my guy's stab that a cannibal corpse concert. What? And the long, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. My buddy's a cannibal corpse concert. Yeah. He was just mashing and next thing you know, somebody stuck on me. You know, I've ended up if you can't a little corpse concert. Yeah. Yeah. They get off the chain. But a lot of people think, oh, Tampa is saying Pete's nice area. Same thing with Naples and Fort Myers. We got tons of on-resolved murders and tons of them that they just don't publicize. And I don't know. Maybe I shouldn't say that because it's nice there. But but that's the truth. You know what I mean? And and they just don't because where they call that, uh, tourist. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's a freak everybody out. Miami too. Miami's off the chain. I mean, Miami's not even really Florida. Nah. Miami's a whole different country. Yeah. Some old different worlds. I lived there for a couple of years too, but not one good day. Not one. I mean, I had great days, but not one productive Miami to me is like Vegas. Like the best two days there, the day you get there and they leave. Yeah. Now it is. Yeah. I had a lot of good times. I had some good Cubans that were good friends of mine to this day. Or you know, the ones that are alive. But but they were thorough people. You know what years were you living in Miami? Oh, see. 90 in the 90s mid 90s, 96. All that all that time is kind of a blur. I was out of my mind. Yeah. Yeah. The early 90s of her, I've seen some documentaries about Miami in the 90s. Yeah. Yeah. I was in prison there in the 90s, early 90s. And all those guys are coming in there from the worst of the, you know, it's just from the worst parts of society. You know, so what was your early childhood like in New Jersey? And how did that shape you? That's a good question. So I reacted. It was about eight years old when I, when I identified a lot of pressure to, um, to live up to something, you know what I mean? I felt like there was a lot of pressure. I had to live up to something. I know what it was, you know, and nobody gave me direction or, um, what were your parents like? Uh, both good people. My dad was a chemist. Um, always working. My mother was always cooking, you know, she had a place in Montclair called the gourmet pantry and, you know, good parents, but no, no real time with four kids to like, um, and we had a lot of like, uh, other kids living in our home too. Cause my mom would take in any, you know, sad case or anything like that. So everybody just kind of assumed I should know what I'm doing. And I had to act like I knew what I was doing. I felt like I did. I didn't know how to say one of four. So yeah, one of four on the third, uh, born, I guess second, my little brother's the baby and, uh, he's like 44 now. But, um, but yeah, I always kind of had to, uh, know what I was doing. Had no clue. Like really I was a slow learner. I didn't get nothing. Like I didn't understand nothing. People gave me like my mother one time when I came in drunk, I felt through the door and I was like, you know, kid, I was trying to impress this girl ended up puking in her face and she ended up helping me to the door. And I, I fell down and she's like, you're just like your father. I was like, Oh, cool. I like my dad's a good way right over my head. Like, and you would think I was some sarcastic, you know, but really, I meant it. At the time I didn't know, uh, nothing, you know, that's funny. Yeah. And nobody taught me nothing. Like I had to learn all this stuff. All those years in prison, I, I read a lot and tried to figure things out. But there was no real, uh, you know, there was people that tried to talk to me. Like they had me go to a shrink and an anger management school when I was a kid in Wayne, New Jersey. Uh, I threw a chair and hit this teacher because she, uh, humiliated me. And I just whip the chair and I hit her. I didn't mean to hit her. I was just angry. And uh, that so they sent me to an anger management school and Bobby Chez used to come there and, and they had this goat and they taught me how to box and now I'm an angry kid who can fight real shit. It was just a, you know, it just got worse than work. They sent me to a therapist. And when I got to the therapist, it was so calm there. He'd have me punching a heavy bag. I was like, yeah, I'm good. You know, I, and then when I had to go to my house, it was like sometimes people be breaking in a window. Some weird person will be sleeping. No matter. You know, there was nothing but like trauma going on around me. Somebody's trying to steal a car. You know, they're big on stealing cars there. And you know, you don't know somebody's coming to cut your throat. You feel like you just feel a fear. And, and, and so, you know, when I got to these places that I could have got help, if I knew how to be honest about, because they'd say, how are you doing right now? Right now, I'm great. I'm in this office. I'm right here with you. This is safe. You know, I got a punching bag here. I don't need nothing else. I'm good. But then I couldn't talk about what wasn't in this moment. You know, and so if you asked me if I'm fine right now, yeah, I'm fine. You know, I couldn't talk about yesterday or whatever, because I don't want to really live that shit. And I don't know if talking about it's going to bring it up again. So like you're afraid to follow fear. Relive the past or anything about the future. Yeah. Or piss on a good moment. You know what I mean? This is a good moment. Why would I want to bring that shit up? Not knowing because I couldn't trust where they were going. I didn't see the point in something. So I won't do it. You know what I mean? And you couldn't get me to do it. And if you kept trying to pry, you'd find out real quick. not to do that. You saw it looked like I was confident. But all the while I'm batting off the only things that can help me because it's not my thinking. So it was a real, real trap. You know, so when prison went up around me, I was just like, it doesn't make any difference. I've been in prison all my life. You know, so the walls go up around me. But I was in prison my whole life. I have to be in this moment because, you know, if I bring any of my real life into this, it's going to suck. You know, right. Yeah. So how did, how would you say that growing up, at least until you were what eight years old, going up in Jersey, how did that sort of like mold you or hardwire you? A lot of ways. I left there when I was 14. When I was 11, I was working for these gangsters out of a whole book. And they were at this time they were doing legit, you know, rubbish removal. But their, but their whole presence was kind of illegal. Just their whole aura. You know, just said, don't mess with these guys. So I would go in and do these rubbish removal jobs. I was a big kid at that time I was like 11. I was 6, 2, 2, 20. And I'm throwing like furnaces on the truck. I'm having a great time because I'm making good money. You started me out 60 a day cash. And then I, because I buy you lunch. And I said, all right. And then I ate like 40 dog, 40 hot dogs the first day. He goes, I'll give you a hundred bucks a day. You buy your own fucking lunch. He gets, I was like, oh, I got a raise. And it went right over my head that it was too much food. You know what I mean? I just like, I must have did a great job. I gave me a $40 raise in one day. Because like I remember it was Archie's on, or JJ's on, on, down in Newark. And I go, yeah, give me 20 cheese dogs, 20 chili dogs. You know, these are like one bite to buy a dog. 30 water dogs, you know, but it was like Christmas for me. because my mom, she only cooked healthy shit. And I wasn't allowed to drink Pepsi or have, you know, toy guns or not. Then they were, they were a little strict when they were around. You know what I mean? Yeah. Yeah. They would always steal, you know, I, I'd be on my own. My mother was, they became mom. Jehovah's Witnesses. No shit. Yeah. The only, the only kind of Jehovah's Witnesses I've ever seen were them and another family and the other family didn't seem judgmental. They were very nice. But our family seemed like they had to tell everybody how to live and we didn't know how to live. So it was pretty comical. But, but they had this thing where you couldn't have a replication of a pistol or anything like that. They're not allowed to fight in wars and none of that. So they had an effect on you at all. Oh, big time. Because it made me, I love pistols. I love guns. I, I, I, only reason I think I love guns is because I didn't have to be toy ones. So I bought a real one. Yeah. I was like, yeah. Yeah. I was like, I'm hiding this because they would break them right in the, right in the, and it was like heartbreaking to me because I wanted to play with it. You know? And so anyway, I got this job just so I could have money to do my own thing a little bit because I, as much as it seems crazy, I didn't know how to do anything. But I wanted to do everything. You know, and I didn't let anybody else tell me how to do anything. So a lot of it was my fault or my, what you said, it shaped me into a very defeating way of living because I couldn't say you're real good. You're good at podcasts. If I said, hey, I want to do a podcast. But don't tell me anything. I'm just going to figure it all out. And you go and give me some good insight. And I'm like, and I shoot that down. That's kind of what I did with life. You know what I mean? I'd ask how to do this thing. Right. Then I'd shoot down the messenger and I'd come up with some crazy shit that told me it was the best way to go. Well, that, I don't think that's a bad thing. I feel like a lot of people fail because in life in all different aspects because they think too much about the future or the past. Yeah. And I feel like one of the like the crazy example of this would be, I don't know if you saw it for a basketball fan, but the Michael Jordan documentary that came out on Netflix, I think parts of it. Yeah. It's got forgot what it's called. Last dance. Yeah. One of the biggest takeaways from that was he talks about like not thinking about anything when you're playing basketball and you're doing everything, obviously prepare, but when you're doing it, you're living in that moment. And that's how you achieve your the fullest potential you possibly can is just staying in that moment and not worrying about the future, not worrying about the past. That's I believe that's the best way to live. The problem is when you start out from a place that's not whole. Let's say George had a lot of demons doing it. Yeah, he does. And that's the problem. Like you might think he's a success and he is in his own right. You know way more successful than probably anybody, but there's this success that I found is more important. It's the success of like going inside and either living above those demons or or or or beating them. So so I had ones and the guys that were the guys that were influencing me showed me that power over road half and a beat. You're always right. You could always be right. And that's no way to learn. So so you got elements like the obsession of what you're into being all into it. I think that is the best way to do it. If you're into something like I told, like I said, the Julian, like when I'm here with you, you're the most important person I'm talking to because you're the only person that I can transmit and receive with. So I take that very serious and you know, a lot of the things I, I deal with people with is that kind of seriousness. Like they're going to, they're going to die if they don't do something about these problems. Some of them, you know, so so it in Jordan's case, in an a lot of cases, people don't have to beat their demons. They, they get enough success everywhere else. But if you're not a success to yourself, you're not living. Like I don't think you're living. And he might be. He might conquer enough. And you know, it looks like he's a well-rounded, great guy. But the guys on death row that I learned this serious lesson that it's just growing, it's just a concept that when you're, when you're close to death, you think about a couple of things. And one of them was, did you live to your potential or did you help others live to theirs and how you treated everybody? Well, what I didn't know when that concept was introduced into my head through, through experiences that that's the wholeness I need. It might not be what everybody's an iris in it, but a legacy or, or contributing to the whole is something I, I feel is my greatest call. You know what I mean? And if I'm not living true to that, it doesn't matter how much money I get, how much success I get, according to other people, I always feel like a failure inside, you know what I mean? And, and I could, I can get to where it don't matter what you do to me. If that's not in question, nothing else matters. Like the pain doesn't hurt. I can deal with whatever. So that's my obsession. His might have been basketball or whatever. And I don't think anybody's is better or worse than anybody else's. It's all about, do you like, do you like living near potential or do you like people thinking you're living to your potential? And that, and you have that choice. Right. Yeah. What, um, at what point? So when you, okay, going back to your story, when you were, you were 15, you broke the cops jaw, you got sentenced to five years in prison. Five and a half. Yeah. Five and a half. And you're 15 years old. Yeah. Yeah. So you're essentially like living out the most important developmental years. Yeah. Your childhood in prison. What was that like? Well, you, yeah, you, you manufacture and, and play with things in your head that you're supposed to be experiencing. But you got to live in your head. So you can only think about the things you're supposed to be, uh, growing in your fundamental growth. So you're saying when you said when, when you say living in your head, do you mean by that? Like you're always being forced to think about the past of the future? No. What I mean is like, so your fundamental growth is physical, mental, all these things. So you get a growth spurt. And so most people out here would just experience their growth, growth spurt. Me, I would read a book differently or I would work out differently or I would come up with some new. people out here would just experience their gross, gross birth. Me, I would read a book differently, or I would work out differently, or I would come up with some new idea differently than being in a place where you know people are just living their lives. I'm in a place where you're being told stuff and there's violence and there's, you know, you got to distract yourself, not experience life, you got to kind of distract yourself from the lack of life. Does that make sense? Yeah. Wow. Yeah. So are you the youngest kid in there? And there, at that time I was the youngest and adult person because I got, when I got to state I was classified because of my size, they disregarded the youthful fender and so I ended up and which was better because kids my age were just off the chain, they were, you know, doing a lot of dumb stuff. I would have been, I probably would have been a lot worse, I don't know. In some sense I would have been worse off in some sense, I would have been better off. But I didn't like, I like reading, working out, you know, so it was fine for me. I had a job collecting in there because my mom didn't have a lot of money. People didn't send me nothing, so, you know, I collected for guys, it was easy. I was kind of like camp for me, you know. Yeah, it seems like most people I've talked to, you spent quite a long time in prison, they found some sort of ways, I mean, learned to find a way to make themselves valuable, to increase value, whether it be like learning law and like helping people with their cases. Yeah. Matt's example was learned how to tell stories and write people's stories, made people, you know, they're talented people. I know guys that can slam dunk from the foul line, I know guys that can create a picture that's more lifelike than the real thing, you know, I mean, there's you got nothing but time to work on something. It's something, it's out of all the negative things about the prison system. It seems like it finds some of the best aspects you're able to discover within yourself. That's the whole point of jail. You know, you have all that time to just reflect. Right. And you have these boundaries you're living within. It seems like something, there's some sort of magic that happens. That's exactly why, you know, prison and jail was created. That was the good idea to let you sit what yourself and say is this the way you want to live or not. Now the problem is going back to distractions, they thought, oh, let's introduce education. I got my GED in there and stuff. It's all distractions. My last bid where there was no correction, deemed necessary was the only prison bid where I changed. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Because, and I wish it would have been the first one, but I wouldn't have known it. I would have blew it up, you know, but at that time I was ready to change and I had a guy writing me that was helping me read certain things and redirect my thought processes. It was a really good guy I met through through the craziest person I ever knew, but, but somehow he always had a good heart for me, and he introduced me to this one guy and this guy ended up, you know, giving me concepts that are still coming alive today and he's been dead for 10 years or so. You know, when you met him on your last prison stint? No, no, no, no. Before I went to this last prison stint, I was trying to do the right thing for a minute. Not on purpose. Somebody tricked me. When you were out. Yeah. So somebody tricked me into going to a detox. I went into this detox and this guy came in. I thought it was a clown. He was doing good things for good people and I thought he was, well, you know, where'd I, but I ended up, you know, I ended up getting to know him and I ended up staying on his food time for like six months. Because he had such interest. He was speaking to the inside of me without me having to know he's doing it. Like without me having to say it, you know, and I mean, he was pulling stuff out of me and talking in a way that he knew where I was coming from. And all I had to do was listen and I was like, huh. And so he did this about that and he did this about that. And it was the worth issue. And there was this. He said all the things about his stuff. I got to listen to it and start practicing things. And then I got to see it differently. And, and the guy stuck with me up until his last breath. You know, where was this? This was in Fort Myers. Yeah. In right before my last prison bed. So 2004, maybe. Yeah, I met them. Yeah. And then he, I was with him for a while doing good. And, you know, I went off on my own thinking again and and, and well, I started using drugs again. And, and, and I went to prison, but he never gave up on me. It was wrote me. And when he was dying, I came out of prison. I was like, well, I was like, I got him and my mom. I'm good. So I need, you know, I mean, and both of them start dying to cancer or like, on me. Yeah. So I'm going to hospice back to her. I was back to a hospital in Fort Myers. And yeah, I was like, wow, there is a God. He's got a weird sense of humor. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. These two were keeping me out of trouble in the only two that can do it. And, and, yeah, they both started dying at the same time. But he did get across to me all his experience and it's still, it's still even this. This is what it led to like coming here and talking to people. I would never do this. You know what I mean? I was isolated and I liked it. You know, I didn't like it. I just didn't like the react the feelings you get from dealing with people. Mm. Yeah. That's interesting. Yeah. So I much rather do a life sense or that sense. I didn't care than then I have to deal with all the uncontrollable variables of dealing with people. You never know how they're going to act. You know, I like controlled environments. You somewhat knew what was going to happen. It was always going to be shitty. It's a control thing. Huh? It's a control thing. I try to control how I feel the good ones I would chase, you know, till they were dead. And then the bad ones I would avoid, you know, didn't matter how they avoid them. And when you build a life like that, you become deranged. You know, right. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. I want to get to that. I'm sure there's a lot of insight that you can provide from the people that you've met. Yeah. So let's go back to you're doing five years. You started at 15 and you spend five years of prison from 50 to 20. Well, I got sentenced to five and a half. Okay. Then I broke a guards John or Jesus. Perfect. Yeah. Another. Yeah. So that ended up doing two more and then that wasn't that bad. He was kind of fault too. Well, at that time, it was always somebody else's fault. I did do it. It wasn't me. And in retrospect, you know, you're supposed to have a timeline when they wake you up. They're not supposed to touch you. And I might have got around the timeline a little bit and hit them anyway just because I didn't like them. And at that time, I was like, no, you woke me up. I didn't know what I was doing. I was just swinging. So in retrospect, I got what I deserved, somewhat. You know what I mean? Some of this stuff is just crazy. But, you know, because I've been like I said, I've been questioning and died in a murder. I ain't killed nobody. You know what I mean? But I hung around people that were capable of these things. You know, and I was always around them. Mainly because they made me look kind of sane, you know what I mean? And then we became friends and stuff. But they made me feel okay with my fucked upness from the lack of a better term. You know, because that's all you can hang out with to make yourself feel better. Right. So how old were you when you got out the first time? 22. You were 22. Yeah. And what did you start doing when you got out? Well, I had a resentment against cops. So I played semi pro ball. I tripped on acid a lot because he couldn't do drugs and yeah. And then I would play play football tripping on acid. I got, I got invited to come play for the Giants, which was my childhood team. And then I got more trouble. Every time I was about to do something positive, which in retro, like in hindsight, it's good that I didn't get no resources because I would have been a lot more dangerous than what I became. And if they would have put me in NFL or something, I don't know what kind of damage I would have did, but it would have been a lot. If they hid my fear, the way I hit my fear on a bigger scale, I would have caused a lot of damage. That's something I think about a lot. Like, could you imagine hypothetically, if you would have been, that was the, that was the person you were. And now all of a sudden you're surrounded by people just enabling you telling you, yes, you're the best. I don't top of that handing you millions of dollars. That person with unlimited resources to do whatever the fuck you want it. It could cause some serious. I know what kind of trouble I would have caused. I got kicked out of prisons. So I knew that society wasn't, I knew they were kind of right about me being a menace that gave me a menace. Kind of right. I didn't know because I wasn't malicious. I wasn't trying to hurt nobody. I was just trying to carry out what I want to do. But I just didn't care about laws or guidelines or rules. And that's dangerous. You know what I mean? Because if you spread that out and somebody is malicious and they're a part of your crew, now you've just given them a pass to do that. So you're kind of guilty too. Right. So that's, I didn't look at big picture stuff. I didn't look how it's impacting the whole when I seemed kind of like, like they're picking on me, you know what I mean? But really, I've helped so many people now. Some people I won't take on because they're dangerous in nature. You know what I mean? Like, the way they don't think of the whole, you know, if they're not willing to work on that first, I won't take them on because what I mean by that is walking them through their fears and getting them help them. If they're not willing to acknowledge first that this is dangerous to the whole. You know what I mean by that? Without being too descriptive, let's say, you know, somebody wants to get right so they can do what they do. And doing what they do cause a lot of destruction. I won't help. They want to get right so they can do. Yeah, they want to clear head to be able to harm people or contributing something that doesn't look harmful. It sounds it could be even legal. And but to me, I know it harms a lot of people personally and I go on experience. I don't go on what theories about it or nothing. I go on what I, you know, can see and and know from experience that that is a dangerous thing. Okay. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. And I know it because I've seen the worst cases of it. You know what I mean? I've seen the worst. Yeah, I've seen every kind of person there is not to say one's the same as the other. But if this thing leads to destruction 50,000 times, I'm not helping you get right to do this thing. Right. Whatever it is, you know what I mean? So yeah, it's hard to do. Right. How do you, how do you figure out which people can be helped and which people can't be helped? Like when you look at people and you see them going on the wrong, if they're on like a fucking pattern of destruction, either self-destruction, or destroying everything around them? Like how do you know? Like can this person be taken off his path or are they unhelpable? Oh, nobody's, nobody's beyond help. And I know that because they deem me that. And it's just not true. Nobody is. But if the person's not willing, so here's the thing, I identify what many, many people I've been, I've experienced many of those beginnings knew where they were going. So when I talk to them, they say, you've had these same thoughts and you didn't do it. Look at all the money you can make or something like that. I say, well, this is the reason. And then they trust me and then they start to work on that first. Now, if they say, I hear you and they know I'm talking the truth when I speak to them, they feel it. They know it's true, but I have to let them go for a while. It takes a year or two to be get up the courage to work on that thing first and they come back to them. And the whole time I don't reject anybody, I always help everybody. But I focus on what the real problem is that I see because I only know my experience. I know where that's going. Now, I have been accused of being too intense or so like playing around like say somebody's horse plane, I see people get gutted over horseplay, just joking around or being disrespectful. Seeing guys get cut up, that doesn't happen all the time out here. But in my mind, it goes that intense sometimes. And not so much now as when I first came out. But I'd be like, oh, that clown around right there is going to get you killed. And I've seen it happen. But it's not so intense. But eventually, if you keep being disrespectful and you don't check the temperature, you don't know how people are doing. You just come in playing around or you and that dude's, you don't know if his mom just died or you're not checking the temperature at all. You're just thoughtless. You're probably going to get punched in the face a lot. You know what I mean? And so know how to read the room. Yeah, read the room. Yeah. Yeah. But they go on oblivious. Like nobody could be, you know, having a bad day and just take it out on you because you, you were a clown. Right. So I've been too intense in the past and I've learned to light up on that. But me personally, I feel like you should always check the temperature of a person if they seem like they're down, find out first. Right. I'll just play with them. Yeah. There's also, you know, patterns in people that they can't figure life out or they're on like a destructive pattern. They're repeating a destructive pattern. And they finally get back on track. They start to get, you know, they start to get on the right path. They receive some success. And then they intentionally sabotage it. Yeah. They sabotage themselves on purpose. Yeah. Everything's going fucking great. You're on a great trajectory. Right. And then, well, it's going great according to the person looking at them. Right. That's what it's right. That's a big difference. That's what I was talking about. You see your friend, like, oh, this guy, he's fucking doing great. He's making money. He's fucking finally got his own place. Right. And then like, then he goes, drives his car to fucking bridge. Yeah. I see it all the time. It's because you're doing what's right by the people saying, like, you're going off reactions to people rather than a heartfelt. I'm doing this for myself. Kind of. But even though everybody's benefiting from it, if the person is not attached to what they're doing, they're better off being you know, in conflict, right. Talking their stuff out and saying, yeah, I hear you, you think I'm doing good. But the truth is, I hate this. And the other reason I'm doing it is because you want me to do it. Right. And then get real honest. And even though they can't take the action and say, they're doing something destructive. They're using drugs, right. Right. Whatever. Right. But you have to be able to accept them as they are or that acceptance doesn't get transmitted. And it ultimately causes the, the breakout of, you know, like all of a sudden they don't care about your opinion anymore because they're brain-diving them crazy because they're not recognizing and respecting how they really feel. The pressure builds and they're doing this stuff because they want to make you happy. But they don't really want to do the work of making themselves happy. You know, and part of that is because when you go to saying, hey, dude, I think you're an asshole from making me do this right now. You know what, get a job. Yeah. Yeah. You know, like if they don't get that kind of honesty and do the right thing anyway, that's what they can't handle. It's not, it's not keeping the, the bad action down the bad action just happens as a result of not feeling accepted. Not a part of they feel alien because it's so easy for you to do it, but I can't do it. You know, I can keep it going for a couple of weeks and months, but I can't keep it going because it's not me. And I'm not honest enough to say how I really feel. You know, and so how do you get around that? How do you get a guy, you get a guy like me that knew all that stuff and not and got to a point. And there's tons of people like me that out there. But you'll find them when you start doing it. Like you get family will keep you the sickest when you're like that. You because there is. Yeah, because they'll accept you with your bad behavior sometimes. And they'll yell at you constantly. So they slowly take away your life force while like keeping you there. My mother did it to me by accident. She didn't know. You know, it's like the term they call like the devouring mother. Yeah. Yeah. Something like that. Yeah. Keep the, because it's, it's a weakness that they're or like a band-aid. They're keeping their kid around. Right. Because it's, they don't want to deal with the heartache of cutting loose, which is ultimately the best thing. Yeah. Yeah. The only way they can do is throw them out of the nest. You know what I mean? But it's, sometimes they die. You know, sometimes that, but that was happening regardless and it might have happened more so because you, you coddled the thing. And it's not a tough love thing either because I deal with a lot of families of like addicts and stuff like that. It's a, it, you have to know you're, you're using courage that they're, you're doing this. And I, the first thing I get them to do is practice what people are not so close to, you know, go somewhere and start talking to people and get real honest. Like, you know what? Kicking. If this kid dies, I'd be better off because I'll sleep at night. Or if this kid goes to prison, like my mom was able to do that, when you're in prison, I feel safe. I feel like you're safe. That's what she would say. And I didn't really understand what she was saying was she didn't know how to detach from me and still look like a good mother, you know what I mean? And it's ingrained in a, in a woman to, you know, not give up period. But when you got certain destructive forces in there, they end up being your enemy. You know, they end up being the worst one to help you. Yeah. For a time. Yeah. I see that. Yeah. Oh man, it's, it's one of the most heartbreaking things to see and, and try to talk somebody through. Sometimes I don't, I don't like doing that because I feel like they probably hate me. We're telling them this, but I gotta tell them sometimes they out of it. If you really want this kid, if you want this, you want what's best for this kid or do you just want to look like, like you did it? Are you willing to play the back roll and get the best benefit? Or you want to look like the great mom and have your kid die? Right. That's what it comes down to, you know, in some of those cases. But they're all unique. They're very people are sick in different ways. People hide it better than others. And it's very difficult to get people to know. You could tell me the truth. I'm not going to judge none of that. And we can't get anywhere until you do. So it might take us six months of talking honestly before you tell the truth about what's going on. And you might not even know it. You know, most of the time they don't know it. Right. Yeah. That's fucking wild. Yeah. How many people like this have you helped dealt with? Uh, are you still doing it today? Yeah. Oh, yeah. I don't know. I mean, hundreds. Yeah. Like it's weird how many people are in my life because I never talked to it. But, you know, if I did, it was just to get something. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What is it? Right. Yeah. But yeah, when I when somebody has me a question like that or I think like that for a second, it's overwhelming. There's way too many people like yeah. And I don't know how it all, well, there's this, there's this life force that seems to give you limitless resources to do it and time slows down and all that stuff. I don't know about really, but that's the only way I can explain it that when you're on the side of life, you have everything you need to do it. But it is a struggle to stay on that without you have this whole, you have this whole psychology and this whole mentality like you see these people and you have literally been through all this. You have, you have it mapped out like yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's experiential for sure. It's not, even though I read tons of stuff and all that, and it all comes to the front of my head when I need it. But if I tried to look smart, I would go right back to that dummy ground. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Right. Yeah. I'll recite this or whatever. I'd be like, yeah, I don't know what you talk about. Yeah. Well, when I'm in that mode of sincerity, humility, and it all comes right to the front of my head. Everything I need is right there. Like even when me and you were talking, I sense you got something going on that where you want answers to that truly. And sincerely, you know what I mean? You could see you have an investment in that through friends or something. Have friends. Yeah. Yeah. Something. And that type of stuff only come like I'm not interested in nothing else, you know, or nothing else pulls my interest in everywhere else I look like a dummy. It's what it's, I mean, dude, I mean, it's, it's a fascinating thing that like I have friends that that are that fit this description perfectly. Right. And, you know, it's a thing that it's like, I freaking rack my brain over it all the time. Yeah. Like how, how is this happening? How does this guy fucking get go on the right path for so long? Like, look how fucking good he's doing. Like, like clockwork, once every five years, fucking right back down to the end. Yeah. I did it twice at five years. That's funny. Yeah. That's the timeline I went out twice. And when I say I went out, I went, I, I, I gave up hope that I can change. You know what I mean? I do it for my kid. I would do it for all kinds of reasons. And it would look great. I would build up and everything else. But I was still missing that completeness of why I was doing it. Right. Yeah. And there was something pulling at me. I mean, hard. And it would take about five years to get to that point where it was so unbearable. That most of the time I gave up this time, I didn't give up because I messed up to major organs and I was just too lazy. That was the only reason right. It was just all age. And I mean, maybe, you know, this God or something, inner being, I don't know, you know, I don't know. But this time I stuck through it in about three years after that five years, I was like, thank God. This is what they're talking about. I'm not living. You're one lucky one. Yeah. Yeah. If you could live through it all, because the things I know, I know, I don't have to go read a book or I just know from doing it wrong, every way you can imagine. And then doing it to the point where I can get a license or a desk ends and still doing it. I found out what works and what doesn't for me. But I do not suggest that like read itself. Read itself. Book a survival rate, but not very high. Yeah. But the ones like me won't listen to that. You know what I mean? And the only people they listen to are people that did that. Right. That's why I get a poll of a lot of people. I mean, it's amazing how many, you know, families and stuff I'm intertwined in and stuff like that. Because, I mean, if you read my history on record or anywhere, it's not. It's not a good read for family fun. Yeah. But it's like they love me. I love them and so weird. It's like a whole nother. Yeah. It's a real, it's a real human connection human connection. Yeah. And I over I thought that was the worst part of life was connection with others. Right. I really did growing up. That's somehow I picked that up. And I just thought nobody's to be trusted living your head and only deal with people when you need some more material to live in your head. Because they're not to be trusted. Nothing's consistent. It's all going to go to shit. Like I had this negative outlook. And I don't know. I guess I just purchased it from fear and and the lack of control over my emotions. They were so I was so hyper sensitive. And you would think I was like a stone killer. Right. The way I walked and I didn't express nothing. But I just learned to do that because I didn't want nobody asked me no questions. You know, right. Yeah. The truth is I had like a rule by emotion. You know, well, you were also so young too. Like, dude, you were like, you know, I mean, in prison at fit from 15 to 20, I mean, your hormones are fire. Oh, you're so crazy. Yeah. Yeah. It was I smashed this finger in prison. And and this nurse was giving me spongebath because they didn't want my hand getting infected because I'm a minor. I think they're illegally putting me in with adults and stuff. But whatever. And so they're they're giving me spongebout. I'm like, I just, you know, it was crazy how much I was like, you know, a bear touch or anything like that would just make me not. I did. I was a good to say that. But yeah, yeah. Yeah. It was like, oh, I did it. She's like, oh, that's normal. That's going to be fucking torture for a kid. Yeah. It was a crazy thing. Yeah. Yeah. Cause I mean, I've heard stories about state. Like, I've heard the story. I got, I had a guy here who was the state prison for a while. It was actually a friend of mine's brother. Right. He said that whenever a female cop would walk through all the dudes would be fucking jacket. It cause it's deprivation. Like if you, if, if the idea of jail was what they wanted at first, sit with yourself, think about what you're doing. You know, and of course, there's people that exploit that and make it horrible and shit like that. But if you really had a place where you were just set aside from society, you don't want to be a part of society. Okay, sit somewhere and see if what you really want because you can't go around harm and people, you know, and so if you had that ideal prison thing, I think it would work. You know, I mean, as far as like, you know, it doesn't even have to be called a prison, like maybe just throw them in a cave unless they're coming to cave. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. Throw them in a cave with no sensory, you know, because sensory deprivation tanks, Joe Rogan. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Give him some mushrooms and put them in a sensory deprivation. I believe that's where it's all going, eventually, bikes up to. Yeah. I think it's really, you know, that's just the way it's going. But because of money, you know, not enough money. Yeah. Yeah. That's the problem. They people put money over welfare and they don't realize that's a time bomb that eventually that your money's not going to make any difference. You know what I mean? There's nothing. There's only so many resources, whatever. Yeah. But, but, but not looking out for the welfare and helping things get better instead of people, um, it's a ticking time bomb. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. And they even said that about the prison system. They said, you keep locking people up for drugs. You got a time bomb on your hands. You're going to have all these people in here who aren't criminals. Now or becoming, they've done some criminal acts, but it was due to a desperation or whatever crimes of emotion. And, um, and you're treating them, you're putting them in with hardened criminals who are, you know, chasing money, like you're chasing the drugs and all this other stuff. And they've done this over and over again. Um, you're creating a time bomb. So, and so I think it was a governor or something back then that said that. But it's true. They privatized the prisons. They make it money off of it. Yeah. You know, people buy a prison whacking a George whacking, you know, those guys are making money off of locking people up. Like, there's an incentive to get locking. You know, lock people up. That's crazy. You know what I mean? But it is crazy. I don't get into politics. I don't feel like I got the right to talk about that stuff. Sometimes, you know what I mean? I don't know enough about it. Well, you know more about the prison system than most people. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I wonder what the percentages of people that actually get help, like, do better after prison versus the people who just don't, the people who are either they fucking die or they never get out or they just fucking, I don't know. They don't get better. I don't know the statistics are I should have never been out of prison more than a week. That's my statistics as far as the state goes. I should have never been and it's been 15 years since I've committed it. Well, fixing myself. I choked people. Getting right took a little bit of bumping. You're still the same person. You're just trying. Right. But the commitment and everything else. So it's been about 12, 13 years since I've gotten any trouble or I think like that still. But I don't act on it. Sometimes I'll think about stuff like this fucking dude trying to hear something. You know, it'll go through my head, but that's just all stuff coming up. But it has no real emotion behind it. So going back. What was your question again? I'm sorry. I forgot. Yeah. We went on like five tangents. Yeah. Yeah. I wanted to get to the religious aspect of your upbringing. How much of how big of a part was religion in your early life? Well, I read the Bible four or five times by the time I was, I don't know, 10 trying to fix my family. Yeah. Because I really thought everybody was stressed out way too much. You know, and I felt all this pressure to like fix them. I don't know what it was. But but what I didn't know and why I turned my back on all that stuff. My mom was Joe was with it and his my dad was Catholic. Me and my dad would skip out most of the time when they went to church. And we go do something. But anything other than go to church. But when I did have to go, it was miserable for me because everybody else seemed like so pleasant and they were getting it. Me, I was like, I'm going to hell. You know, that's all I seen out of that place is I'm going to burn. I can't act like these people. You know, and I couldn't sit still. I was like, this is driving me crazy. And so me and my dad would escape from that. And so I avoided it. But at the same time, I did read the Bible over and over again, trying to see what this was all about. Because if I come some families can be some. But at the same time, I did read the Bible over and over again, trying to see what this was all about. Because if I come some families could be somewhat functional, our family, like there were threats running back and forth. And there was always like an impending doom going around. So, I did read it from the back, I studied a lot. And what I didn't know at the time is I was looking at it for my own power. Which is a selfish, self-centered way to try to look at spiritual things. It's an only own power. Yeah, like for my own will, like to fix the people I want to fix. Like playing God and reading the Bible. And I didn't know at the time, of course, I'm a kid. You know, thinking out as God's up here taking requests. Let me read this Bible, putting some requests for this family. And then, but what I didn't know is spiritual is all inclusive. Like, and so these religions are just about certain people. The people, not the spirit that's behind it. A lot of them. Like some of them really do understand the deeper meanings and stuff like that. But then if they tried to tell me at that time, I wouldn't have got it. But I still try to fix physical people. What that does, it's only good if I took those spiritual truths, applied them to everybody and it became my nature. So you can't just take stuff like that. Throw it on somebody and be like, hey, act like this. You know what I mean? So I didn't know that. But later in life getting all that stuff came to life. And I see where it's all true. It's people's religious accounts of spiritual matters. You know what I mean? It's all true. It's just, it's their culture at the time. And if you read it in a spiritual way, like it's all inclusive, it applies to everybody, but it's more about acquiring that way of looking at things. Non-violence. This is not rather than taking a kid's guns. You live non-violently. Right. Right. You can't be cursing everybody out and doing all the crazy stuff you're doing or a kid's gun and think he's going to get the message. Yeah. Total conflict. Yeah. It's kind of like a moral framework for society, right? Yeah. Well, kind of it's a way of living. So you got all these different religions and I've got to know people and all of them. And basically the people who are looking for all inclusiveness, they find a way of being that allows them to live and let, and this seems spiritual or what some people will call, you know, what I experienced today go into places. The same places I go to now are euphoric to me. Whereas in the past of the ass that's going here, the sucks, dealing with these people sucks. You know, everything was sucked. It sucked. But all I got to do is come here and meet you. I'm having a good time. Like that's the difference. It's an inside thing, you know what I mean? Yeah. Like I'm not bringing here an agenda. I'm bringing here just a connection. Right. And you're connected with me and that's all I need. You know what I mean for today? And it might lead to wherever. Or it might be just this. Either way, it's fine. You know, right. Right. That's fascinating. Yeah. All right. So back to the linear timeline. Mm-hmm. You get out at, well, like 22, 2022, adult. Yeah. How long did it take? And what were you doing the next time you got them? The next time you got them trouble. Well, I got out. I remember going and having a drink with a friend of mine. And I didn't do anything more than that. Because I said I wasn't going to get, you know, report. And then at that time, I didn't do any drugs. That was, that was later that really got confusing. But so I drank within one night and then I went to make it money. I had some friends I met in there. And we went to the other coast, picked up a bunch of sheets of acid and all kinds of stuff and brought it back over and sold it for, I don't know, 300% profit. So huge. Yeah. Well, a poker return. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I was actually after the last podcast. I was trying to look him up. It says he died like 10 years ago. Yeah. I had one or why I didn't hear from, but I don't know. Yeah. I worked and showed the guy is that I dressed and everything else. And then it showed he died. I was like, oh, man, that's horrible. He was a really happy good dude. So. Yeah. But he killed himself. He loved the party and, oh, I mean, you know, killed himself. Oh, driving. Yeah. Driving. And, you know, he was always doing that, like driving real fast over there and drunk stuff. Yeah. Yeah. But he swore he was the one that knew how to do that. But anyway, he, I, I was going and going. And getting stuff and then trying to play semi pro football. And, and, you know, had all the same people all. And I had this reputation because I went to prison and came back. You know, people thought that was cool. And, yeah, just kind of, I don't know. You just get like a, it felt like I was like kind of, um, idolized a little bit. You know what I mean? For a while. And I didn't pay really no mind to it. But in hindsight, I look at it. Like a lot of people made me feel like it did something good going to prison. You kind of like owned the identity of it. Yeah. Like, like, well, I wasn't really thinking about it just because I lived, I lived that. And then you were never, you were never like analytical of anything, especially like self analytical. No, no. I was analytical of stuff, but it was nothing to do itself. What's that how? Yeah. I'm like, oh, my God, fit in. How am I not going to go to prison again? Right. So I was always analyzing that. Okay. Missing out on the, I'm the cause of that. A lot of that. You know, so yeah, I would, I would, and all this stuff, I looked at in retrospect. Like, like, like, it's pretty much how I lived my whole life. It was reaction, reaction, reaction, get some time to sit on your hand. You look at it. But what can you do about it? And then you keep going. And it wasn't until this guy kind of explained to me that, um, I bought into some things that even though I'm honest, it's not true. You know, even though I'm being honest with him about what it is, it's still not true. And that goes back to what I was telling you about being honest about your emotions, long enough to find the truth. You know, so you, so you give your best honesty, your on a lot of technical tests that comes out, you're telling, honest, you're. You believe it, right? Yeah. Yeah. But you're, you're convinced in the mind, it's still not true. It was a lot of detective tests. All they really do is like to detect how nervous you are. Right. You're not afraid. I don't really know. They put me on one. Yeah. They were pretty accurate. I mean, I wasn't, I wasn't trying to hide nothing because I was actually legitimately. Yeah. That time. I had this guy on here, uh, um, a couple months ago. And he got arrested for rape and murder when he was, I want to say 12 years old, 13, 12 or 13. And, uh, he didn't do it. But he was really friends with the, he was like the closest friend of the girl who got raped and murdered. It was in, uh, like one of the first years of high school, maybe. So maybe he was like 14 or 15 after. But, um, they put him on a lot of detective tests and like the cops were acting like his friend and he like failed a lot of text. Yeah. Even having that charge is making nervous. Yeah. Yeah. And they, they, he ended up on a prison for 16 years and tell the caught, the guy who actually did it. They matched the DNA. So they fudged his DNA just to fucking get a conviction. Right. But he explained to me, uh, basically how fucking bullshit the lot of tector test. Yeah. How the, the specialists, I forget what they're, what you call them, but the people who actually administer the lot of tector tests, um, the polygraph tests, yeah, how they can manipulate the people that are doing it in the way they ask the questions. Wow. I believe that they're not, they don't hold up in court anymore. It might be because of that guy. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. You know, when they did mine, it was just for, because they already had the DNA. They had this guy's DNA that did it. So they, all they needed was the match of DNA. They wanted to slip questions in there, but my lawyer fixed it all to where they only got one of the people up. So I had to answer that question. Right. Stumbled on. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I stumbled on that one three time. Whatever you all want to pass it. It was good enough for them. Good enough for me is probably just some bullshit that set me up. But who knows? I walked out on that and then 60 days later I got like 11 sales of manufacturing heroin charges. So I was facing life again. 60 days later, you think I'd turn one of the factoring hair when you got life. I was dealing with buying pure heroin and cutting it and selling it. Yeah. And how did you get life or something like that? They tried to get me 180 years with the habitual offender. Oh. Yeah. Later on they tried to get me life for one pill out of the bottle that I had a prescription for. As annex, they tried to that last bit I got two years for. I was on like 800 milligrams of method on a day, which is a lot of method on. And I remember them going. You know, the judge was like, why aren't we giving you life today? I was like, do you like had one pill? I have a script for that Xanax and I took it out and put it in my saga. I said, if you want to fight this, I can fight it. But I really want to kick. So give me two years. I'll go right now. He did. He gave me two years. Wow. But he was trying to give me life as a career criminal. I was like, Jesus, places ridiculous. And how old were you when you finally got locked up the second time? The second time. There's only a couple of years later. I kept going in and out and a couple of them were small bids, you know, total about 15 years. And I kept going in and out and then they finally, they were just getting sick of me. They were trying to give me life for almost. And I always thought I was going to get life because they've been telling me that. You know, all that time I started buying into it convinced me of the mind. Honest, not true. You know, I honestly thought I was going. And if you thought, if you talked to me for any period of time, it's like, live right now because we're going away forever. Right. So I kept making things work worse with reaction reaction reaction. You know, not really processing or thinking, not living, you know, not experience in life. And state prisons are like the worst, right? I've heard the state prisons are the worst. Yeah. I mean, there are a lot worse than the feds in some senses. Most people, if they have a lot of time to do, they want to go to the feds. Right. Yeah. Because they got like paying jobs there. You know, you know, mop in the floor, get your 10 cents an hour. Whereas in prison, you only got like a couple pride jobs that you work all day long. And the hot sun might get two bucks or something. But me, I just, you know, I lived off to land, I guess you'd say. Yeah. What was it that you found when you were when you got locked at the second time? Like, how did you find value? How did you fit in in the community that you were in there? Like, like, what did you do to find any sort of, or did you find any sort of meeting or purpose or value when you were in there? I liked conflict a little bit. I know in hindsight, looking back on it, I would hang with the Jewish people. Sometimes the piss off the area and guys. And I hang out with the area and guys. The piss off the, because there was so racist. Like, what a bunch of clowns. You know what I mean? You're all in the same place. It's always been. That's how it is in all prisons, right? Although it's so different. Well, there are a lot more segregated up north, but down here they have, you know, everybody's thrown in together. And then you got these, these clowns that are, you know, there's so hell bent on hating something because it's a distraction. For a, for looking at yourself. And for some reason, I was always in conflict with that, you know, and I would even, I would say mean things and do mean things. just to start to fight over that type of. Really? She's hard to beat you. Why did you still, I didn't get it. I didn't get it. Right? I'm for sure. Yeah. When I moved to Naples, I, you know, I had black people hate me at first. You know, I'm friends with everybody now, but I had like black people hate me because I was white. I had white people hate me because I was a Yankee. And, and they would just say like the stupid, most stupid things. So I just started beating the shit out of everybody. And I mean, and, and then I, you know, because I really, my dad one time when I was a little kid in Jersey, we had like a wine. It was almost like an imaginary line. And I remember saying some racial slangs to this guy, you know, we're like seven, six. We don't know what we're saying. We just hear the older kids in neighborhood. We're yelling these things back and forth. He's calling me this. I'm calling my dad's snazzy to me, body ear and snazzy to him, body ear. This is your new best friend ever since then. I never had a problem. He was a great kid. You know, I mean, turned out to be one of my, you know, closest friends growing up there. And all his like family, you know, it was racist as shit towards me. You know, over there I have to deal with that. And I'd be like, yeah, whatever, you know, and I'm here to, for this person. Well, you know, that's his city was he. He was black. Yeah. And then, you know, and then his sister too, she's, I used to like riding her bike, but it was a girl bike, but you're like, a ride wheelie's on it for a while. And the guy with all, you know, the older kids would be all, you know, that cracker, you know, they said a honky of there or whatever. Oh, yeah. They would call you a honky done Florida. They'd call you a cracker. But, uh, Bobby like, yeah, go fuck yourself. You know, and they would have beat me up or something. Yeah. It would beat my ass. Really. Yeah, I wasn't big yet. And, uh, and I didn't know how to fight at that time. So I would get beat up. But, uh, but anyway, I learned through taking a beat and giving a beat and that people are just stupid, you know. And, and same thing on my side, I'd be sitting there helping somebody who's trying to help me because of my color, not because, uh, because he likes me as a person. You know what I mean? He's just looking out for his own. And they, you know, you're helping them with the changing wheel. Next, you know, it's some shitty conversation about, you know, it's their fault because of this. And I'm like, and then, oh, and then one was yelling at me because I hung out with a Spanish guy, my friend. In prison? No, no, no, no. This is on the street in New Jersey. Okay. Yeah. And it was weird too because they weren't stupid people. They were highly intelligent, but they were blinded by this. Mm. All of them. All of them. I mean, the tribalism. Yeah. Tribalism. Yeah. Exactly. And it was so, you know, it was such a conflict for me. And finally, when I didn't care, and I knew how to fight, and I didn't care about my welfare, when I got in prison, I kind of tagged in these people. Of all races. Like, when you were in prison, because of this experience that you had from a young age, like with violence and seeing people and being beaten, getting beat up and beating other people up, could you look at people and kind of like, read them and see like how far they would go and know that. Yeah. Yeah. Like, the lights go off. It's just, this is what I say when this happens. You know, like, they get like a tomotons. You know what I mean? They stop thinking and they go into pure ritual. You know, that's how clear it is to me. Because you're, all of a sudden you're not having a conversation when you, there was this big dude I got no fight with. And as soon as I said something, because the dude, the dude in question that he was talking about, was a nice guy, but he had some problem with whatever he did or whatever. And I don't know the history. All of a sudden I wasn't talking to this guy anymore. He was just all full of hatred jumps off the bunk, tries to hit me. I just stiff on them, throw them back, punched them. You know, and then you don't really want to get locked down for periods of time, especially had a good job. So he huffed and puffed and ran around and he's a big dude. I mean, when you scare me, I try to. You're how to tell her, how tall are you? Six five, three hundred and eighty pounds. But he was, he was like a big stop. Yeah, when I'm, when I'm ripped, I'm a little less fat and stuff. And I, I look bigger, but, but this guy was, you know, ripped up. I mean, you know, see the same height, same weight. Yeah. And his name was Danny too. Was it? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I felt like one minute were fine. You know, he actually saw friendship because of, you know, I could lift like anything in there. And, and so he's like, you know, so we were working out. Next thing you know, it's like a robot. Oh, this is what I do when, when this gets threatened. And it all comes, you can see it's so clear. Like I could see it's so clear because I've seen it so many times. They get fearful. Yeah, they get fearful and all of a sudden there's a, there's like a robot you're talking to. You're not going to get through. And so he was acting all huffy puffy and, you know, I told him, I said, do you want to go to the Bible, go to the box, I'll beat your ass right. And he's like, Oh, I'm going to get you. Whatever. And I was like, yeah, all right, shut up. And, you know, he squashed it. There was a little kid. It's funny too, because the dude that tried to keep everything calm. So we don't get the place locked down. He was, I don't know. Maybe I know he was Muslim, but I don't know if he was like from there or whatever. And he's the one that broke it up and held him back. And I was like, I was like, not holding back. Like if he wants to, you know, let it go. And he's like, no, no, we don't need to show where you guys are friends. And that's what I thought. But then I don't trust people that flip like that anymore. Like after that, you know, in that mentality too, this is before I changed. You know, once you got in that bracket where you can't control your emotions, you're done with, I'm done with you. Because you're unpredictable. And eventually you're going to cause problems that we can't get out of interest. Yeah. So I'm not going to be tied in with that. You know, you can get in raising all that, but you should never let anybody know what you're feeling. So when you were trying to fuck with people by like hanging out with different groups, different races of people and you were what was it in turn? Like what were you trying to do or like what I was trying to destroy that bullshit pride? Like it didn't make any sense. Were you trying to like teach them a lesson? Yeah. I think so. I think in a way I was like, because if somebody else did what I did, they would, you know, hurt them or make them not doing anymore. And I wasn't going to stop. So I felt like I was the only person that can get through to it. This is all crazy, but that's how it makes sense. Yeah. That's just how I processed it, you know, at the time. Because I wanted to play basketball and sometimes, you know, other people will play basketball. And these guys wanted me to not play basketball because my fellow might fuck you. I grew up in Jersey. We took it serious, you know what I mean? Yeah. So and plus is a good way to loom weight and everything else. Stay in shape. So whatever. I just did it. And I would just sit there and bounce the ball, looking out. Staring me the eye. Yeah. And it wasn't not perfect because some of the guys I played with, they were just as bad too. Erase is them. Yeah. They're going to do this and they run into your chest bone with their shoulder real hard when you're, if you're hacking them or whatever. So I wasn't hacking and somebody tried to do that. And I just kind of shifted and threw them in the concrete. And I felt perfectly fine with it. You know what I mean? And all his friends on the court were like, dude, he's just playing. You know what I mean? You ain't got to go try to run into them like that. You know, they kind of stuck up for me. But that's what I, that's basically what I wanted to see. Like fair is fair. Right. Right is right. Wrong is wrong without being one of these like kumbaya or, you know, right. I'm not trying to say everything's, you know, well, you had the unique ability to do what you were doing too because I feel like a lot of those people who stick to their little, their little tribes, they're doing that because they're going to get protected. Yeah. When somebody else comes out of you didn't give a fuck. Yeah. You're going to beat them. You're going to beat them. You're not. I wasn't going to stop. Right. You know what I mean? And you weren't seeking protection from a group from a student. Not only that I was doing this unconsciously. There were some always in me to try to care about stuff and do stuff. But at the same time, I didn't like caring about things. You get wounded too bad. So there was a big contradiction going on inside of me, which I, that's why I couldn't clearly know what I was doing. I'd be like, Oh, I start some shit sometimes. Yeah. And I don't know that there's like a life force trying to bring life lessons through everybody at all times really. Right. But most people are so fearful. And I was too. I was fearful of, you don't never figure out how to live right or keep a job or be able to stay in society. I was fearful of all these things too. But one, I thought something was right. You couldn't kill me. You couldn't stop me. Right. You know what I mean? And, but it, there's a clarity got harder and harder to see. You know. What lessons did you learn about regarding empathy for other people? Like before when you were younger growing up, was there what sort of lack of was there? And then at what point, what took it, what did it take for you to develop a sense of empathy for other humans? Well, at an early age, there were certain people that didn't seem to succumb to fear. I thought. And until I got enough courage to really push that to the test, I thought there were just some people are just like, man, they're really tough. They're really hard or whatever. I found out later they're just really good at hiding it. And they have apathy. They have a lack of care for their welfare or anybody else's. That gives them the ability to appear fearless. I did the same thing myself. So I knew what that was. But not until I push people who looked fearless to the point of putting fear in them, did I figure out everybody's full of shit. You know what I mean? Like everybody deals with fear. So empathy came for me through some hard ass lessons. Like I knew what people were saying was true and telling me this stuff. But they were trying to tell me that that empathy was a necessity. And I said, now there's some people that know how to get by without dealing with all this, you know, fear and feelings and stuff. And in my mind, I always contested it. But in my heart, I knew they were saying what they were saying was everybody has a level of things they got to deal with. And I was like, yeah, not right now. I'm busy. And I put that off so long that I had so many circumstances where I was like, shit, this is because it's kind of a feminine trait really empathy. I think, you know, yeah. So it wasn't something I was going to do. You know, I can't appear weaker. And then like that or and then about what I realized is it doesn't matter what you, what you think or feel it. There's reality. And then there's not. Right. Yeah. And so when I had enough courage to face that, that was all a sudden that became a language for me. I guess because I never used it or never really thought to use it. I always hit my, my true intentions. I hit my feelings, my thoughts. I learned how I'm better and better over the years. Every time somebody found out I felt like I was exploited or vulnerable. What I was really thinking or feeling you do a bunch of coke and start. Yeah. Yeah. See, you start letting everything out. Well, I learned that if you do a bunch of coke with anybody, they let it all out too. Yeah. So you find out who the who the snitches are like your boy. Matt Cox. Yeah. Yeah. He's you know, you don't have to give him coke to it for him to talk. He's proud of it. Yeah. Yeah. That's funny. But good for him. I mean, you know, if you're doing wrong, whatever. I mean, I can't. He think he believes that if someone claims that they're that they, if they were in his situation and they weren't going to be a snitch, it was foolish pride. Foolish brother. That or they're lying to themselves. Yeah. Well, both of them. Yeah. The foolish pride is, yeah, lying to yourself because it's, you know, but my line of reasoning with that was if you're doing something, calculate what the worst you can get is. And that's how I did it. And that's how I got the clarity of mind to carry out certain things that I had to carry out was I already accepted the worst possible scenario as a possibility. Mm hmm. And I accepted it before I did it. And so that way there was nothing but calmness and most of the time I didn't end up getting caught. Wow. Yeah. I probably shouldn't share that. That's a good recipe for. People that want to do bad shit. But, but that's the, that's the answer to it. And, and it all, like you'll get that. It's, you'll carry that through and you'll get that. But in the long run it destroys you. You know, Did you ever meet anybody to where there was just like nobody home? Like empathy does not exist within this person. It's just you look into their eyes. And it's just there's nobody like nothing there. Like no feelings, no regard for any values, no regard for it. It doesn't give up like, would just murder anybody, cut your head off without any sort of remorse, any sort of human feelings whatsoever. I know, I know, I knew people, they're dead now, a couple of them. I knew people that in circumstance, certain circumstances were like that. But I don't know anybody like the Iceman, like he's just like that, 24 seven or whatever, like the Clinsky or whatever. I didn't know guys like that, but they were all from where I was from, like Jersey City, you know, they had a breed of people there that is what we got to do. You know, and that I think is generationally from putting production and technology advances above human welfare. You know what I mean? When generationally that gets worse and worse, you get a lot more sociopaths and a lot more people acting like sociopaths to be successful. You know what I mean? And if you act like something long enough, you purchase that. The reason I ask, I have a friend who's a lawyer who's represented a lot of murderers. And he explains his clients and he gets deep into the human behaviors and the human nature and how they became this way. And he explains what it's like going on to death row, going through all this security and getting in a room and talking to these guys that are on death row. Like one of the guy who murdered like a dozen women or something. And he's talking to the guy and he explains what it's like sitting there across the table from him. And I ask him like, how could you describe this person? He goes, the best way he gets to describe it is you look into his eyes and it's just deadness. There's no body home. Right. Well, if you're talking about in prison, like I've seen people like that and I've got to know some of them and talk to them. But like there's a lot of like, so a doctor, that's what he was a doctor. A lawyer. A lawyer. So a lawyer sees him in a certain capacity. He doesn't see him 24 seven. Right. Whereas like when you're living with them or you're around them all the time, you know, it's only certain things that trigger that. You know, okay. Yeah, there's times when like so eating is a normal thing. So everybody eats. Yeah. All of a sudden they're a different person when they're eating. You know what I mean? Like the rituals of being human are all a sudden there. Yeah. And maybe from their childhood or whatever they learned to manners or something. But all of a sudden they're different. They're not nobody's home. I'm killing you. Stuff like that. So they, so there was a guy I talked about him before, but there was a guy who ate his parents and he was, oh, he's parents. He was a cannibal. He killed an eight his parents and in the outlived his life sentence. So he got out in like 2012. I really don't. I talk about this guy. I can live a life sentence. They gave like 25 years back then or until you die. So 25 years you consider. So 25 years or until you die. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So he was under a guy. They got different guidelines at different times. So he was under these guidelines. Yeah. Yeah. 25 years or life. So and he was already a certain age. He was a lot of benefits of eating human beings. Jesus Christ. You know, he ate his own leg. He had a pair of dentures. They gave him his teeth. You know, they took care of him. And he took the dentures a bit of part of his calf out with the teeth. And I was just chewing on it. You know, and that's how I got to meet him. I was running these, I had to run these bars. And then they walk them in. You know, he going there and do his thing. But how a guy gets to that point. You know, there were certain things like when he did this ritual of, that compared to his ritual, taking a bath, or you know, two different people. He would talk different everything else. So he would be like different people during different times of the day. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like I'm saying, nobody can consistently. Now there is people that are 24 seven like that. I'm sure. I don't really know any of them because you always need something. Even if you act like you don't, you always need something. So you're, you're, hold the meaner changes. It might be fake, but it's different. You know, but the far is nobody home. I've seen that and it's a. don't. You always need something. So you're your hope, demeanor changes. It might be fake, but it's different. You know, but the far is nobody home. I've seen that and it's a scary thing when there's nobody, there's no lights on and my buddy used to get there all the time. You stab people all the time. I was, what the hell is wrong? You quit, yeah, quit stabbing people. And he would do it all the time. You break a plate of stab. You know what I mean? Like he broke one, one guy bumped the plate on the wall and it was his old lady's dad's or that's dad play hits the ground and the guy didn't seem remorseful. When he goes to stab in the second time, I grab his arm and I pull them back and I'm like calm down and I grab the guy and I throw him down the stairs just to make him feel better. You know what I mean? But not stab him anymore because he's gonna leak out all over the place. Like it was just crazy. But I used to hang around with that guy all the time because you know, it just made me look normal. What was this cannibal guy like? Oh, so large. Oh, large was his name? Was he tall? All six, six white pasty. You know, been down 25 year, 20, whatever. Was he what was his ethnicity? I think he was a white guy. I don't know. He could have been, he could have been like Scandinavian or something. Oh, interesting. Yeah. He doesn't mean to worry about like an Asian guy who was a cannibal. Yeah. Yeah. It was some, it was ingrained. I don't know where he got it from. I don't know. But he'd been down for a long time and I didn't have a lot of interactions with him. But a few I had to, you know, get a shank out of his hand and choke him out one time. He was gonna kill his nurse. Yeah. And I didn't, I didn't want that known. But, but, but yeah, he was gonna, this lady just talked to him like real disrespect fully and was rude and not to say like the guy didn't do bad stuff and he deserves this and that. But when you don't, you just don't talk to people that don't have nothing to lose like that. Right. You know, and think you're going to be okay. Unless you're, you know, unless you're a tough person and you're going to handle yourself, but she wasn't. He was just reckless with her mouth. So I warned her about it. And then I was, you know, I don't like to get ball, but I, uh, but ended up doing that. What was he trying it? Well, how was he, what was he doing? He was gonna cut her, you know, or eat her. I don't know. He knows what his plans were. But he had a, he had a nive, he was like, kind of, he just kind of shared it with me. And I just, I said, hey, pop this door, I went in and got it from at least that, uh, she'll get a chance. And then the, the guards that's seen it, they said something. That's like, don't, don't put that out there. And you know, I mean, uh, oh, so I don't know. It kind of made me feel like I was, I don't know, conflicted because I don't like to get people business or did he ever talk about? Did you ever ask him like, what the fuck happened to you? I wasn't that, and I wasn't that interested because I've always, well, because I've always had a strong thing that you should look out for your mom and dad. And of course his, who knows, maybe they beat him. Right. Who knows what his deal was? They probably weren't that nice to him. Probably. Maybe, maybe it's just crazy. I, I don't really know. And I didn't want to know because anytime I got an idea in my mind that you're a bad person, then I gotta do something about it. You know, so I just, okay, I say, stay out of it. And if I hear your beat, no people or something like that or beating your parents up and they didn't do nothing or something of, you know, I'm going to do something to you. So I don't want to know at that time, I didn't know how to just process that and say, oh, if you're learning, okay, okay, A plus B equals me in the box. Yeah, that's it. And I don't want to be there. So you tell me some crazy shit you did. And I don't like it. I'm hurt you. And at that time, you know, so yeah, I just stayed out of it. But yeah, there were people I got to know like that where nobody was home at times. And there was a doctor that dealt with Domer that worked there. And he told me some crazy stories about Domer. Really? Well, he's, he told me that the guy can run like 20 miles and not break a sweat like crazy things. He can mind over matter certain things. He can lose 10 pounds and like that or he can gain, he can strong mental capabilities. But nobody's home. He would say like, and he had some some memorabilia and he had the first woman executed in Florida to he had her sheet. He would buy weird things like that off the, you know, the lead spot in the starch board. It's like a starch board. Those sheets, they kill you on what lethal injection. He would buy this shit. Yeah, he would like get it. You know, he had yeah, hookups on it. But on eBay, you could sell that stuff for like, I don't know $300,000 or some crazy number for I got to sit in the electric chair. And so if I could have took a piece of that with me, that would have been cool. So because they couldn't lift these packs in the back of of the electric chair like 450 pounds. Yeah. All the guards are kind of fat and out of shape. But so I go down there. I said, I'll do this. I'm going to pull them out. I want to sit in the chair. You know, the tunnel is still crazy. And I got to sit in that thing and it was eerie. It was eerie. Have you ever seen the documentary called Mr. Death? You got to watch that shit. Yeah. I'll check it out. It's on that. Pull up that Mr. Death trailer. It's on, um, no, I don't think it's on Netflix. I think it's on. I think I watched it on Amazon. Okay. So it's this guy, the patient, the synopsis of it. There's this guy. Maybe we can just watch the trailer. Yeah, that's a Fred Luchard fucking fascinating story, man. So this guy was contracted by all the prisons to improve all of the execution method. So he like reinvented the electric chair, the gallows, the gas chambers. And basically his, his whole life was dedicated to fucking executing. Play this trailer. You got the audio hooked up. What like the mouse humane way or just yeah. So this guy's real, he lives in, uh, he lives in Alabama. That's what the teleball can say. And then James work and then experts and outcome 10 Fred Luchard. No, there's nobody Fred Luchard was a really hope. I don't think he's naive. I guess if the godfather called you up and said, you got to do this job for me. You just do it without thinking about it. Come on, guys. To me, it looks like he's almost under a spell. He truly believed what he was doing. That's right. He saw everything hit built up in his own quiet humble way, destroyed by these people he had never met whom he had offended. It's kind of a shitty trailer, but yeah. This guy Joe asked me if I knew what Fred did for 11. I said now and he said he kills people. That kind of surprised me until he explained exactly what he did, which wasn't that he killed people, but he made things that killed people. Anyways, you could stop it. It's kind of a boring trailer. But yeah, anyways, he was contacted. I forget what happened, but his father worked for the BOP, I guess. He somehow got the contract to because the electric chair, when they first developed it, it wasn't killing people. It was an electrocuted game and then they'd be fucking like coming back. They would become a back and be fucked up and throwing up or like, is that guy German? No, it's so it gets crazy. Okay. He's not German, but anyways, he got contracted. He's fixed. He learned the inner workings of the electric chair how it worked. Eventually he figured out how to get to kill people the first time and not have them suffer. Then they're like, okay, now you can fix our gas chambers. Now you can work on the gallows and now he want to do something more humane, lethal injection. So he fucking developed the lethal injection. Perfect combination. After doing this for so long, he learned holy fuck, it's so hard to kill a human being. It is so, he learned how difficult it really was to kill a human being. It's not easy. It's not as easy as you would think. Then it goes off the rails towards the end of the documentary because he basically says, I don't believe the Holocaust was real. He says, he doesn't believe that that all these Jewish people were killed in gas chambers. There's no way he travels to Germany. He visits Auschwitz, visits all these places and they show him in there and he's studying it, doing the science on it. Ultimately, he believes it was fake. So he's kind of a crazy, I don't know enough about it. I mean, if you believe that you're a crazy person. So, and then so he had Mossad following him around. He had like, Israeli intelligence following him around. He got sued. He went to court over it. It's an insane story. He got sued because he didn't believe the Holocaust was real. Yeah, it was like a freedom of speech thing. I'm going to butchering this. But if you watch the documentary, there was a guy who came out with a book claiming the Holocaust wasn't real. This guy went to court. He was sued over it and somehow this guy, Lucha got deposed in the lawsuit because he studied. He was like the expert on death. So he was deposed to sort of talk about how difficult it was to kill people with gas, with cyanide and all that stuff. And he was basically making the case that if these are the places that you're saying, all these people were executed, it would be impossible. He's like, I couldn't make these these rooms. So I couldn't kill people in these rooms. It would be impossible, especially thousands of people. So it's a fascinating documentary. The guy is crazy. But anyway, I don't know how we got about tangent. I talked to the electric chair. Dr. Daxx. Yeah, Mr. Daxx. That's what it's called. Mr. Daxx. Mr. Daxx. Yeah, I'm not talking about Amazon. Yeah, I was just watching that hunters and they were talking about getting the Nazis and they were all in Huntsville, Alabama. Oh, really? Yeah. What was it called? Hunters. Okay. Al Pacino and just a bunch of that one kids in it, whatever. But it's really, it's pretty wild. How they, the government took them, took them in all their scientists and helped them with their rockets and all that. Everybody knows, but they infiltrated for a fourth right. They infiltrated the highest levels of, you know, politics and all that. Or the government. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a pretty wild story. They said it's based on a true story. Dude, there's so many wild stories. Yeah. Like spiraling off of that World War two and everything after that, man, that's, there's a lot. Yeah, they're coming. Yeah, it just comes out now. And that's how it always is. It comes out later and everybody's like, what the hell right. Yeah. By the time you find out, it's old news. It can't do nothing about it. So you sat in the electric chair? Yeah. Yeah. So yeah, I said, after I took those packs out, I didn't want the thing. Hey, why aren't you? Let you keep them back. And you, so you were like actually legitimately on death row. Well, I stayed in a open bay dorm with the other workers. And then I was, um, I worked in death row. But it's all in the same prison. But where I go, most of these inmates don't go the workers, you know, I'm down in the cells and all the places where they're housing, the people waiting to die and, and, um, you know, and then I'm in the medical part, you know, waiting for something to happen. Somebody gets cut or killed on anywhere in the prison. I have to go clean it up or whatever. You volunteered to do this? No, I'm not. I give you a job. And I got there. I was kicking so much method on. I told the, told the guards. I said, lock me up. You want to. I'm not doing nothing for like 30 days. Yeah. I was still kicking. And they sent me so quick through the prison system and sent me to this place. I was like, geez, like the twilight zone. And I was still kicking my, I had like at your feet. My legs were weak and, and, um, so I told me like 30 days. I'll get my strength back. I'll do a job then. And then they gave me that job. So it was, uh, you know, it was pretty interesting. Pretty interesting job. What was like the most fucked up thing you saw? So many things. But, uh, one guy bit another guy's penis off through the, uh, I should laugh. That's my mind still goes to humor when I can't comprehend something. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's immature, but it's just the way I am. So the guy, you know, let's get blown by the other guy. And, uh, I guess he found out he cheated on one another guy. I'm in medical and he bites his penis off. They come flying down there with the guy. They're like, they're grab a bag of ice. Go get, go get this guy's penis. And I was like, yeah, no, I ain't doing that. And, uh, I can't even say the rest of the story. I probably get in trouble. But, uh, they wanted you to go rescue his dick. Yeah, put it on ice to try to, like, to try to bring it back. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know if it was like a piece or a jug, but when I got down there, it was a bloody mess. I just kind of kicked it down the drain. If that's illegal, don't put that on the thing, you know, I don't know. I just, I wasn't going to touch it. So oh my. Yeah. It was pretty crazy. But that's just one of, I mean, people been smashed and so whenever like somebody, what was more prevalent? People committing suicide or people are getting people trying to commit suicide, killing people or or trying to commit suicide. What was more prevalent? Um, well, so, so everybody in there was kind of sick, like from the guards down the inmates, everybody kind of gets sick and not environment. And when I say sick, I mean, like your thoughts just get twisted and, um, annoyance, where say you had a friend and he was being annoying, you'd be like, I do, you're being annoying. I'm going home. These people would plot to kill you when you were annoying. So that, that's kind of, and if you're real annoying, the guards would plot to kill you, you know, until other inmates to kill you. Um, and give, give you the free time to do it. So what happened a lot was, so somebody would try to hang themselves. There's no real way to do it. So they tie the sheets around the corner of the bed and then they flip themselves. And a lot of times what happened, they break their neck and they start swelling. So I would have to go snatch them up, put them on a thing and run down this thing and end up cutting their throat, putting a trick down there and trying to keep them alive and they turn into like a vegetable or something. So it can get worse. I mean, even though they should wait in a dying and life in prison, now you might be waiting what no, you know, being paralyzed. So I wouldn't want to be in that. So most of the time is trying to do trying to hang themselves or kill themselves and be a failed attempt. Yeah, cutting themselves to the cut themselves a lot. Sometimes they do it for attention. Sometimes, you know, if you're really trying to off yourself, I guess there's no stopping you eventually unless you do like that, you paralyze yourself. But then this one guy was beat, uh, beat to death. Um, another guy was little on fire a bunch of times. Yeah, I've seen that, you know, they put him out if they really want a torture and they'll burn them and then put them out stuff like that. You know, um, I have to ask you. Yeah, Jeffrey Epstein, did he kill himself or did he get killed? I don't, you know, if you were to, I know you don't know. Yeah, but give me the educated guess. Well, first of all, I hate to say this. I don't know that story. I've heard that name. I'm so, uh, okay. Yeah, I don't want to Charlie anything like that. Like, and it's funny, I got little bits and pieces from people. He's a high profile guy who basically was friends with a lot of presidents and politicians and a lot of billionaires rich people. Right. He, uh, he has a lot of secrets that could potentially fuck with, you know, powerful people. Clinton's right. The Clinton's main, the Clintons. Yeah, a lot of people. Um, and he was found hanged and by it was the, the bed sheet, I believe. Yeah. And completely dead. But the main thing there was these two vertebraes in like the lower part of his neck that were broken. And I guess there was, there was an expert, the, did the autopsy said when those vertebraes are broken, it's usually strangulation. Yeah. Or like violent choking out. Thumbs that are front. Yeah. Yeah. Um, and I guess the guy who was in the cell with him was like a fucking monster, like an enormous motherfucker. Yeah. Yeah. He probably was killed. But because hanging yourself is not easy, like I knew a guy and the, and conveniently the cameras went out when that was. Yeah. Yeah. There was definitely product and spirit. She going on there because I seen a guy, this guy was serious. Uh, never committed a crime in his life. He was, his wife was having, um, like a mental breakdown or something. So he's out in the grass of the road. He pulls up, he tries to like get her out of the road. The cops and Naples pull up on him, think he's abusing her and lock them up. And his parents were like, you know, all on the side of lock them up and on the side of this woman. And, um, and I really don't believe he was guilty. I think, I think he went a little overboard with trying to help somebody who didn't want their help. You know what I mean? So, but he was a nice guy. He made, he made signs. He had a business. He was really, he made this de-forming. That was my first initial, whatever. Um, he made a cool ass picture of it. And, uh, anyway, I got to know this guy. He wouldn't eat. He kept not eating. He got himself real light on Christmas Eve morning. I hear bomb. And I was like, man, I was like, I hope he didn't try to kill himself. You know, because you hear the metal pulling on the thing where he jumped, he took a running jump, tied the sheets around the thing. He had enough room to run, go out and come down off the second floor and, you know, and do that. So, he was a vegetable for a little while before he died. I'm picking the guy up. They're telling me, don't touch him. Don't touch him. We're in the county jail together. So, I was like, hey, go fuck yourself. I said, on time, I get somebody on time. I let him down. He's a vegetable. His parents came to me for, for as a witness. Now all of a sudden, they went from being against them to believe in his innocent. And because they can sue the county for negligence and false whatever, they wanted money. I told him, go fuck yourself. You know what I mean? I said, I said, I, I said, I was messed up. How you switched out. Even if he did it, even if he was rough with that lady, you're, that's your kid, you know what I mean? And I hated them for that. At that time, I had no, no ability to see the sickness in people and you know, real empathy for me. Yeah, I just thought there were pieces of shit. So, I didn't help them at all. And he ended up dying. And, but my point of that is, if you're going to kill yourself, first, you know, do's lose some weight. And, and to be able to do it in those circumstances, second, if this guy has been sheltered from his consequences and this is his first gig at getting in trouble, he's probably doesn't have the temperament for going all out, you know, and it's a certain kind of, I mean, some people I know did one day in jail and they just lost it. They could do jail time. Yeah. And it's not because they were a week or anything like that. Just certain people can't be locked up. And that's a friend of mine, Blue has had off because he was facing a jail bid for, he hit somebody. It was really their fault. We should have took off for whatever. But, but it was their fault. There were two drunk guys on a motorcycle, a legal, they stole the motorcycle, they cut front of his car and it chopped one of the guy's legs off. But the other guy was picking him up. We already called the ambulance. I was like, let's leave Duke, because you've been on acid. We just came back from a concert over Miami. And I said, let's just leave. There's nothing else we could do. And he was like, nah, I gotta stay, you know, and he's stayed. He went to jail. I bailed him out. And he's like, I can't do jail time. He blew his head off for he went to court. How much jail time was he facing? I mean, what's the word for, you know, I didn't kill anybody. Yeah, he didn't kill anybody. It was an accident, you know what I mean? And it was their fault, you know what I mean? But they, he did fail the the the survival of a bad thing. Oh, yeah. I couldn't do that. But we were just tripping on acid. We weren't drunk or not right that, you know, and, and yeah, they, they really screwed him over because he's a nice guy, good guy. And he tried to do the right thing. And totally got screwed and then the bonus had off right down the street with my, my house too. Yeah. But, but to kill yourself, it's, you gotta have a lot of fear of what's coming. You gotta have a certain resolve, you know, and it's gotta be, like you said, it's really hard to kill somebody. You know what I mean? For the human body to just give out, right? Because everything in it fights it, you know? So I don't know that dude Epstein, if I had the pressure of the Clintons coming to get me, who knows? You know what I mean? Yeah, because it's spooky. It's like, yeah, how do they come get you? You know, right? Then you gotta sit there and all kinds of, you know, well, I think the conspiracy is that the Clintons had him killed because he didn't want him giving up any secrets. And they wanted to make it look like a suicide. Yeah. But the autopsy claims that because those broken vertebrae, those broken bones in his neck, I forget what the name of the bone is. There's a bone like deep in your neck. And I guess it out of, there was a study done out of all the hank suicides by hanging. There was like less than a half percent where those bones were broke. Right. And this wasn't like a violent thing where he ran and jumped off a fucking thing either. It was right in the cell. Right. What's the percentage of your ones that it is broke, they're all dead or the, did any of them live through that? I'm not sure. Yeah, because I imagine if you got that that deep and, because there's a thing on the Americans, you ever see that show? Yeah, I got the washing in my brother said it was good. But the guy puts the guy up against the wall and he goes, right in here. And just like what you were saying. Yeah. And he pushes it in and just like, you know, he's done. Yeah. When the guy was like a Russian sleeper or whatever. Hey, find that. Can you find out the name of that bone Austin? Okay. Yeah. Just look up Epstein autopsy bone. Huh. It'll be the first one that comes up. Hey, if you hang yourself, you're not going down here. It's going to be up here. Right. And then the lack of oxygen afterwards. I mean, eventually that, but you could be resuscitated maybe brain dead. You know, but yeah, if you break something here, work permanently cuts off, I think that's why they stuck the, yeah, breakdown people starts one day. So they would cut their throat open. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, yeah, there's another movie. I don't know why I'm going into so many movies, but that nobody you ever see that one. Along came solar, whatever. But anyway, he's a, he's a, he's an accountant or a cleaner when it comes in when, when, you know, you want everything to disappear. But he looks like an average Joey ends up getting in a fight with these guys. He hits the guy in the neck. Crushes his thing, the Russian guy and he's on the ground. He just cuts his throat with a knife and puts a straw in the guy's gurgling, but he lives. You know, yeah. Yeah, that's, I couldn't believe it. Yeah, human beings are resilient man. High, yo, a high, yo, a bone. Okay. So what's it? So it's close that little, the whole thing. All right. So it's Jeffrey Epstein's autopsy report indicates that the various bones in his neck were broken, including the one near the Adam's apple called the high oat bone, according to the Washington Post report, the news is, the news is sure to add even more controversy and conspiracy theories to the jailhouse death of the disgraced billionaire. Such breaks can occur in those who hang themselves, particularly if they're older, according to the forensics expert, um, who studies the subjects. But if they, but they are more common in victims of homicide by strangulation. So I don't think that's exactly what sense, but some fishy. Yeah. Yeah. You're into those conspiracy and stuff. Yeah. Yeah. You study that a lot. Yeah. I'm fascinated by him. Fascinated by, you know, a lot of them, they're the famous joke that, uh, what's the difference between a conspiracy theory and the truth? Six months. That's funny. That is funny. Oh, so out of all the people that you met that, you know, knew that the grim reaper was on their heels, whether they had like a death penalty and they knew they were going to die being on death row. Like what did you learn from people who knew that they didn't have long to live? Yeah. There was, there was a way to tap into this, um, being okay on the inside of your, you know, behind your thoughts, behind your, there was a way to like find peace and actually as long your breathing, doesn't matter where you are, you can take sufficient action to, um, alleviate it. You know, just by, by surrendering and accepting, there's these principles and 12 step programs, that's where a lot of this stuff I practiced and had, you know, paradigms and ships in perspective, that put words to all this stuff that happened kind of, um, oh, sorry. No, you're good. Yep. That kind of happened, um, organically or I found out it just happens. That's the reality of something that's going to work out and stay in reality. So these guys, the fight reality so long, that either they went to denial and went insane or they surrendered and accepted reality and then did something about it. You know what I mean? They took some action towards making good on their bads or whatever. Some are dent of a thing. But I noticed this as a universal truth that if you're gonna, like you said, there was five years where people would do good. The reason why people sometimes give up is because doing good is not a feeling good. Yeah, doing good is, is not fulfilling them somehow. Well, it's, yeah, it's not meaningful because of all the, the baggage they're holding on to that they didn't deal with. So it takes about five years to clear the fog. You see the reality of how much work you got to do. Either give up or you get to work. These guys knew to give up with just more horrible than doing something about it. Somehow they figured that out because there's no mercy. There's no mercy. It's like give up or go crazy. And it can get worse and get to where you're eating your own V season, doing, you know, crazy stuff, trying to kill yourself, all that. Because the brain will just won't leave you alone. Right. You just drive you nuts. Yeah. Do something about you're going to shitter get off the pot. One or the other. You know what I mean? You're not going to just not deal with this. And I look at choice. Yeah, there's no joy. Yeah, because you think about it when you're a kid, clean your room. No, you know, you eventually gets to that. But at first, you're just like, I want to clean my room. You buck a little wherever. There's no relentless coming at you. You know, unless it's abusive or something. But there's mercy somewhere. There's going to be a middle ground somewhere. There's no mercy at that point. You know what I mean? There's no, there's no coddling. There's no forgiveness. There's no, I'll do it later. Your conscience just says, you're going to do this. Now you're going to, I'm going to make you crazy. You know, and I call it like, I'm paid tickets. Like you heard it so many times growing up, clean your room, do this stuff. You don't do it. And then eventually the bills do. And there's no calling for help. There's no getting out of it. You got to pay this bill now. That's what death is. You got to pay this bill right now. You know, interesting way to put it. Yeah. So when so yeah, it, kids, there's no mercy. And it's just not going to, not going to let up on you. You don't get another five minutes, you know, sometimes before the brain just snaps. And then you go into this other place. And even if you do, eat your own shit, do all this stuff. These guys still have to come to that conclusion or die that way. You know what I mean? And some of them can't successfully die. They just got to sit in that for years and years. The guys that had sort of accepted it and kind of faced their in herself, so to speak, what were they like? Very, very, they didn't talk unless it was something meaningful. There was not in trivial. If you joked about like responsibilities or something like that, they would not even deal with you thinking you're an idiot. You know what I mean? Like, you were joking about playing games with girls or women or whatever or not being a good diet or something like that. There was no time for anything trivial. When they talked, it was very deep, very intense, very meaningful. Very few words. or not being a good dad or something like that. There was no time for anything trivial. When they talked it was very deep, very intense, very meaningful, very few words. They didn't really talk to guys like me that much, but like I told Julian, I've always been blessed with psychopathic, just opening right up to me. I don't know why. I have no idea. But yeah, they've always been good to me. I don't really judge them, just interested in what they're saying. You know what I mean? Because it's ridiculous to try to play God. I mean, I can see it because even though you are big and intimidating, you have a very disarming spirit to you. I can see why people would want to open up to you a lot. Is it true that you actually died at one point? Yeah, I had a couple minutes of where the doctor said I was dead. I didn't really know, but I had this experience and I was floating. I thought it was like space. But it really, when I look back on all this stuff, it changes over time, but it's still the same thing. Like I tried to explain before, I thought some voice was talking to me and it was actually just revealed to me the truth of how nobody's disconnected from anybody and that every time you think they that's just your body or brain making sense of something that it can't make sense of. Right. Yeah. So somebody says somebody's being a bold people or doing something crazy. That person is just as much life as you are. Like in that sense, you are the same. And what they did with their stuff and why they're so the other way, those make you think you're separated from that person. So then here we go with the prison thing where you sit somebody in a place and let them come to terms with that. They're overriding somebody's will, you go and bash their head. Now you're now you're overriding their will. So you're separating the life force even more. Yeah, what I mean. And this is just how I look at it. I'm probably murdering the words. But like I didn't get this when I was younger because I was very prideful and I'm not going to be tied up with that people or these group of people doing this or whatever. And it was all nonsense because your your life force has no color, has no creed, has no religion, has no nothing. It's the same life force. So if you're if this guy is wielding it to do what you say is bad, then you do those things to him. You just created your own world of of that in your world. You know what I mean? But really it's all the same. So everybody's impacted by what you're doing everybody. You know what I mean? So and I brought this up a couple times. I should have looked up who originally said it. I think it was Plato or something. You could judge a society by the way of treats as prisoners. Interesting. Yeah. If you look, yeah, look that up for me. So you could judge the quality of a society by the way of treats as prisoners. Because if the whole society is like murder them, kill them. They're all a bunch of murderers and killers, whether the guy deserved it or not. That is their their answer. You know what I mean? So now they look justified. They look cool. They took care of the bad guy. But the next generation don't know nothing about that scenario. There's yelling out murder that guy and it turns into like make a different support. Society should be judged not by how it treats its outstanding citizens, but how it treats its criminals. Oh, it's from the book my mom made me read. Dusky F. Yeah, he wrote a crime and punishment. Yeah. Scroll down. Awesome. Interesting. That was a weird book man. My mom had me read it. I probably he was a Russian, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's funny. My mom, I don't know. I get mistaken for being intelligent sometimes. And people give me style. Yeah. Oh man, it's a real curse because I got to go back and tell them. I'm not really. I went right over my head. Yeah. Yeah. So it's not like I'm tricking them. There is something there's an intelligent life force. I think it's behind you. It's behind me. But we fuck it all up when we become too self aware. So I don't I don't play with it. You know, I just kind of stay out of its way. But but my mom gave me this book and I'm like, so horrible book. And it's like everybody I know that's intelligent. It's like, oh, this is a great book that I tried to read it again. And I'm like, it's about like a murder or something. I'm like, what the fuck is what kind of messages is? My mom started sending me. And I haven't gone back to it. It's still sitting on my shelves. You've been there for 10 years. Oh, wow. But it's like a the pain of my existence because that guy in that book is always coming up. I got to read it now with the new way. I look at things. That's interesting. Man, I wonder what would happen if you write it now. Yeah. Yeah. Because I don't have to be intelligent. Intelligence is everywhere. Yeah. What I mean? Like, it's the only mess it up when you think it's yours. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. There's also that, you know, the thought that some people have Buddhists in particular, where, you know, they look at everyone as themselves. Like, everyone is me. Like, you are me. I am you. Like the person that you're getting, about to get in a fight with, the person that you hate or whatever. If you guys are both starting from zero and you guys go on the same exact path, you're the same person. You guys just went on different paths, ran into different people, different experiences, different environments, ended up in different places. Right. But everyone is essentially the same. Wow. That's probably where we're, yeah, because a lot of these religions put words to stuff that I experienced. And so I just say that seems like the truth. That's, you know, my experience too, because that's what I mean, that's better words to the life force thing that I use. Yeah. It's like it doesn't, it doesn't matter who's wielding it. If you, if you don't like what they do and you do what they do, then you are condoning what they do. Right. Yeah. So, so yeah, then yeah, that's the same. I like that. Then yeah, I'll probably read more of their stuff to them. Um, so yeah, going back to when you died, how did that, how did that happen? You were like, once you legally like actually dead for a few minutes. Yeah, they flew me, they flew me to a private hospital and coral gables. It was weird too because I thought I would have got arrested. The drugs. The drugs, the drugs that didn't fly me. Why you? Oh, yeah, I did a bunch of heroin. Yeah. I shot a bunch of a new bag or something that was over in Miami. And I was in the high it. And, um, and I was in a nice room. I was a high maintenance. I liked the nice cold bathroom. So I would stay in these nice rooms because it made me feel better than when I stayed in the hood and stuff. So it'd be a chance I got I stayed in nice places. And so I was in this place and I was with my daughter's mother at the time. And I came out of the bathroom and I go, I did too much. I knew it and I went, bam, hit the ground. And, uh, I don't remember not after that. So she put my gun and my drugs all up under the plants on a balcony on the high floor. And then somehow talked them into thinking she was important and not like, you know, she was not important, but like really important. Like if I dies, this whole place will be in trouble. So they fly me over there and, um, they, you know, the doctor fixes me or whatever brings me back. And I remember coming back and seeing all this stuff in this tube and being like, you guys are getting me fucked up. You need to stop pumping that shit in. He was certain that's the shit coming out of you. And I was like, all right. And, uh, you know, and I remember when I came back also they had ripped my shirt and I was so ungrateful because that piece I felt when I was in that, that it wasn't space. It was like, it might have been space, but it was so big, but yet I was connected to every living thing ever. And that thing that came over me was revelation that we've never been disconnected. Uh, that I've never been disconnected because the first thing I asked is where's my mom? Where's this person, you know, fuck, where's, you know, who's, you know, and it just said like, it didn't say anything. It just kind of, I just knew it. It relaxed me and said, relax. The only time you've been separated from anything is, is, um, it's been an illusion. Like, uh, you made it up. You made it up your separation from life. You made it up. It's not never been true. And I, and I was like, wow, that's cool. And I, you know, I felt really good for the first time I felt peace and never felt it before. I never experienced nothing. And then this I didn't have nothing to determine from the experience. Right. Nobody, you know, nothing just a, I don't know if it was a singular identity, but I think I only had eyes because I can only see out. And I didn't have nothing out. Nothing weigh me down. It was kind of free. And, uh, so I don't know how to describe it more than that. But when he pulled me back, I was like, hostile, pissed off and a headache. And, um, and I said to him, I was like, who ripped my shirt? You know, just nice guys brought me back to life. And I didn't have handcuffs on which was surprising. I still have bullets falling out of my pocket. I was like, what's that? You know, I heard this Qing Qing and they kept falling out of my pockets. And, uh, the doc's like, it'll look like bullets, you know, he's, he's mine. He goes, well, any mine, he goes, I didn't bring bullets to work today. You know what I mean? So he was, he was really nice and compassionate. And, um, and I, you know, and he said he saved my life. So I asked me if I could forgive him about the shirt. And I was like, yeah, you're good. But, uh, yeah, he was just very just a good guy saved my life. And I was a dick. Yeah. I mean, because I did, I just kind of was pissed. I really wanted to stay where I was at, you know, for the first time I found peace. And I didn't even know what that was. It wasn't until years later that I put together that, um, all my pain is caused from doing things that separate me from the whole, you know, that's how things separate you from the whole. Yeah. Like, like doing things that I know I wouldn't give my loving caring, you know, I wouldn't love and care about somebody and tell them to do it. But doing, doing those things because I think I can handle it. My ego says, I can do this, but you can't. But it, but it causes, um, isolation, antisocial behavior. Yeah. Like those, and they identify those in these 12 step programs that I told you about. Oh, really? I go to a mobile time. Yeah. Because while I go to a specific one, but it's really good at introducing you to society and keeping you in it without, if you, I mean, if you do it right, you can't become a, uh, like a time of time. You can't go in the robot mode. You have to constantly spontaneously be in the moment without the, without the brokenness, without the fear or expressing them, you know, it's so it's a really good way to practice because it's an environment conducive to that. If you're there to practice it, but there's so much misinformation in so many robots or so many selfish, self-centered people looking to do the same thing a different way. So you only get like one out of, it's like a church or anywhere else you'll get one person who really grass what they're doing here and says, this is great. And practices that, the problem is if you try to predict who else is going to do it or whatever. So sometimes it's kind of lonely. Um, but sometimes it's great. Like everybody's just doing good. There's plenty of resources. There's plenty of help for people that want it. There's a big environment for it. Sometimes it's, it's crazy. But I just keep doing it anyway. It goes good practice. Yeah. Definitely. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's the near death experience thing is crazy. I think there's like studies that say that the pineal gland in your forehead releases like chemicals in your brain. It helps you see lights and all that. Yeah. It's like a psychedelic trip or something. I've heard that. I've heard and I've never experienced that from, I've done a lot of psychedelics. I've never got that. You know what I mean? Not to that level. That was so awesome. Like it was so comforting. And, uh, and it's, it's a kind of a thing that I don't need anything else to know that, that everything is cool. You're on a mean. Right. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. So it's my own little personal thing. I don't even bring it up unless somebody asks, but, but it's, um, it's just something that happened. I stumbled upon that tells me, give everything you got with anything you're doing and just live to your potential because it's all fine anyway. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Or you could take it like, oh, we're in a credible. Yeah. That's incredible. Yeah. What, uh, what do you say to kids growing up the way you did in an environment that you did, um, headed down the path that you were headed down who seek out a seek out advice or don't like what do you say to them and how do you get through them? Um, anything, anything great. And so if you're in a ship position or you're in a, you're in a position where you want to grow or you just want to be able to be you, anything that, anything different is going to come through unfamiliar means. So you have to be okay with humility and overcome your fear and that everyone has that fear. Everyone, you're not unique, you're not special in that sense. Like you get to experience your share of it. There are some people that hide it well and make you think they're in way more control than they really are. So, so don't let that deter you from, you know, because if I could have been so much smarter, if I just would say, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. That I just been using that for like 10 years now. I don't know. And it works great for learning. But yeah, yeah. And I'm to ask smart. No, I don't know. And I used to just keep my mouth shut like, man, I don't know. And I'm afraid to ask because you look like you know this stuff naturally, you know what I mean? Right. And a lot of them are faking summer, you know, intelligent people, right? But here's the thing, if you're a kid growing up, don't let nothing fear you do not express where you're at like in this moment. And if if you got people around you, it kind of sucks because when you're a kid, you're kind of throwing in with a lot of stuff. Like I got, I got, I don't know if I should speak about that because I'm working on working with somebody right now and it's still going. So, but um, so you're kind of locked in to as a kid, you have to be certain places, you know, as a minor, you have to be, sorry, maybe I got to fix my butt. Sorry about that. Raise that. So as a as a person who's not independent, you're locked in to certain areas. It doesn't mean you have to conform to everything, but as far as like, so if I was a kid and I was in a rough environment, like I was growing up, and um, it was kind of crazy. How I could have did it. Now, if I look back on it, is I had, there was always some person that's like a, I used to call them like, do goers or I didn't even know what they were at the time. It was like all of a sudden I'm hanging out with this person going these places. I've heard some horrible stories about that, but I've had good people one person out of all the mess would show up and say, you want to go to this monster truck thing or whatever. And what they were doing was trying to help me and I didn't even know I needed help. When I look back on it now, and I help a lot of people, I realize there's always that one person around that you can talk to. It's just you don't see them being helpful to you. You know, any but they buy 30 or 40 trips around the sun. They got tons of experience. So you don't open your mind to the fact that you could be, you don't know everything you think you know. This guy's willing to show you that it's okay to not know everything. And so, but that gets tricky because like all the fear they put on these shows and there's like all kinds of crazy shit, but I got people sometimes that, you know, put their kids in my, pretty much my, you know, to take care of them or just like help them learn to stuff. Like kind of like these guys did for me different times of my life. And so if they have a person like that, it doesn't matter who they are. If they're willing to listen and share their experience with living, you know, I tell these kids, man, try to try to use that. You know what I mean? Try to use that. I had to do it with my nephew a few years back. I kind of of had custody of him. He was at the time he was nine. And there were so many things I had to work through with him. And then, you know, even to this day now, now his dad's there doing a great job and helping him work through now. But at one time it was, you know, I had to figure this out. And it was tough, you know what I mean? But he learned that he can come to me and he does. He decompresses his little say, let's take a ride and we'll go take a ride in the truck and he'll just start blabbing about everything. And I just let him go and go and go, you know what I mean? And the reason being is he's decompressing, you know what I mean? And I don't need to judge it. I don't need to stop him or correct him. I wait. And then there's a question at the end of it. So what do you do if this happens? You know what I mean? And I just answer it. And I don't pay any mind to uh, dramatically acting over some crazy words he might say or whatever. You know what I mean? I just kind of let him get it all out. So if you got a guy like that, I've been able to do it. My nephews, I got a couple of them, you know, once now he's a 50% partner in the moving business. You know, he's doing great. I mean, I couldn't be prouder of all my nephews. But uh, so they're luckily I didn't know when I was doing this turnaround. So here's the biggest thing. If you fight your demons, you turn that around inside of you, you're automatically a help every time you show up. Because two things, one, you're mastering yourself. So you're not all crazy. So you're not contributing to the problems. Two, you know how to get out of all these problems. Right. So it's not, I'm not telling you something that I didn't do. That was the difference between growing up and hearing and hearing actors say because they were all actors that didn't really go inside first. And it's not their fault. Nobody's the blame for that. But, but I found out that that's not enough. You know what I mean? And I was willing to go to any lengths to find out why is this bother me so much that what you say and what you're doing is two different things. Right. I didn't know why it bothered me so much. But it always, I can always prove that what you're saying is not the truth in your life. So why are you giving it to me? You know what I mean? And in that sense, I was really sharp because I could see that in a second. And I lost hope in people. Right. Yeah. So I did that in an early age. And what I didn't know was that they're just trying to make it, you know what I mean? And so I just took it like everybody's full of shit just, you know, lie, whatever you got to do, get back to living in your head. Word safe. Right. Yeah. That's fascinating, man. Well, thank you very much for coming in on here and sharing your story. Where can people find you reach out to you, contact you? I'm always in Southless Florida. I mean, I've got, I don't want like a open line. I got tons of people. But if my experience is anything like a certain, like you've experienced that certain stuff, you will find me, you know what I mean? And if they reach out to you and they say, you know, that's what happened with Julian to some good guy, you know, he had some questions and I was able to help and quite a few people actually through that. Yeah. And that's all I really care about. I don't care about money property price. I work for what I need. I do this because I really think needed. And I mean, you probably can't even, from my description, I can't figure out what exactly I do other than stay out of the way of good and try to help good. Yeah. Yeah. That's about it. So I don't know what they call that. But your inspiration, man. Yeah. I definitely, you're definitely that. Appreciate it, man. That's awesome. Yeah. There's a lot of, a lot of people that get impacted. They what I hear the most is if you can do it, I can do it. Right. And that's what I, that's the the truth. Anybody can turn their life around if they can realize their solutions not coming from, you know, kind of like, uh, Einstein, one of those smart guys said, you can't get out of a problem with the same thinking that you got into the problem or something like that. I'm murdering. Right. But you get what I mean. Yeah. So if you can get an open mind enough to say, you know what, that guy was there. I felt like I was there. He's there. And that lines up, then you'll find me or you'll find a guy like me. And if you're think I can help, then you know, just reach out to you and I'll call them. Awesome. Yeah. Well, thanks again for doing this. It was fascinating. And I really enjoyed it. Cool. All right. Man. Goodbye, everybody. Take care.