How'd you wind up seeing country music? Well my childhood The soundtrack to my childhood is all country music That's all I heard from the time I woke up in the morning until a time that the lights went out It's funny. You're from northern New England, which I think my people don't associate with country music But it's oh yeah for sure the country at like out in the woods Listen into country for sure but yeah, I I would I spent a lot of time at my grandparents house where in Wallingford Vermont Spent a lot of time there. It was a safe place for me My grandmother would wake up in the morning and the very first thing that happened before an egg hit the frying pan or anything was the country radio got turned on Wow, and it was on all day long and And the very last thing that got shut off before the light got shut off was the radio so I mean it didn't matter if I was going fishing with my grandfather or whether I was at the house if we were going fishing I can still visualize the pile of eight tracks on the floor of his grand Torino with with the boat tied to the top of the car and and It was just it was permanent There was always country music always and if we were in the boat he was singing it so My whole childhood is just steeped in country music. So when I decided Excuse me when I decided to do something Different because I had gotten to the end of my contract with stained And I was now free to do whatever I wanted to do I had always thought about putting out a Solo record if you will a lot of lead singers do that I Didn't want it to be stained light I Wanted I wanted to do something different and Reinvent what I was doing without reinventing myself. Yes, and The only direction to go was country music because it was such a part of my being part of my my whole childhood memories and and the landscape of it so When I decided that I was actually gonna Do something by myself that was the direction that I want. It's funny. I think people think of country music as a regional music Southern Appalachian, you know, Tennessee South, was Virginia kind of a birthplace They don't think of it as the music of the country So it's like central California Bakersfield of course. Oh, yeah, no Vermont. There's field as a piece of Texas of Exactly in the middle of California and you grew up in Northern New England Which is you know very rural almost rural places and you get out of the cities in New England And it's as country as country gets and it's as red as red gets even the state of Massachusetts Oh, I know if you look at the state of Massachusetts broken down County by County The whole state's red except for Boston Worcester and Springfield. Yeah Now you get outside those three big cities and in the state of Massachusetts, which is one of the worst it is California too I get outside those big cities It's all red Yeah, not a lot of common of voters up near Mount Shasta. No No, not at all. It's it's just music is such a window into attitudes and culture and It's just it's funny that country music is basically popular everywhere outside the cities 100% Interesting so how was it weird for you to go from a one genre to a completely different one? weird Hmm, I don't know if it was I don't know if it was weird it was Foolish by everybody else's accounts because I had already built something Substantial in the rock industry. Yeah, and I kind of walked away from that and went to a completely different genre that there might be some overlap of Staying fans that also liked country music but I was certainly in that moment shooting myself in the foot and having to basically start over because My value in the industry was was towards the rock industry and Nobody knew who I was in the country industry in less they would listen to rock music too so it kind of in perfect Me form I Took the hard road and decided I was gonna change genres along with putting something out by myself Which would have been hard enough as it is how how its country music changed itself as a genre I don't really recognize country music anymore Really? Well, what's playing on the radio like there? How do you draw a line? From what's on the radio now and called country music To what was on the radio when we were kids called country music like there's and there's no there's no line to be drawn I listen up with grass chunks and so this is all this is all outside my world, but for sure tell me how it's changed It's been infiltrated by California just like everything else who really when Within my career about halfway through it Everything changed in the industry and a lot of consolidation happened a lot of people Lost their jobs at whatever record label they were at or They were in the top 40 side of things and Everything got condensed and they lost their well they all either went to Nashville or they went to country radio and I truly believe that that has something to do with why Country has become so Popified Where it's like the land of the misfit toys where it's not really country. It's not really pop It kind of rides right down the middle of it and becomes its own thing and They should call it its own thing like it should have its own genre and classification and Instead they call it country and I don't know how you can put George Jones and Murrow Haggard in the same sentence as as Morgan Wallen or Or or or with the rascal flats. I mean how do you even? How does that correlate how does that fall into the same category because it? It doesn't in any way to me Which is better? Country yeah, we have pop music. I think pop music with a country twang is a little weird Why did they do do that happen organically or do you think it was on purpose? It's the it's the Control mechanism It's the people in in power. I'm calling the shots and and being the taste makers if you will and choosing for us what we want to hear and then stuffing it down our throat until we accept it you may have noticed This is a great country with bad food our food supply is rotten It didn't used to be this way take chips for example You may recall a time when crushing a bag of chips didn't make you feel hungover Like you couldn't get it bed the next day and the change of course is chemicals There's all kinds of crap. They're putting in this food that should not be in your body seed oils for example Now even one serving of your standard American chip brand can make you feel bloated Fat Totally passive and out of it But there is a better way. It's called masa chips. They're delicious. Got a whole garage full of them They're healthy. They taste great and they have three simple ingredients corn, salt, and a hundred percent grass-fed beef Tallow no garbage no seed oils What a relief and you feel the difference when you eat them as we often do Snacking on masa chips is not like eating the garbage that you buy a convenience store. So you feel satisfied Light energetic not sluggish Tens of thousands of happy people eat masa chips. It's endorsed by people who understand health It's well worth the try go to masa m a s a chips dot com slash chucker use the code Tucker for 25% off your first order That's masa chips dot com Tucker code Tucker for 25% off your first order highly recommended There's something a little radical Well, maybe more than a little radical about traditional you know Johnny Cash doing You know a live show from the folks in yard. You know, it's like it's pretty It's pretty untamed in a lot of it. I mean, there's like a true outlaw not a fake outlaw element But like a real outlaw element. I think the country music is is americana like It's the It's through the genre that we as them as the country of America are certainly responsible for it came from here Yeah, it didn't come from somewhere else where where rock had a lot of English Influence all those English bands from back to earth and stuff and but they brought up the tree music is Country music still isn't worldwide It's it's big in Germany. It's it might have it's kind of listening audience in in England and in Germany, but It doesn't expand much further than that like Country music is an American genre And it's become less American and more international More more like Barcelona. It's just everyone city right? It's like it's like it's like nobody's city It's like the land of the misfit toys. That's the best way to describe it where it doesn't fit in pop Doesn't fit in country just kind of But you can push it in either direction And it would be and it works, but It has no It doesn't have its own soul. If you will It's not it's definitely not pure to the genre. Do you think That they're still a demand for it. I mean could country music. Yeah real country was it could more haggard make a living today Oh, I don't know. I mean I would certainly hope so But if you listen to the landscape that's on country radio right now I don't see where he would fit in at all Hmm, I don't see where I fit in at all. Are you on the radio? No Really? No, they won't play me. They don't like my my my thoughts on things Really? How important is well, it's obviously you how many shows you do last year? Oh 175 180 shows last year. Yeah, so obviously Much you're much all of them sold out. You're doing fine. Um, just fine. It's nice to not have to Bow down to the powers that be It's nice to not have to Undermine my value in a market because the radio station Wants to get as much out of my show as they can so they sell my ticket for a low-doh $10 ticket and they've just devalued my Value in that market By selling such a cheap ticket when I can sell hard tickets. I don't I don't need to sell sell myself short by by doing favors for a radio station. Is that how it works? Oh First you sell your soul to the record label And then you sell everything else you've got To the machine, which is the radio that drives music Really is it satellite or terrestrial radio like all of it? All of it satellite just took over. Yeah, but it's the same idea same concept So how does if you don't mind revealing the sleazy underbelly of the business like that you don't participate in apparently? How does it work? We're the we are the the indentured servant I mean, I think that indentured servitude laws are literally still on the books in California so that they can get away With what they do with us The performer the artist you're talking about. Yeah, everything every every penny that we ever get paid from a record label is all alone It's all alone. They they to give you a car just a conceptual breakdown This is all just kind of a Take a dollar. Yeah, so 25 cents of that dollar Let's just say it's probably more Goes to the record label Just because because they invested the rest of it Business management takes their percentage lawyer takes their percentage Management takes their percentage business manager takes their percentage then the government takes their percentage And then the overhead And then what's left Let's call it Ten cents at the end of the day that Goes back to the record label To pay back The loan That they gave you Of the money that they gave you up front I saw Any money That I've actually made From the record label I've I've made them 80 times as much Like That's a it of a dollar Let's just say there's 12 cents left The 12 cents actually goes to pay back the record label for the money that they gave you It's insane How does that still exist? Because of the laws on the books It's like It's insane Are the record label people adding a lot to the process? Are they creative geniuses? No I just love how All the people who are getting rich From other ones they didn't do it Are the least creative? Yeah, they're the ones that can't create But they are making the most money off of the creatives Were here because Who wouldn't want a record label? Who wouldn't want to live this dream? Who wouldn't want to make music if they're a musician? Who wouldn't want to make music as their livelihood? So we're in a very Very fucked up situation where There's a thousand people behind me Yeah, that would kill me to have my freaking job Yes, exactly So I mean, I got no leverage Television is the same I got no leverage with the industry Because I'm a I'm easily chewed up and spit out Because there's a thousand people behind me waiting to get chewed up and spit out How long did you participate in that system? It was 2012 or 13 That last stained record that we put out was The last record where I really had to do the dance And and play the game with radio And and not ruffle any feathers And not offend anybody And and play the game And then once that contract was done I tried to play the game with country music And then I released a song called that ain't country that was basically talking about the whole industry that Has created this amalgamation of Music that doesn't really fit in a genre Um and that was the end of it I put out a song expect it trying to get country radio to play it About them and they didn't like that very much Okay, so you attacked the distributors and then were surprised when they didn't distribute it. Yeah super smart Yeah, super smart I admire your purity But but but but exactly but principle That's that's hilarious. So that didn't that didn't work So what did it did it work? Why don't it basically? It didn't work to my advantage to be getting played on the radio But it certainly freed me from Being a servant to radio. Yes so It's a I It is so freeing To not be under that thumb. Yes I can write songs that are over three and a half minutes long I can Put lyrics and songs that That I want to put there. You know, I'm just I I'm no longer To the industry standard because I'm not necessarily trying to participate in the Industry game I go out there. I play successful shows I have a fan base that Seeks out my music and doesn't just Listen to what the radio stuff's down their throat and I'm Very very blessed and very very lucky To that I don't I have to participate in the game anymore How is Spotify changed it I'm a Spotify Billionaire I've have over a billion spins on Spotify If I only had a penny For every spin On Spotify that would be Fantastic a dollar A quarter a penny For my respan With over a billion spins On Spotify All I have is a plaque You never got paid It's so By the time Spotify plays it there's so many people in the middle I don't even think a penny comes my way to be honest with you For a billion spins you made no money I don't think so. I don't know. That's not how Spotify works Wow, doesn't work I'm not sure I'm just not I just know that that it cuts a lot of people In on my financial stream That's all I know A lot of people who are not you Right that once again aren't the creatives and they're the ones making all the money So you think some are creative in how they came up with something to Get into somebody else's money. What's called creative accounting Which is the form of creativity long unrecognized in the West Um I would call it being a leech But yeah, I would I would say the same if it ain't broke don't fix it as a cliche For a reason because it's pretty good advice, but sometimes it's not true Cellphones are glaring exception. You've got yourself on you've had it for years You don't change sometimes your cell phone battery life fades or maybe your processor can't keep up But your phone is bound to run into trouble eventually no matter what the problem is and replacing it early is much better And often far cheaper than replacing it too late enter pure talk This month if you switch to a qualifying $35 plan 35 bucks Pure talk will give you a Samsung Galaxy A 36 completely free Literally free Just 35 bucks a month for talk text and data and you get to restart your phone life cycle without paying for a brand new device So it's a scam-free deal All on America's most dependable 5G network It's like a cell phone that works as well as any other It's just way cheaper and they're not scamming you so switching is a win for everybody you save money in your cell phone bill bill Pure talk grows to hire more Americans and support more veterans, which it does So get a pure talk calm slash talker to get your free phone today. That's pure talk com Slash talker to switch to our wireless company. It's America's wireless company. It's pure talk That's amazing to me It's a Billion plays more than and you don't get paid. I don't I mean Might have it certainly wasn't enough for me to Notice whoa, how did all this money come from in my bank account? Oh, I got spun over a billion times on Spotify. That's why I mean Do I know for sure that no money came in? No, but if you don't remember then obvious Compared to minuscule comparatively speaking That is so interesting have there been basically the whole thing the amount of money That we generate as the artist What we get back for that is minuscule comparatively speaking to what Everybody else with their hands in the cookie jar makes so whenever I hear people talk about I'm not complaining. Well, you should buy it. Well, I'm very blessed and I'm very lucky and I'm and and you know Obviously God has a plan for me because This the way that all of this has just happened and I am just a passenger and yeah, and I'm not driving the ship. Yes but and I'm very lucky and very blessed, but I can still recognize the faults to the system And not necessarily be complaining about how amazing of a ride I've had doing this. It's just it's interesting I mean, but I should just say Spotify has been such a huge blessing for us on this podcast I mean, it's just crazy. It's an amazing new way for people to consume. Yeah, and it's run by a guy I know Who owns it and I think it's a good guy and committed to speech and and so I'm very pro spotify but I just didn't understand That the creators on the music side were cut out of the benefits Again not cut out No, but I mean a billion but that's I mean I should have I should have seen a pretty Significant deposit into my account for that many spin. Well, what's interesting is they probably paid somebody but not you so you yeah Probably I'm sure my record label got paid Well, you see the accounting of the US economy like what's our GDP? You know how much money is the United States economy generating and like a lot So the question is not you know is the engine functioning? The question is where's the money going and my Complaint about the US is not capitalism as clearly works It's about who benefits from it and it does seem like the least Useful least creatively certainly least patriotic, but at least decent people make all of them big money and I think that's this is another example of it like how did Larry think it's over like what did Larry think do for America? Etcetera et cetera. You're out away to completely Leach off of everything that's already there. What that's that's certainly the way it seems to me certainly does right So how do you make money by getting on the road? That is how and that's why I work as hard as I do because that is where I make my money I don't make money on record sales. I don't make money off of Spins I make money off of merch and actually playing shows Wow But that's a much it feels like that's a much more direct transaction like You're renting the venue you're performing for two and a half hours or whatever You're getting a cut of gate like there are fewer middlemen in that right? There seems to be less of a less of a machine that It puts itself in between Yeah but There is this thing that has taken place since I got my record deal 20 years ago 27 years ago Is called a 360 deal where now the younger artists They're sharing The profits for everything the record label gets a cut of Their merch the record label gets a cut of their live performance pay The record label gets a cut of 360 Everything Wow no matter what you generate because they can Because there's a thousand people behind every single person with a record label with a with a record deal That wants it as badly as you did before you got it And they can give you the shittiest deal on the planet Because if you don't take it the guy behind you will Wow And they're not only a greedy and dishonest ruthless They're also very political right? The record labels and usually in the wrong direction and I don't understand how a record label that I mean it certainly isn't capitalism with the conscience But it is it's certainly capitalism Where the record label is in it to make money And it's not necessarily about what's the art That is being created by the creative It's about the money that that creative artist is going to generate For the record label to cover the 15 failures that they brought to the table Yes and dumped all this money into I get it Publishing is the same way. Yeah, so um, you know, you've been in it your whole life. You've toured with it Everybody Everybody you were telling me last night about smoking weed with Willie Nelson on his bus and years ago You've toured with everybody How many creators artist performers in your business In private hate and resent the record company most if not All I don't know that in a private setting in a private conversation where things aren't going any further I don't know of Anybody that I know in the business that would have good things to say about it It would be possible for a decent person to start a record company and record label. I would think so I would think so, but the problem is is that the the the um the operating system It's just it's not decent Right, so a decent person could start a record label But unless they change the entire formula and in the entire way that the whole business is ran The business itself is let's you're as and in the entire way that the whole business is ran, the business itself is less serious. So a good person could start it, but unless they change the whole thing, it's going to be the same. Right. It's like getting elected to Congress. Yeah. It's pretty obvious now that this country is getting weaker than ever. I mean, the population is unhealthy. That's what Mahat is about trying to counteract this long-term trend that's culminated in a disaster. Americans are so unhealthy, we can't staff the military. And it's really, really sad. Why is this happening? Maybe because sick people are easier to control whatever the reason their answers to it. One of them is joy and blokes. They are revolutionizing supplements with smart supplements or personalized for you. They're based entirely on your genetics, your biomarker data. They're not guessing. So they use labs, advanced labs that measure up to 110 key biomarkers. And their clinician's design and precision supplement plan that's updated as your body changes. So it's not just off the shelf vitamins. It's much more precise in there for much more effective. So there are about three billion possible combinations. And the effect is you get exactly what you need and you get nothing that you don't need. You also get 60 to 30 minute consultation, depending on how much time you need. You get access to expert guided hormone care, including testosterone optimization for both men and women, longevity, medicine, cutting edge, peptide therapy, and you get it off from home. Right now, new customers get 50% off all diagnostic labs plus 20% off all products and therapies. You also get a free 15 minute health coach consult. And the effect is the desired effect stronger, sharper, more energy. You get it right away. Go to joy and blokes.com slash Tucker root cause medicine is the way healthcare ought to be. So when you start having conflict with your corporate masters over politics, bam, getting elected, that was a moment. Wasn't it? You know, you weren't fully on board. Hell no. You didn't work. I immediately recognized it as a horrible blow to our country immediately, not even knowing why yet. Like I just knew instinct tells instinctively in my gut, I knew that we had made a massive, massive mistake as a country. That's for sure. And so many balls got rolling during that timeframe that were still that we're still trying to slow down. No, I know. But yeah, when DMZ would get me when I landed in Los Angeles and I was walking through the the airport and they'd get me and ask me questions and that was when I started expressing my feelings and my opinions on that. You know how they get you? Do you know the answer to this quote? I found out I've been gotten a few times at LAX by TMZ and other airports and I once asked like how did you know I was on that plane? What? You know, because they know because they bribe the airline, the guy told me this. They bribe the airline to give them the manifest. Makes sense. That makes sense. How are you out of nowhere? They're like, hey, yeah. Like, what? How'd you even know I was here? Thanks United. Bless you, American. You know, it's pretty, anyway, so they would roll off the flight at LAX. Someone come up to you and ask you a question. What did you say? Oh, I was, I have, I have, I had no issues then. Or do I have any issues now telling anybody exactly how I feel? And you know, I was already talking about the unconstitutionalness of Obama's actions and what he was doing. And I mean, mentioning that what he was doing was borderline treasonous. And that was how I started the ball rolling. And what kind of responses you get? Because you weren't allowed to criticize Obama there for a while or else you were, I can't remember the word racist. Yeah, I know I've been, I've been labeled that racist. And then there was, there was one time I was, I was playing a show down by the, down by the border. And, uh, I mean, I've played a lot of shows. And I've played a lot of shows back before I had a record deal. And this was the rudest crowd I had played to in 15 years. I'm playing completely acoustic all by myself, not even any extra musicians on stage or anything, just me and my guitar. I could not get them to shut up all night. Just talking over me like I was the jukebox. And I made the mistake of back then at the end of the show, I would do a song completely unplugged where I would pull a cord out of my guitar and I'd walk away from the microphone and I'd go stand right on the edge of the stage. And I would acoustically play the last song with no microphone, with no nothing, just belting to the crowd. And for some strange reason, after such a rude evening, I decided I was going to do that and try to prove everybody wrong. I'm, they're going to listen to me whether they want to or not. So I attempt to try to start the song. I explained to them what I was going to do through the microphone before I stepped away from the microphone and I attempted to start the song as I got to where I started to sing the volume had gone up and not down. Now mind you, there's no sound system anymore. It's just me singing to the room. So I stopped. I walked back around and I go to the microphone. I explained to everybody what I'm going to do again. I start again. Volume goes up. So I go back to the microphone and I was, and I was like, listen, I don't have to do this. I was trying to do something in a lady that was standing right there in the front row, like four people from the center. She's like, tell them to shut the fuck up and Spanish. And I said close to the microphone. I wasn't necessarily talking into them. I was talking to her, but it was close. And I said, I'm sorry, ma'am. I don't speak Spanish. I'm American. The world ended for like a week all over the, like broke the internet, Aaron Lewis, a racist. Aaron Lewis this, a racist. Right. Because I said, I'm, I'm sorry, ma'am. I don't speak Spanish. I am American. That was what I said. Beats me. But that's what went around. Perez Hilton did a hit piece on me about how much of a racist I am put the video connected to it. And if you watch the video, you see that the whole interview is complete. I mean, the whole piece is a complete bullshit and a complete fabrication of all of it. And they would write these hit pieces and actually attach the video that completely contradicted the hit piece. Yeah, it doesn't matter. But it doesn't matter because people wouldn't actually, they just read. And Rez Hilton boy, I haven't heard that name in a while. She's still alive. I don't know. Boy, that I don't know. Maybe the facts got him. I don't know. Possible. That's wild. So you're a racist for saying that I don't speak Spanish. I'm American. When America, it says clearly in the books, in the naturalization process that you have to have a full working knowledge of the English language before you can become a citizen in this country. Yeah. Well, you know, English is not a race. The United States is not a race. There's nothing about race in that sentence or sentiment. I know, right. Yeah, a boy. Why you just brought me back to an earlier time. I don't think that would happen now. People are so over that. People are over it, but I think that that side of things probably still would have tried. Well, now they call you an anti-Semite probably. This is the amount. I'm any of the ists. Wow, that's wild. So how did your manager and assorted handlers record label feel about this? I mean, it was just one of those things where you just had to kind of let it go by. Yeah. Just let it die out. Let it play its course and go away. Was the crowd mad when you said that? No. Yeah. No. And then I tried one more time to sing the song. And they wouldn't listen. And I put my guitar down on the stage and walked off stage. Oh, what you do is already two plus hours into a show. It's not like they were like it's not like any of the show got taken away from that at all. I was done. I was just trying to do something special and they didn't want it. So did you ever have gone like direct conflict with an employer over politics? Yeah. With the way I mean, my record label president, we've had some pretty heated discussions about politics and and he I mean, when you do the whole breakdown and you start talking really bare bones basics, there's a lot of things that he agrees with me on. But when you bring all the rest of it in, we don't see eye to eye on much anything. Right. I get that a lot reasonable people similar values actually, but they're just they see themselves so differently and they're just committed to some weird partisan addiction. It's almost like a feel good addiction like a like a like it's a virtue signaling addiction that people seem to have that for some reason feel so guilty about their own life that they need to create these these things to to virtue signal and make themselves feel like a better person because at the end of the day, how they present themselves and behave and life is is is unfulfilling for them. So they somehow have to virtue signal to make them feel better about their unfulfilled lives. It's it's a very strange strange thing. I have found as a 53 year old man looking at the people that are younger than me that are going to take over this country when I'm gone. They just want to be a victim. Like it's the craziest thing happening with with our culture where all of our younger generation, there's more pride taken in being a victim than there is in getting over and getting through and moving past whatever it is that you were a victim up. It's not pull your boots, traps up and and stand up and keep moving forward anymore. It's it's lavish and the victimhood as long as possible. And that just doesn't compute with me. No, like I don't that's not what I was taught at all at all. You weren't encouraged to wine as a child. No, no. I wasn't either. Honestly, if I was whining, I don't think that my voice was even acknowledged. Of course not. As it shouldn't be. Right. Do you feel guilty about growing up as rich as you did going to Hotchkiss and Yale and all the advantages that you had? I grew up very much like most in this country. We were lower middle class at best. I have the first memories that I have are living in a single wide trailer in a trailer park in Castleton, Vermont. Charming place. Super charming. It's not it's not the Vermont. If we can get away, is it not so much? It's not so really. And my dad back in the 60s, he bought a hunting camp up on the side of a mountain in Shrewsbury. And he moved us from the trailer park to that hunting camp. It's in the it's in the song Country Board. My dad picked the place up for 1500 bucks back in 1964. He bought this hunting camp on the side of a mountain for $1,500. And he moved us into that hunting camp. And by the time we moved, he sold that same place for 85 grand, I think. And that was what put us in a regular middle class neighborhood at that point. That was the up that he that he turned that $1,500 investment into 80 something. I've always wanted to live at my hunting camp. I think that's the dream for a lot of people. I would just like to live in a hunting camp. What was that like as good as as a kid? Yeah. Lonely. Lonely. I had to keep myself occupied for sure. I was out in the middle of the woods as a five year old kid. Which of moms say what does a woman say when a husband moves her to a hunting camp? I don't think my mom minded. I don't think my mom minded. There was like she had the garden out front. And they were always, I mean, my parents were kind of hippie-ish. Yeah. That sounds like I mean, my dad got arrested at the Yankee nuclear power plant for protesting back in the day before it was up and running. Yes. Was it, I mean, what was deer season like if you already live in the hunting camp? It wasn't there. We would go to Wallingford and to Damby and up where the family was and the Lewis farm was in Damby and was half of the, Damby is almost like a volcano, like an inactive volcano where at the top of the mountain there's a valley. So it's like an ancient volcano that at some point blew off, but you would never know, but there's a valley on the top of the mountain. And that was the valley that Lewis, the Lewis farm was in. And it was like top 10 dairy farms in Vermont. So the farm is where we would go and everybody would gather up and we would do the classic drives and pushes and all that stuff. And it was always rifle. I didn't get into bow hunting until later in life. Yeah. There wasn't much of it. Not really. Not then. No. I mean, bows have really come a long way since like the mid 80s to now. I remember the first time I heard it, I thought it was like one of the, not bad. I wasn't against it, but I was like, wow, you kill a deer with a bow. Mm. Like, high of watha? Like that was wild. Huh. You still hunting fish? I do. I'm so completely eight up with upland bird hunting and I'm from New England. So I had never hunt quail before and I earlier this year went on my first quail hunt. And oh my God, that was it for me. That was it for me. Like I have gone, I went probably 15 times since I found, found quail hunting and I hunted all the way up until the last day of the season in Florida is April 15th, 15th or 20th, maybe or somewhere around there. And literally hunted all the way through to the last day. And what do you like about it? Everything. The tradition, the tradition is the biggest thing for me. Like I'm all about it. I'm hunting with a gun that, you know, should be in a museum or in a clay and somebody's private collection and, and those are my hunting guns. What do you hunt with? I'm a big 410 guy. I love the 410. It's the smallest of the shotgun gauges. It is the smallest of the shotgun gauges. It is the most gentlemanly, if you will. And, but I'll be out there and full, Philson regalia and, and, and looking like I just came out of a, out of a safari or something. And, and I'm all about it. I, I, I respect the tradition of it. The camaraderie, the dogs. Oh, yeah, I got it. I love watching the dogs work. They're unbelievable. Watching a dog slam into a point like that, like somebody just shot him with electricity. Just, it is amazing. It is amazing that that's, that's almost as enjoyable as the actual flush and the shot is actually watching the dogs. I totally agree with that. That's, that's half three quarters of the enjoyment is experiencing that whole thing with, with the dogs and how amazingly trained they are. I mean, just how does a dog know to do that? I don't know. It's, it's laden. I mean, it's in the dog. Yeah, your job is to bring it out. It stinks you all and then you got to bring it out. That's it. It's amazing. Can you hit a quail with a four ton? Almost every time. Really? Yes, sir. You're doing 180 shows a year. How'd you get to be such a good shot? I had, I, I, I was hunting with my dad bird hunting for roughed grouse and, and woodcock, just like you love so much at seven, eight. Yep. I think I got my first double for woodcock's at 10 or 11. Got my first double on grouse at like 12 or 13. Wow. I've never done that. The grouse one was like it couldn't have been more perfect. Three grouse all went up at the same time and they all flew straight away from me. I probably could have got a triple if I was using a semi-auto and not a good one. You had another barrel. So for people who don't, I'm sure we're going to lose an audience point here, but for people who don't know what New England grouse hunting is, can you describe it? grouse is a big woodland bird about the size of a chicken, about the size of a chicken. And they, they, they strut like a turkey does. Yeah. Um, and they've, they're one of the most beautiful birds and they're one of the hardest. Yes. There as fast as an F-15 and you literally have, if you get two seconds as a window of opportunity for that shot a lot, that's a lot. Yeah. That's a lot. They go off and it's like, and they're gone. You literally have that much and they're gone. And the noise I'm making is what it sounds like when they take off from their, from their wings hitting their body. And it will, it will stop your heart like, yeah. And there are no pen raised rough grouse. Yeah. They're just all wild birds 100% and they're as wild as wild gets. For you to go out and have a successful day of rough grouse hunting or partridge as they're also called. Yeah. Um, you've, you've accomplished something. That's for sure. You, you get a limit and you're actually done for the day and can't keep hunting for the day with rough grouse. You are, you have accomplished something. If you're doing it on foot, I've never done that, but never limited out on grouse. But like how many, how far per bird do you think you walk in grouse? Miles. Miles, unless you, unless you have found a thick population, you will cover some ground and you will put in a lot of work. It's probably why I like, well hunting. You get older because I'm, I'm 53. I don't necessarily want to walk into a piece of woods that is up and down and the thickest. They, of course they live in the thickest crap. Oh, yeah. So you're really, really, really, really putting in a lot of effort to possibly put up one bird. Where with quail hunting, if you go to a plantation where that's their deal is quail hunting. With a nice leisurely stroll, nice leisurely, gentlemanly stroll through the woods, you can put up 100 birds instead of possibly one. Yeah. In that sense, the, the, the hot and heavy action is what kind of keeps makes the, the quail hunting thing kind of at the top. Yeah. Quail hunting is a rich man sport. Rough grouse hunting and New England is a poor man sport. Quail hunting is a rich man sport because of the fact that the majority of the quail hunting that you can do at this point in, in our, in our society and in our growth as a country, everything else. It's really hard to actually find wild quail to begin with. Yes. So what you're hunting is a put and take situation. So there's an overhead to it. Yeah. And you, you're paying anywhere from a thousand to astronomical prices to go and hunt this place. Yep. Some places are insane. And so exclusive and so private that even if you had the, the ridiculous amount of money to pay, you can't. But yes, yes, it's a, it is a rich man sport in the sense that it's hard to go do it on your, your own time with no dime for sure. You, you've got to go to a place that for the most part, you got to go to a place that it charges you because there's a massive overhead for the cost of the birds and the cost of everything. So if, you know, musician, if you had to pair a musician with these two kinds of up on bird hunting, you'd say Bruce Springsteen, who's the representative of America's working man. Oh, yeah. Totally would be a grouse. Like I would put him as my representation any day. Do you know Bruce Springsteen? No. Thankfully. What do you think of him? I think that, that he is a, a disgusting display of not appreciating what was handed to him for as in this country as being an American, the success that he has had. The fact that he duped us all with one of the most anti American songs ever and called it born in the USA as some sort of celebration of how great it is to be born in the USA. I'm angry at myself for not seeing it for so long and actually giving him in my mind the credit of being a representation of blue collar America. I think that he has forgotten where he came from. Yeah. I think that if you're not careful doing this, this career that that me and him have both been so blessed to have had if you're not careful, it will consume you. And it's obvious that it creates a situation where you've lost sight of the reality of the country that you live in because you've, you've lived such a push. You've had so much, you have so much that it's really easy to take a stance that is so anti everything that you, that you were lucky enough to have lucky enough to create lucky enough to be to change your your situation in life. He just lost touch with the struggles. He's lost touch with the struggle. And it seems like most people who have lost touch with the true struggle of life, those are the people that vote for these fucking idiots. Those are the people that feel like they have to virtue signal. Those are the people that somewhere along the way they feel guilty for the success that they have had. So they somehow have to make it up with this nonsensical bullshit that like you grew up at the same time, time I did. It was the most unracially driven. The verbal beating that we took over and over and over our whole childhood of you don't judge a man by the color of his skin. You judge a man by the content of his character and like. color of his skin. You judge a man by the content of his character and like, it was the best that our country has ever been. And I think that that didn't work well for the Democrats and the Communists. Why? Because they thrive in the chaos. They want us at each other's throats. They want us bickering internally so that we have no sense of shared country pride, that we have no sense of shared morality because they've created so many things artificially for us to fight about. There is no doubt in my mind at this point. It's not coincidental. It's purposeful. Like, there is definitely a power center in this world that definitely does not want to see us as the shining light on the hill at all. They're against peace and prosperity and because there's no money in it, self-sufficiency in God. No, I couldn't easily money in it. With we're all, you know, how can they exploit us if we're all united and getting along? When we're all looking out for each other as human beings, how can they exploit us? They can't. So they have to they have to keep us in a constant state of conflict. When did you start to realize this? As I got old enough to be carrying the weight of that responsibility on my shoulders, yes, like knowing full well that, okay, it's my turn now. I have assumed the responsibility, which we are all supposed to do, that the country is in my hands. It was in my father's hands before that. It was in my grandfather's hands before that. And as our as our generations grow and get older, each generation, it's now with their turn to become and take over as the stewards of this amazing beautiful country. We forgot about that for a little bit and we haven't been doing that over the probably the past 30 years. That's not okay with me. Like it is my responsibility now as a father and a proud patriot. It's my responsibility now to make sure that what I hand over to the next generation behind me is better than I found it because that's that's what we're supposed to do. That's that's what we were taught our whole lives. You walk into the woods. You leave it cleaner than you found it. You find one piece of trash. It doesn't even matter. One piece of trash and you pick it up and you put it in your pocket, you have left that better than you found it. And our generation, that's what was it still did us be in into us. That's for sure. Yeah, that's the core. I'll come from the generation of still, it's probably the last generation of as a kid. Now, did it fuck me up and make me feel like my voice doesn't get heard. And I like an incessant thing for me is to be heard because I didn't feel like my voice was heard as a kid at all because I was like the last generation of kids that are kids that are to speak when they're spoken to. And that's it. Like I got that from my grandparents. Like children are only to speak when they're spoken to. That's fair. And children are to be seen and not heard. Also fair. Unless they have something interesting to say. Sure. But if you don't, I think in general, if you don't have so many interesting to say, I think that all probably that well supports the whole thing of because I said so. I don't have to give you a reason as my child as to why. Because I said so, there's a huge lesson with that in life. Your boss isn't going to explain to you why you have to do something. He's going to tell you to do something and Eugene need to just do it. There's going to be situations in life where if somebody tells you to do something and you hesitate and don't do it, your life could be in danger. It's just a it's a lost art firm. It's a lost art firm. Parenting is a lost art firm. I said that all the way back in 2001 on the cover of Rolling Stone. Parents have forgotten how to to be parents. Like I realized that all the way back then. And it's only gotten worse. Yeah. The the average kid these days, the biggest parental figure in their life is their computer or their phone. It's not their parent. Yeah, let's see. I don't know. It's insane. We are knowingly and willingly flushing everything down the toilet out of convenience. It's so convenient to have this fully operating computer in my hand at all times. So convenient. Every important piece of thread that makes up the fabric of this country is being picked out one at a time. And it's going to leave us with this empty shell that nobody knows what to do with it now. Because we've already discarded and thrown away everything that kept us on a path, on a good path in life feels like new people will rebuild a new and different society in place of the Americans who are here when you and I were born. And that's scary. Oh, I know. That's scary. If if if we hand this country off as the stewards of today, if we hand this country off to the younger generation without fixing it first, and they're able to do what they've been taught to do. This country will cease to exist. Certainly will not be the shining light on the hill anymore. I don't know that it is already. I mean, the the love and want and desire for this country to go back to where it was for a lot of people is still strong. But I don't know if we have the wherewithal as a society, as an entire country, to pull our heads out of our asses long enough to fix it. It's scary. I'm scared. I'm scared for my kids. I I I lose sleep over what this country is going to be for good Lord, my grandkids. It's bad enough for my kids. Yes, another generation, my grandkids. If this doesn't if the ship doesn't get righted, what are they even going to have? Is their life going to even have the even the slightest semblance of what our lives were? Do our kids now? Is their life even the slightest semblance of what me and you had as kids? No fucking way. How's it different? You've got three kids. We were latch key kids. You didn't even have to lock your door. It like you came home and and and so many parents weren't even there. And there was no worry. Like I never had a key to my house. I don't have a key to my house now actually because of where you live. Oh, right. No, that's right. And I love it out here. This is like no, I agree. No, but you're you're right. I mean the feeling of safety um what was kind of unquestioned. The feeling of trust, just overall trust of your fellow man. There's that's that's in stink. It's it's it's extinct. It doesn't really exist anymore. So you travel by vehicle by bus through America. I don't like to fly. I literally have not flown on a commercial plane since everything shut down for COVID. Wow. Good for you. I will I drive everywhere unless I absolutely have to fly. And then I am guilty. I won't fly commercial. But once maybe twice a year when I absolutely have to fly, I will I will be boogey and get a plane. But because you're traveling overland, the majority of the year, I see what this country is. Exactly. So that's what do you see? And you've been doing this for what? 30 years. You've been on the road across America. I have watched with the fly over states just crumble. You go into a small town. Half the bills businesses are boarded up. You know those small classic what you would think of as Americana, those Norman Rockwell towns. They're all boarded up. There's nobody downtown. There's no commerce. There's there's a dollar general down the street. Yeah. There's a Walmart 10 minutes away. But every mom and pop shop is all gone. Family businesses that have that have provided for that family and provided for the town with the business that they provide. It's all gone. Everywhere pretty much pretty much. What are the you you play in every region of the country? Yeah. What are the toughest parts of the country right now? Rural. Yeah. Rural. Secondly, the cities. And that was and it's in and it's undeniable. Visually right there in front of your face. You have to close your eyes to not see it. So why does no one ever mention that? I never I every US senator I know I know all the Republicans. I mean, the very upset about Iran or Ukraine, but I don't ever hear the mention their own states about the cities. I know it's disgusting. And these are supposed to be the people that are the representatives of that area. You wonder as Tom Cotton never been to the Delta and Arkansas. Like, well, Miss Alaskan was seriously most of us have been able to rate a war console. Right. And I've been through all of Arkansas. And it's poverty-strict and falling apart. And that's anywhere Tennessee. I know like anywhere. 30 years ago, 40 years ago, Pine Bluff Arkansas was a real town. And now, you know, it's one of the most dangerous places in the country. I just wonder like, what do they think? I don't know. And I don't understand why their policies never work. Like they never ever work. I don't know of a single communist policy that has actually done good for whoever it was that the policy was designed for none of them. Right. It's only about destruction. It is. It's only about destruction. Well, here's the story. You probably haven't heard a lot about the Chinese mafia is exploiting rural America to create a drug empire. This is not available on cable news that networks not telling you about this, but it's totally real. Communist affiliated drug gangs just drawing parts of the United States, the parts that Washington ignores, to sell drugs, laundering money, and building a black market network inside this country's most beautiful, but least served areas. We've got a brand new documentary on this. It's called High Crimes, the Chinese Mafia takeover of rural America. It's available now on Tucker Carlson.com. It's excellent. The purchase of churches and schools to aid the operation, the cherry rigging of power boxes to steal electricity, foreign pesticides, collusion with the Mexican cartels. It's it's unbelievable. By the way, one of the drug houses is like walking distance from my house. I didn't know that. It's a layered and fascinating story. Had to Tucker Carlson.com to watch now. We think you'll love it. So here's one of my favorite quotes. My favorite air Lewis quotes. My book of air Lewis quotes. Everyone in music is like an outlaw, a rebel, and they all say the same thing. And they all mowed the same piloties with the same stupid bumper stickers, just asked to the same powerful people. So this actually is kind of an outlaw thing to say. And here's what you said in 2022. And I'm quoting you, you know, as fucked up as it sounds, maybe we should listen to what Vladimir Putin is saying. I got so I got so much trouble for that. And I will continue to quote you back to you. Maybe when Klaus Schwab and George Soros and every other earth destroying MF are all jump on the same bandwagon, maybe this maybe we should take a good look at that. Why are they trying to protect Ukraine so much? What do they all have to lose? So I would think like in a country with creative people, if we can, you'd be one of many people asking the single most obvious questions. Why can't we listen to what the other side is saying? And why are all these people who were pretty obviously bad also vested in this one faraway country? Like what do they have to lose? I mean, first of all, bless you for saying that. Second, do they want to ever answer your question? Nope. Nope. I lost employees. Employees. Oh yeah. People that not direct employees in my like in my knit circle. Yeah. But external employees, people that worked for me in in different areas that wouldn't that that wanted nothing to do with that anymore? It's a it's a funny story in your part of it. The reason I said that is because I had literally just watched your show. Oh gosh. And you were the one to say, maybe we should have maybe we should listen to Putin and see what he has to say. And I was like, well, if Tucker has said it on Fox, how'd that work out for me? It worked out for both of us the same way. I agree. It worked out for both of us the same way. It it took weeks for that one to go away. Really? Oh, yeah. But I just I'm not an artist. I'm I'm guy who gives us opinions on YouTube. But I appreciate artists, which is to say people whose whole job is to pursue the truth. You know, whether they get there or not. But I mean, that's their job. And every society carves out room for them to do that. And a healthy society isn't run by artists. Don't want them. They're not in charge of the power grid. Okay. But a healthy society does kind of listen sometimes to what they say because they're saying unconventional things challenge you to think a little more deeply about things you assume are true. Are they actually true? You pay artists to say things like that. So it's just wild to live in a society where artists are leading the charge for conformity. They're like, no, no, no, obey. That doesn't when did that happen? I don't know, but it's very weird. It it seems like what once was like on that edge is now so blunted. And everybody is just a spokesperson person for the machine. It does feel that way because they're all afraid of losing their position in the machine. Yeah. When all of the higher ups think the opposite that you do, most of the time in this industry, those people don't have the wiggle room that I do. Yeah. So they have to conform or they lose their spot. I was lucky enough to have built and created my spot before I chose to not conform. Right. So I didn't necessarily lose my spot just because I didn't conform because I had already built it and they couldn't take that away from me at that point. Like they've already tried to cancel me. They've already done everything that they can do to talk shit about me. So now they just ignore my existence. Now they don't even say bad things. They just don't say anything at all. It doesn't seem to have affected your sales. Doesn't seem to. You had one of the biggest songs in the country a couple years ago. Everybody hated it. Everybody in charge hated it. Am I the only one? Yeah. Yeah. There was a outward call within the industry for me to be canceled and to lose my record deal. And my record label president who we don't see eye to eye on politics at all stood up for my right for free speech and my right in my right to creativity and as an artist, my right to express myself. However, I want. What didn't they like about the song that it was a patriotic country loving point out the what the fuck is going on right now point of view and they didn't like that. They didn't like that. I was pointing out the obvious in a time where every single one of us was sitting there scratching our heads going what in the fuck is going on in this country. I'm 49 or 50 at the time or whatever it was. And I've never seen anything even remotely close to what's going on right now in this country. Like where did our sense of free people go where all of a sudden we're just conforming to these rules that just don't make any sense. It seems like they're just taking handfuls of shit and throwing it against the wall and seeing what sticks. And I was like, what the fuck am I the only one who's seeing this, who's recognizing how completely how completely absurd the whole concept was of shutting everything down. How do we survive that as as an economy, as a, as a, as a, the wheels that need to keep moving at all times just screeched to a freaking halt. And me and Jeff Steele and Iredine got together and everybody was wearing masks at the time. Everybody was was was distancing themselves from everybody. That moment in time was one of the most destructive moments in time that we've ever experienced. It, it destroyed our, our close nittness. It destroyed human beings are, are, are our social people. They want to be in groups. They want to be together. We, we want to, where, where, you know, we, we, we want to come together instinctively and to do that. Like there's a, there's a whole lot of people that that are responsible for that that that should be held accountable for what they did. I couldn't agree more. I'm, I'm still blown away by it. I still, I still feel like the words to that song are, are just as relevant to this moment that we are sitting in right now as it was five years ago when we were locked up and told that we had to wear masks and then we couldn't. I had a mask in my car just to put on if I went into Dunkin Donuts or if I, and that didn't even last for very long, a month into what I was like, this is fucking bullshit. I'm not, I got thrown out of Dunkin Donuts one day for walking in without my mask on. You're throwing a Dunkin Donuts and like, like rudely, really like you are putting everybody in this, right, in this place's life and danger and you should be ashamed of yourself. I was Dunkin Donuts a place where homeless junkie shoot up in the back. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Um, but what you were doing was unclean. Right. So I, yeah. I never knew that people were that easy to, to train. I never knew they were that obedient. I never knew there were that many people with no self-respect at all. At the time, I was living in a, a very, very left town, which Massachusetts, North Hampton, Massachusetts, lesbian capital of the world. Mm hmm. It's where Smith College is. Yep. It's a, it is a festering cesspool of, of anti-American everything. What's the happiness level? Would you say in North Hampton, Missouri? I don't see it's made. I don't see anybody smiling ever. Ever. They are all, all these people that feel the need to virtue signal every time I turn around are some of the most miserable people you've ever met in your life. Oh, I've noticed. Oh, yeah. What are they about about their own failures? I don't, I don't know. I don't know why it's such an incessant need these days to do it. Like just live a good life. All this virtue signaling, all this, all this fake outrage. Just live a good life. Yeah. Treat people good. You'll get treated good in return. How they, how they treat you in North Hampton, if they knew I was probably not very good. Central music's not that big in the instance. I'm not, I'm a, I'm not the artist celebrity. I hate, I don't even like using that word. It makes me feel weird. I'm not, I'm not the artist that wants to get noticed. I, I try my best to, to stay under the radar. A successful day for me of going out and about is not getting noticed. So I it, it doesn't, I don't even remember where I was. Sometimes I get on a roll and I, I lose true. Well, you just picked the right town for anonymity. I mean, if you were say the Indigo girls, or the Dixie, you wouldn't be able to walk down the street. You know, but um, you really did you choose North Hampton? Because you know, not a single person there has ever heard of your music. At the time, it was out of convenience. Um, but I certainly would not choose nor do I now that I don't live in downtown North Hampton. I don't, I don't choose to go there. I will go into North Hampton for pretty much one reason and one reason only. And his name is Sam and he is the sushi chef at Moshe, Moshe. Oh, and I will go and I will sit down at the sushi bar with Sam. Drink saki with him and eat sushi. So you'll make the sushi pilgrimage, but you would, but no more residential time there. No. What's your, let me ask you a couple questions about what you like. I want to try that flavor. Oh, it's the best. This is sweet nectar. We just came out with it. And I got like a case of it. So I've been, I've been on it and I have a little bit of the other two new flavors. I know that I heard you. We have a bunch. We've got fruit, mint, and winter green and all that. But this is, um, and we've got a bunch of other flavors we're working on. But that, uh, the government makes it hard to introduce new flavors. It's crazy. Well, because you're, you're, you're, you're, you're trying to get the kids. That's what it is. Yeah, I can't, I'm not even allowed to talk about that topic. Nick, a teen for the children, totally for Bowden. Um, I started really young. I'll just say that. And I'm glad I did. But anyway, I know everyone disagrees with me, but that's how I actually feel. So I'm just going to say it. I had my first cigarette at eight. And I've actually been smoking like have a pack of cigarettes. I'm smoking since I was like 13. Yeah, me too. But I quit at 45. And what brand do you smoke? American spirits. It's not good cigarette. It is. As far as a cigarette goes, it's still, it's delicious. It's delicious. It doesn't have all the extra 1600 chemicals that they put in there to make it more addictive, to make it burn faster, to make it burn slower. Right. They even put chemicals in there that are contradictory to themselves. Yeah. For fire, fire, proofing their cigarettes. I mean, it's all. Yeah. And then an American spirit will go out on its own. No, I know. If you I smoked American spirit blues, um, the light blue and I do it to the filters off. And I saw wow, that's like, that's the strongest cigarette in America. If you do that, it's incredible cigarette. I don't smoke anymore. Anyway, sorry. So I'm not promoting smoking that would is delicious. Very delicious. More delicious than anything I've ever done before since. I'm just, that's how people do it. By the way, the piety around smoking, obviously smoking is not good for you. I don't want my to come through. It smells. It looks gross. All of those. I disagree. I and it's such a satisfying five minutes removed off your life. You think about people who kind of openly brazenly publicly send young men off to die and pointless wars on behalf of some other country. Like that's just that that's just part in the. a publicly send young men off to die and pointless wars on behalf of some other country. That's just par in the US Congress. They all can't wait to do that. They face no moral sanction whatsoever. If you were to light a cigarette and someone saw you, you'd be like a monster. Look at them arguing for smoking. I'm just saying it's good to have a sensible moral hierarchy in mind when you assess other people's behavior. Some things are bad, but some things are worse than that. Right. And then make your choices accordingly. Kind of. And make your judgments accordingly. I mean, I do think violence is bad. And sending off other people's kids to die is one of the worst things I can imagine. And yet that's celebrated. You would think that that would be like a really hard decision. It's not. It's not. Like the easiest decision for them to make. Lindsey Graham literally can't wait. And I do think all of them should be forced to go to the front lines in Ukraine and worry about getting droned. Not because I wish them harm, but because there should be some skin in the game. I just want some fucking truth. Yeah. I agree. I want to know why Lindsey Graham is such a, a, a, a, a, you crane. What were you doing over there, Lindsey in 2014? I think that's fair to ask. What were you doing? Why are you so vested in, in Ukraine? Why, why, why would you put Ukraine over everything else? Like what is going on? I mean, as, as you know, as so many people are fully aware, the Ukraine is one of the dirtiest and most corrupt places in the world aside from the United States. Run by a Stalinist, by the way, who canceled elections, closed the biggest Christian denomination in the country, put the priests and nuns in prison like, him murdering his political enemies. I can't go to Ukraine. I get killed if I went to Ukraine, a country that my tax dollar support. And Lindsey Graham is like, no, that's great. I don't know. I mean, let's just wake up a second. This is bonkers. It's degrading us. It's beyond immoral. It's like self-harmate scale. It's crushing the United States. It just makes me wonder how many of these politicians that make these decisions that were like, what the fuck are you even thinking? Did you get caught in a honeypot? Did, did, did you do something and they caught you doing it? And now they have you under their thumb? Why no? Like Madison Cothorne got ran out because he started mentioning stuff like that. Started talking about the parties that happened and start, they got rid of him as fast as they could. He's a good dude. Well, Matt Gates, same thing. Matt Gates, same thing. They're like, oh, you were sexy. I don't know how Marjorie Taylor Greene has somehow made it this far aside from being a woman. I don't think they have anything on her. I think she's a decent person. Yeah. I think she's incredible. But it was so funny with Gates. They're like, he starts making unauthorized noises about this or that and all of a sudden they're like, well, you had sex with children. Okay. Where's the evidence? By the way, where's the indictment? They never indicted him for it. Oh, I know. So how can you accuse somebody of a crime and then not the government is accusing him of a crime and then not indicting him for it? Why is that not a crime in itself? If Matt gets a sex with children in item arrest him, put him on trial and prove it, or you're in trouble yourself for destroying his character. You're using my tax dollars to commit slander against your political opponents. Yeah, that's a crime. But no one's ever prosecuted for it. But that's what that does is it puts the fear of God into all the other freaks in Congress, all of whom have something not all, but many of whom have something to hide, including people you've just mentioned. And they're like, whoa, you know, I better stay way away from the boundaries because I could get hurt. Sure. It just casts a poll over everybody, a fear. You obviously don't feel that. No. How long can you do 180 shows a year? If I'm doing the country thing? Yeah, forever. Really? Well, Willie Nelson does it. He's 90. Yeah. I can, if I live that long, I could still be the country thing I could still be doing that. The stained thing, that's a little bit more taxing. Yeah, to my voice. It's a lot of yelling. It's a lot of screaming. It's a lot more taxing to where if I'm being completely honest, there's probably more of a shelf life to my country thing than there is to the stained thing. There's probably going to come a point where I'm going to have to be like, you know what? It's too taxing on me and it takes too long for me to recover from being on tour with stained for a month. And there's probably going to come a point where I'm going to be like, for long jevodies purposes. I need to either do less shows or not so many in a row or the country thing, man, I could do three shows a day every single day and never blow myself out. And enjoy it. You have to be pretty damn blessed in life to be able to continue enjoying a job. It is a job at the end of the day. At the I'm blessed that I was able to create my job around something that I love and that I'm driven to do. But as a job, there's parts of that that kind of ruin the experience of it all. There's it's the music business, the music part. I love. Yeah. It's a business part. It can ruin the part that I love so much. It's way no one enjoys porn. Sorry. I said that. No, but it's true. I mean, like any time you take a good thing and make it a business, it diminishes it, of course. Oh, God. Our poor kids these days, they're sex addicts and porn addicts before they even had sex. No, I know. It's depressing. They're learning about sex through porn. Yeah. That's a healthy sex life. Yeah. Yeah. Speaking of like creating a moral hierarchy, the people who make in profit from porn, I mean, I don't know why they're not in prison. But I talk about exploitation. Oh, yeah. Right. But it's the cigarette smokers and the people who doubt Zelensky who really should lose their jobs. Okay. Let me end on a happy day. You've said a lot of tough things about the music business and the people who profit from it, you described them as leeches. I don't know. That's true because I've never been in your business, but we all know that. It's a leech to all know that they're all calling them a leech. It's a pretty negative connotation, but just a blood sucking parasite in general. What a leech does is it parasites off of a living organism. That leech isn't the one that's responsible for the life that it's leaching off of. Exactly. And so it's an analogy. I don't want to be that negative or hateful about it. I'm very grateful to my president, the record label president for standing up for me and for, but it's a business and a situation that you stop paying attention for a half a second and you're eight up and spit out already and you're gone. Yeah, I believe that. So here's the question I want to end on because it is a positive question. Having been it for 30 years, who are the good guys? Who are the artists who personally who are actually in the green room? Good guys. Long side there. I keep my circle pretty small. Bob's my friend, Debbie Kidrock. I don't interact very much with the rest of the industry really. I don't find myself in Nashville very often. I don't go to the gatherings and the parties. I live out in the corn, soybeans and the tobacco. And there's miles in every direction around my house of just agriculture. So I don't really interact with the business very much. I'm very particular about my inner circle and who I consider a friend. I don't have a lot of those. I don't have a lot of them. Big picture here in Aaron Lewis. I gave you those things. All right, who are the good guys? And you're like, well, you know, this is the best thing. This business is tough. Would you want your kids to go into it? No. And they've had my oldest daughter, Zoe, is on one of my records singing, singing, traveling soldier by the Dixie chicks, actually. And I don't know. So many people approached me like, I'll give her a record deal. Let's, she doesn't want nothing to do with it. My kids have been on the receiving end of all the shit that comes with this industry. And all the sacrifice and all the, all the, the, the, the disappointment. And the, you know, I'm, I'm a slave to the grind. You know, the grind has taken precedent over important things in my life. that I can never get back. You know, monumental things. My kids first steps. My kids first words. My kids first days of school. My kids last days of school. My kids' graduations. I haven't been able to be there for a lot of them. The sacrifices real. Yeah. Um, but it's, it's created a situation where I just don't love very many people in. So to, you know, big roundabout circle to answer your question. I, I have a lot of acquaintances in the industry. Like there's people that I have huge love and respect for. I, I'm like pen pals like me and you text all the time. Me and Marilyn Manson text all the time. Yeah. Um, I haven't seen actually surprised you. I, I interviewed him in the 90s. Brian and, uh, then I thought he was smart and maybe 1999 at the Chateau Marmont in LA. Brian is one of the most intelligent, profound conversations I have ever had with somebody. I, I like, he's a, and I use the word evil lightly, but he's like an evil genius. He is fully aware of every single button he is purposely pushing. Like all, it's all been, he's genius. Like it, it's all been calculated. It's all like he knows exactly what he's doing. He knows exactly what buttons he's pushing and he's pushing them on purpose. Interesting. Hmm. He's amazing. Jonathan Davis from corn. One of my favorite people. Like people you text with Marilyn Manson. He's like my modern day pen pal. We never actually talk on the phone. We just text. Give him my best. The will. Aaron Lewis. Thank you. Thank you. Michael Bird shooting with you. I, I look forward to it. I can't wait. I can't wait to watch you, uh, watch you use your, your new hammer gun. I don't know if I'll be able to use it correctly, but we'll find out. Thank you. My pleasure. It turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the customer fighting right now. Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. That is totally wrong. It's a more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. We could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.