Alright, we're live on podcast again with Joe Redner. Thanks again for coming out here, man. I do not have a man. I've been wanting to do this interview for a long time. You are. So how did you become such a legend and an icon in the Tampa Bay area? You've been, you're very well known around here and you're very outspoken and people call you an activist. But how initially did you become so well known in this area? Well, about 1976, I went to work for a gentleman that had a go-go bar. And I went in as a night shift manager and that's where there was the answers were pasties and g-strings and that's what they wore. They didn't strip, they didn't do anything to came out to answer a couple of songs and then quit. And I saw a case from a Supreme Court of the United States that said nudity in speech was protected by the First Amendment. Nudity in speech. In speech. In speech. In other words, if you're dancing and you have nudity, that's protected by the First Amendment. Okay. Because you're speaking, you're saying something. Okay. A conduct, how you conduct yourself, how you dress all that is speech. Okay. You're saying something to other people. So then I opened a club that was a nude and had alcohol and it was a beer joint. It was a doreos and I called it the night gallery. The change was doreos before it was a beer joint. I called it night gallery and we started the girls dancing nude and the city started raiding me and there was hundreds of raids and eventually and people going to jail and bonding out and I bonded them out. The father we got in there junction that says you can't do that against the city. Saying their nude ordinances were unconstitutional. So then they left me alone for a while and it started using their Luden Lascivius statue to get me. Well, Luden Lascivius, you have a right to a jury child. So we had to have those. It just went on and on. I could just go on and on and on but essentially it's just the government overreaching and invading people's constitution rights because of something they read in the Bible and that they cannot justify in a court of law with evidence. Things like a lot of things. Now did you know that you were the first person to have a nude strip club in Tampa? Were you aware of that when you did it? Yeah. I was very much aware of it. And you didn't think that I mean did you anticipate any kind of blowback? Yeah, but you know if the constitution says in the Supreme Court says I can do something. And I believe it's my fundamental right. Even if it doesn't, if I think it's a human right and a fundamental right, if I feel a necessity to do it, I'm going to do it. And then I'll defend myself. With my peers and that's what I've been doing. I've been defending myself in the press and that's how everybody told me shut up, shut up, shut up. No, I'm not shutting up. You're coming after me. I'm going to go after you. Any legal way I can. And legal way is to get to the press because the press is coming to me and saying, hey, this is what they're doing to you. What do you got to say about it? Right. Let me say what I got to say about it. Right. So, and when was all this happening, when was all this taking place? Well, this was when it first started from 76 to 87 or something like that just constant was constant. The only respite I had is when a female mayor came in. Every male mayor came after me. Really? But not the female. No. No. That's hilarious. Why do you think that is? Jay cast. I mean, Sandy Freeman, she didn't. Because I think that women in order to get elected have to be really smart. Right. Yeah. But she made the law. But men don't. Yeah. And we have a lot of people in office that they're not really smart. I mean, I'm not saying they don't get things done and people are like them, but I'm telling you, they're not really smart. Right. They don't know all the ins and outs of them. No. And they have, they're this a male personality. Yeah. It's crazy. And so all the tamper mayors who were men really were. Martini is breathing hard down your neck trying to exactly where they're trying to do to shut you down. Well, then you got arrested like a ton of times. Yeah. I've been arrested 150 times. Oh, what? Yeah. I've spent a lot of time in jail for contempt to court because I wouldn't obey a judge. And I really want to even got his sympathy for when I was in jail when he realized what was going on. And he let me out. Wow. And they were trying to implement a rule where the girl had to be six feet away when she was given you a lap dance, right? Yeah. Had to be known. Had to be just think about what you did. Like just where a virtual reality goes. Like no, how do you, how do you get a lap dance at six foot away? So there is no lap dance, right? There wouldn't be a lap dance. That was the point. That was why they did that, right? Well, they want to shut these clubs down, but they can only go so far. Well, when they think you step over the line a little bit, they're going to come after you because they want to shut you down anyway. It's a Republican way of doing things. Make the problem then point at it in order to get rid of the thing that was operating the way it should in the first place. They create the problem. Then they point out and say this thing don't work. Right. So that's what they did. They tried to use a bunch of excuses saying that all your girls were on drugs. They called them crackers. They used all kinds of crazy language to try to make you look bad. Yeah. Well, I went to their schools. There was more drugs in schools than there is in the mom's Venus. And went, so I proved it. So when exactly did Mons Venus, when was that created? When did you actually start that brand or that company? 1982. That was 82. Okay. Yeah. And I read a, was reading a book that had the mound of Venus in it and Mons Venus. That's what they called it. And actually it doesn't translate perfectly to the Mons of Venus, mound of Venus, but that's what it means to me. Okay. So like that. Mons is an mountain, I guess. And it's the pubic area. It's okay. That little mound down there. The little mound. The little mound. Yeah. And how do all this places in the country out of all the strip clubs in this whole country? Like, I mean, I've been to strip clubs in Miami, Las Vegas, New York, Atlanta. There's something about that little hole in the wall and Dale, Dale Maybury that attracts like, it's like, it's really small. It's really small. It's small building. And it's when you see it for the first time, you're like, this is what everyone's talking about from the outside. You know what I mean? And there's something about that place that's consistently drawn the most beautiful women in the world. And it's not like any other strip club I've ever been to. Is there like a secret to the way you do business that makes the... I'm the dancer center. Center. I'm everything is geared toward the dancer. The dancer comes in once she wants to. She leads once she wants to. The dancer can work seven days a week and work one day. If it's many hours, can work the shift she wants to. She can switch shifts without telling anybody. They can go to school. They don't have to work their job around their school. I mean, their school around their job, they can work their job around their school. The school could be what they want to really want to do. Everything is for the dancer. So I get the best dancers because that's a reputation. Yeah. And then pay wise, weren't you paying them different? No, I don't pay the dancers. They take all their money, right? Yeah, but they keep all their money. They pay performance service. They give a lot of dance. They perform a service. They get paid for it. I don't tell them how much to pay for it. I have a recommendation from 25 to 35 dollars. It's posted, but I don't tell them how much to charge. And I don't take their money. Which is what's different from the other club. They take the percentage of the money. Really? Yeah. What kind of money does the dancer and your club make? Depends. What's the standard? Or satisfied working two or three hours and making 200 a day. And then you have the ones that want to come in and work 10 to 12 hours, which is not many. And make $800. $800 a day. It depends on the day. So I say a dancer can make a good dancer that can make a couple thousand a week. Wow. Yeah. She wants to do 40 hours a week, five days a week. They know talent. So when was it when watching all those videos on YouTube, those preachers standing out in front of Moms Venus, screaming at you through the megaphone, screaming that everybody Jesus Christ is going to come back. And you're going to go to hell for bringing all these drug addicted women here in dancing. And like why does it always seem that the nastiest people in the world are religious. Right. Oh, it's just why is that? Well, I think they gravitate towards religion because they need saving. In other words, they have this antisocial part of themselves. They know it. If they do it's like putting your hand on the burner, you get burned and they do it. They get in trouble. So they turn to religion because I think that's going to stop them from doing these antisocial things. So when anybody is born again Christian, I'm not talking about comfort Christians. Some people are getting Christian. I'm worried about them. I'm worried about myself with them because they just told me they have some kind of bad problem that they're trying to stop. Yeah. Now the comfort Christians that believe in a God because they're going to see their families. They don't believe in a literal interpretation of the Bible. They pick and choose. Because they're going to see their family, their children may be died before them. They make them comfortable in life and death. That's good. Those are comfort Christians. They don't do what these are not trying to push their ideas on everybody else. Exactly. What were you doing on those talk shows where you were talking? You were talking to a preacher. And you and the preacher were debating and arguing about stuff. You remember that? Bill Keller. Bill Keller. It was called like what it was like bleeping something, the bleeping truth. Oh, that was another one. Yeah. So you were talking to the street preacher. And basically he was just yelling at you about God and you need to let God into your soul. And he wanted to save your soul and all this stuff. And it was just this huge battle. It just seemed like religion was against you and everything that you were doing. And it seemed like that was kind of a long battle. Well, maybe it's because I'm against religion. Yeah. I think the religions were one of the worst ideas that's ever happened. Although I don't think man had any choice in having this idea because he didn't know what the hell was going on and was trying to figure it out. Yeah. Anyway, it's done more harm to society and any single idea that's ever been brought forward. Communism, all that stuff that's been these bad ideas. Well, it's not bad if you keep it to your, I mean, once you start to bring it into politics, that's when there's big time problems. It allows itself to do that. That's why it's bad. Right. You recently, you were diagnosed with stage four lung cancer and and prostate cancer, is that right? I've had both of you. And you're now in remission. Well, they call it remission. I call it cure. You call it cure. You're cured. Wow. That's amazing. Congratulations. How long have you been cured? I got it late 81. So they cured me in a year. So I've been cured for seven years. Seven years. That's only 4% of the people live five years after being diagnosed with stage four lung cancer. And I'm what eight years now. Wow. So how long do they tell you? And marijuana had a big part in that. I can testify to marijuana. Right. And how did a big part in my getting well? How so? Well, it allows you the chemo it's killing you. chemo is something that treats you so bad. That you think about not doing it dying. Yeah. That's how bad it is. Because it just kills everything in your body. It's trying to it's trying to kill it's killing you. They just hope it kills the cancer before it kills you. Because that's what chemo doing. It's killing you. It's barbaric. It really is like a barbaric way to cure it as easy. But I let the doctors do their thing. And then I did my thing, which is my health thing. I'm a raw vegan. And I fought it my way with no sugar. I was amazed at the mafit when I was getting the chemo. Could you sit there for hours putting that pump in that stuff and do it? And they were bringing me ice cream. And I'd say, what do you people crazy? Right. So you were already vegan then or that pump did you to be? Sugar feeds cancer. Oh, yeah. Right. It feeds it. Yeah. And they're bringing you ice cream to comfort you. And I said, no, man, I don't need that. We just fire the joint here and I'll be fine. Yeah. Well, I couldn't. I had one cancer. So oh, yeah, you can't smoke it. Yeah. I was doing all edibles. I was doing all edibles. OK. That was like the weed and the edibles. Was that when you were doing chemo? That was just like, made you more comfortable and took away all the symptoms of the chemo. Right. And it helps you eat, give you an appetite. It helps your appetite to help. It does all those things. And you have cannabinoids centers in your body. If you don't do cannabinoids, your cabinet can have anoid deficient. So it's just eating it or putting it in your food to fresh marijuana is really good for you. Now, did you do? Did you consume marijuana before prior to this? Or was this the first time that you started actively concerned with it? I don't obey laws that I think are unjust. OK, I got you. So I didn't marijuana before. But I smoked it. I didn't do edibles or anything. Right. Yeah, you just smoked it. I never had a problem with it. Never ever ever had a problem that any would justify any time in jail, any time in. So I thought there was none of the really none of the government's business. Because I didn't have any effects. I couldn't overdose all those things that other drugs give you problems that give me marijuana does not. Now, why do you think Florida so far behind when it comes to Republican legislators? He didn't even have to think Republican legislators. What, why are they holding it back? Why are they holding Florida back when it comes to lead drugs and marijuana? The special interest was the marijuana. This is not just marijuana. This is everything. But the marijuana thing, do we have a ruling for Florida grown that says that we have a right to it? Florida grown is your company. Company. Right. We sued and got an injunction. And then we sued. And then that was upheld in the appellate court that says they're statute that regulates marijuana. And the way you get a license is unconstitutional because they have given their the licenses to their friends. It's crony capitalism. Just a few companies, in violation of the constitutional amendment, just a few companies have been given licenses. They are unregulated and no one else can get a license. And that's anti-American. That's un-American. Free enterprise is the basis for our capitalist and capitalistic system. They have taken that away. I have a right as a citizen of this country to a license just like everybody else does. You do too. You have a right to fair competition to go in there and compete against the other ones if they're limited numbers of license, to compete against them and have your chance. Like every other American does. And they just, the Republicans, they give you all that lip service and then they do just the opposite. They gave the licenses to their buddies. And their buddies are the ones who own these companies. Oh, I'm talking about the money. We were talking about the money. And then what they do is the legislators actually they do it in other ways, but they call for contributions if the companies want something done. By saying, by saying key words and stuff like that. And now the companies that have the licenses give them a bunch of money, the legislature. So that's why you have the problems here in Florida. Now they buy the legislators. They buy them. It's out in front. They're brazen. I don't understand why anybody lets them do it. And these companies, they're just growing. They're one of the energy companies, all these companies that have Xs, they have monopolies on everything. Opiates. Yeah, no, they go into an area and they have the only one that services that area, electrocompies. You have different electric companies, but there's no competition in this one area. And that's crony capitalism. I have a right just like everybody else. That's America. That's equal opportunity. And that's what I fight for. What do you think about the opiates versus marijuana? What is the current state of that? Because I know there's been a lot of pushback for, there's been a lot of problems with the statistics of people dying from opiate overdoses and the methadone clinics in Florida and everyone that dies from all that compared to marijuana. And I heard that there's a guy named Mel Symbler, who is, he owns like some methadone clinics, or I don't know the exact details, but basically he was pushing back really hard against legalizing weed because he made money from opiates. Yeah, I've been aware of Symbler for a long time. He's a bugler. He gets, he almost money for the Republican party. He's been for president and in the state. He's a big influencer. He had an organization one time, I think, that treated kids for drug, problems and they were cited for abusing children. Their methods were so draconian that it was abuse. He basically made money from people that were dosing. He's terrible. He's a terrible, terrible man. Yeah. Yeah. He has no empathy at all. And if it's not in his interest, forget it. So he's a big part of that being held back from him. Yeah, he's a play rod, Drinkus, who is in the house up there and who's spearheaded this fight against our constitutional right to marijuana. They're fighting against those Republicans. They say they're for the Constitution, but they're not. They just get the lip service to it like everything else. And so Ray Rod Drinkus, he's the guy and Mel Samblin, Ray Rod Drinkus are, well, fuck buddies. Who is Ray Rod Rinkus again? He's in the house, Florida house, the represent. Okay. Now when did you become so actively involved in politics? Well, like you ran for Senate, right? No, yeah, I ran for Senate. I've run for City Council a few times. I've run for County Commissioner a couple of times. Yeah, I've run nine times. So when did you start? When did you make a decision? I just wanted to send it one time. Mm-hmm. Like, so when did you start? When did you decide like I need to be involved in the Florida State politics and obviously thought there needed to be some changes made, right? It's a platform. It's a platform to get out and speak when they're not listening. You know, you have something you want to say. I just felt like I was being attacked. Not personally, my belief system, my American belief, the way I believe America is and the freedoms and all that. I feel like it's being attacked. Right. And I want to fight it, give you an example when they went after the gays. I said, I was gay. I said, I was gay. Yeah. But I wasn't afraid to say it because I knew that I could help protect the gays. I went first. I went and tried to give my money to an organization, to say gay organizations so they could hire a lawyer to fight that thing. They went and got a lawyer and lawyer said they didn't have a case. So I filed my own damn case. And that's how I said I was gay. Wow. Anyway. And we win the case. And I had to put can't be used in first amendment settings on the law so that kind of negated it because parades are almost everything is first and has a perfect component to it. So going back when you were fighting for the gay rights in Tampa, it was because they had banned the parades in Tampa. Is that why? They had banned some booths at the library talking about first amendment. Yeah, they allowed displays. They allowed students at South Florida. And so it's a yearly thing to put up displays in there with what they want to communicate to the community. And they had a gay one guy had a display with gay authors not even gay about gayness. Right. They're all present. Right. So these are gay authors. And Rhonda Storms, who was on the county commission, she took omereds with that and she did want it didn't want them to do that. She said it was glorifying gays and she passed the policy where the city, the county could not help any gay thing. I mean, just gay pride is the word they use. Right. They were not going to facilitate it or have anything to do with it. And they use that to take these displays out of this display out of the library. And I just I've read on Nazi Germany and it just hit me. This is what they did to the Jews. It's the first fucking step. It's got to do something. And that's what I thought. And that's what I did. And I wrote a complaint said I was gay. We settled the complaint. I didn't win the complaint. I did win. But we settled it where they added some verbiage to the policy, the county commission policy. Would allow it be a use for First Amendment protected activity, which those displays were. Jesus Christ, Joe. That's fucking crazy. So how many cases have you won over your time? You have to instigate me for me to remember. I've lost some and I've won some. Yeah. But I want a bunch. It sounds like I want a bunch. I know what I'm doing. Right. It seems like I mean, they threw me into the law lies meant 10 years in the law library studying smoking a joint before I went and went. When I I would have been a joint to fire up right now. It'll. It'll. Recall cue the joint. You got it for us. It allows you to. What was that talking about? You got me off. You got me off. I was talking about smoking weeds. Sorry. Oh, the cases of one of the law library. OK, yeah, concentrate. I went up smoking. It's like if I want to be, it's like I can be hypnotized and really concentrate. Oh, yeah. And I would go down, trying around the blocks, smoking another joint. I'd go back up a law library and sit down there. I said, they're eight, 10 hours a day, sometimes seven days a week. What the f. Learning the biggest deal with the law is learning to research. If you're going cold turkey and you don't have to research, brother, that's hard. Yeah. That is hard. And if it wasn't for some nice gay law library, that kind of like me and he helped me. He never hit on me. Yeah. He was got Bill Wells. He helped me. And he said I had more respect for those books than the lawyers and the judges that came in that whole library. And I did. And I do. Yeah. I liked your commercial, your campaign commercials. I thought they were hilarious. Yeah. That was worth so freaking good. That's awesome. I love how your slogan was that you're not for sale. Yeah. I think that's strong. Well, it didn't work. No. Why don't you think it worked? Well, let's see. I'm a dope club owner and I'm an atheist and I advertise both of them. So yeah. So they're probably really scared of you. What does that mean? They call me the devil. What is the actual definition of an atheist? To me, it's someone that doesn't believe in the concept of a God of a Supreme Being. Okay. I know a lot of definitions get loosely thrown around. So I was like, oh, I'm a atheist. I don't believe in it. That there's a Supreme Being. I don't. If there was a being that was supervising this, he certainly wouldn't be Supreme. He's not supervising. Yeah. Yeah. You don't know what the hell he's doing. Do you believe in aliens? I believe it's a possibility. Do you see the thing about the raid on Area 51, how everyone was going to go raid? I'm not trying to find aliens. Let's see them damn aliens. Don't you think Trump would already tell us that? I don't know. Hell yeah. You think he would have? Oh, he can't keep his mouth shut up. What do you think about Donald Trump? What do you think about him in general? I think he's got every bad habit that males have. Every single one. He doesn't hide him very well either. He doesn't even try. Doesn't even try right now. I kind of feel like the people that follow him have every one of those bad habits to do. They cover it up good. It's like the stove. You put your hand on it, it burns you. You learn not to put your hand on it. So you don't hear from these people, but they're there. And now he's emboldening them. And they're going out and killing people. And they're killing America. They're going out, he's emboldening them, they're going out and getting their guns and going out and killing Americans. The thing about it is they're not all brown Americans. And that's who they're after. And they're just killing discriminately. And this is Trump. This is Trump's world. This is Trump's America. I don't like it. I don't want to be here. I don't want to be in this, but I'm not going to leave. I'm going to try and change it. People say, if you don't like it, leave it. That's what they say. I'm going to try and change it. Yeah. What do you think about any of the current 2020 candidates who do you like in particular? I'm a Bernie guy. You're a Bernie guy? Yeah. Bernie saying the same thing now 35 years. He's saying the same thing. He hasn't changed the bit. They're coming over to him. Eventually that's the way it's going to be. The way Bernie says it's going to be. You think it'll get there? It's either going to get there or get nowhere. Yeah. One or the other. Why Bernie though? But isn't he? You think it'll get there? It's either going to get there or get nowhere. Yeah. One or the other. Because why Bernie though? Isn't he? I mean, forgive me, because I'm like a five year old when it comes to knowledge of politics. I don't really know much about it. I just kind of skim the surface. I don't believe that for some reason. But you know, I mean, I try. I'm trying to get smarter. That's why I do this podcast is because I get to have people like you on here. And I get to download all this info and it makes me a little bit smarter every time. That's good thinking. So from what I understand, Bernie is the one that wants the closest to socialism, right? Democratic socialism. Democratic socialism is where the government controls the means of production. Bernie does not want the government to control the means of production. He likes capitalism. He likes capitalism. He likes controls on capitalism. And that's what we like to. Because if you don't have controls on capitalism, people will be made slaves of. That's just the way it is. Okay. And the socialism is the control. And people don't understand that. Socialism socialism, that's not democratic socialism. Democrats control on the means of production. Police departments are socialist. Any time the people get together to do something, that socialism. Okay. It's just what it is. In other words, we get together to build a road at socialism. We get together to have a police and fire department. That socialism. Those are not capitalist. Okay. The OSHA is socialism. So OSHA says you've got to treat your workers a certain way that you can't put them in dangerous positions and things like that. That socialism. Okay. What do you think about gun control? I'm like the shooting that happened in El Paso yesterday. So what's the best possible world? What is your feeling of the best possible world about guns? What's the best possible world? World? Yeah. No guns. No guns. That would be the best possible world. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know the answer. Yeah, what I think. So you think all guns take me away? No. I said that's the best possible world. If they just did not exist. That's not. So what? Yeah, that's not reality. So what do we do? Right. We work to make it, to try and make it that way. In other words, keep the guns out of hands with people that are known, people that are dangerous people and have been gun control checks so that you can tell if that's what they are. Yeah. Maybe loosen up the criteria for taking it away from taking it away from crazy people who have been that have been threatening, loosen up a little bit of controls there. I think that the amendment was worded the way it is, a well regulated militia. I believe that guns are, you know, what a question. Yeah. It's a constitutional right. Yeah. And it's just so hard, but I do know this. In countries where they've outlawed automatic weapons and those assault style weapons, they have much less killings and maybe even not almost none. And we have happening every single day mass shootings with those magazines that there's a sensible gun regulation. How about we don't let them have those goddamn magazines that shoot 150 guns? Right. Yeah. Man killing shells that there's no reason for it in the world for having. You can hunt people have guns, but... I was listening to an interview last night with Ted Nugent and he was pointing out how all the mass shootings take place in, or statistically, a huge percent of the mass shootings take place in gun free zones, like Connecticut, for example. Do they got true? Would you believe anything Ted? No, I would not. I would not, but I didn't actually look up the research, but... I know there are places where they just, they have a gun free zone, but they just go across the border and pick up their gun. Right. And they can do that legally. So what good is the gun free zone when the people from the gun trees zone that do they kill them can just go... It's obviously not to pick up a gun here. Exactly. So that's a joke. That's a non-statistic. It has no meaning. He's against weed too, I think. Yeah, he's against weed. Now he's a good guitar player. So where are you? I don't know. I can't even just type for that. What a talent, huh? So that guy can think because he can play a good guitar. Right. I don't know. What else I was going to say? Oh yeah. You sued the state of Florida twice. Twice. One time for your company. One time for the company to be able to get a license to enter into the marijuana business. Like the other companies are doing. And one, to be able to grow my own at home. So I can... Drink your smoothies and your juicy. Well, juice it, eat it, whatever way. The amendment says... Oh, you got it right with you? Oh yeah. Medical use, which you're immune for. This amendment gives you immunity. Medical use means the... Now listen to this. This is amazing. And then they're going to tell me I can't grow. It means the acquisition, possession, use, delivery, transfer, or administration. That means how you give it to yourself of marijuana. Okay. Okay. That's what I can do with the marijuana, right? Right. All right. Here's what the definition in the amendment of cannabis is that I can do all those things with. Right. Any part of any plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant and every compound manufacturer salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. That's what I'm allowed to possess. That's what I'm allowed to transfer. That's what I'm allowed to use. So where's the argument? That's the Constitution. That is this... There's nothing higher at law than this. It trumps every other thing there is. Statute policy, whatever it is. If it doesn't go by this, it's unconstitutional. Therefore it's invalid and they're violating your rights. Simple as that. And that's the argument you take there, right? Yes. So then, and you win? Well, no, this is on my home grow. No, I won in the lower court. The appellate court reversed. Now I took that one to the Supreme Court of Florida. This one, the home grown one. Yeah, the home grow is now in the Supreme Court. Wow. And they're going to say whether they'll accept jurisdiction or not, which I think they probably will. So why is it taking so long? A state. Why, I mean, what's the state's... Samboer, Ray Rodriguez. What are their Republicans in the legislature? So what is their argument against you? Well, they have to make... What is the argument? They say it doesn't say what it says. That doesn't... You cannot... What are they saying? What are they saying? They say it doesn't say what it says. What is their actual argument? The actual argument is there's a part of the amendment that describes what a MNTC, which is a medical marijuana treatment center can do. Okay. And the medical marijuana treatment center... Let me get this. Means, in the amendment, it means an entity that acquires, cultivates, possesses processes, including development of related products such as food, textures, aerosols, oils, or ointments, transfers, transport cells, distributes, dispensers, or administer to marijuana products containing marijuana and related supplies or educational materials to qualifying patients. That's what an MNTC can do. Okay. That's not about medical marijuana patients. That's about MNT businesses that go into the business. It's separate. They say... Do you love this argument? They say because the word cultivated there and they can make grow your own marijuana that it's the same as cultivating, that cultivating somehow takes my right to possess a plant growing or not away from me. Right. So there's some very big language in there and they're trying to say that... Well, it's not even vague. It just tells the MNTC is what they can do. It's very explicit. It doesn't say a damn thing about a patient. Right. Right. So I have my rights in one part of the amendment and the MNTC has had their rights in another part of the amendment. One has nothing to do with the other and they both can exist by themselves, without the other, and operate. They do not conflict with each other. How are they nullified my rights with the right of an MNTC? That's the whole question. That is the question. That's the big question. Now what do you think is going to happen with the Supreme Court? Well, if they go by the Constitution, I have a resounding win. And if they do, because your Supreme Court of Florida now, it had three, four Republicans. One of the Republicans went with the three Democrats' progressives or the progressives, but more liberal justices than were there. Those three now have retired. They have appointed three more conservative Republican judges. So now we have seven Supreme Court justices that are all in the pocket of the legislature. So it is such a flagrant, I think we may win because it is such a flagrant violation of every principle that you interpret the Constitution with that I don't think they can get around it. I think it would be a lot of public outcry if they don't do it the right way. And what do you think it would mean for you to win this case and for the Supreme Court to rule your favor? What do you think that means for people like yourself in Florida and for patients for cannabis patients or people that just want to grow their own weed? Well, it means that people that can't afford it because that's why I'm suing. I know those people out there that are hurting. I hear them from them every day. They can't afford their medicine. They can't afford to even go to the doctor to get the damn car and then they can't afford to get the car and all they would have to do is grow some marijuana at home and get their medicine. And it is medicine. It's not to get high. It's medicine. Get all that crap out of your heads. It is medicine. It's better than opioids. It's better than all that stuff. It does more for you. It cannot kill you. It can disturb your cranium for about an hour or two sometimes if you take a little bit too much. But that's all can be dealt with for the benefits that you get from it. And you don't have to be that way anyway. And when I eat the marijuana, it doesn't get you high. It's not activated. Really? Yeah. Oh, it means the metabolic that have sent me to far. That's activated. Okay. That marijuana is decarboxylated. It's been heated up already to make it active. Okay. So marijuana in its stage coming from the fresh flour. The bud. The bud. Yeah. The flour. Yeah. We're like at your high. Really? You have to. Yeah. That's why you smoke marijuana. Because the heat activates it. That's what gets you high. Right. That makes sense. Yeah. Okay. So you're taking a very active stance and it seems like you're doing this for everybody else. It's my right. It's my right. And I have an interest in it. Yeah. It was it was my right to have that new dancin. I had an interest in it. So I did it. I had property rights fights with the city of Tampa, which I want. There were my rights. And it was in my interest to fight. So I fought and I won. You still own Mon's Venus? Yes, I do. Okay. Do you own any other clubs as well? No, I don't do it. I don't really have the interest in a dope clubs like I used to. That was what I wanted to open another one and another one. And here I was fighting people all the time. Yeah. It gets siring. Yeah. It does. It really does. And so they stuck me in jail. So 150 times your arrest. That's insane. Yeah. Well, you know, here's what I did. I went to first target. I'd go down to the jail. You know what I said? What are you doing? Jail, blah, blah, blah. And I'm sitting in there with the jailers. And I'm saying, look, these guys going to be in here five days a week. They're going to be in here five days a week for almost the rest of their life every day, eight hours a day. They're going to be here. Here I am. And here I'll be going in four hours. Yeah, that's not so bad. Right. So I just worked it out of my mind. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Look at the brakes there. When I went in for contempt, I went to school. It was like, I've been in jail like three times for contempt. A court one time for five months. And that's just a memory. That's a long time. What does that mean? Contemptive court? Well, court has ordered you to do something. You did. OK. They ordered me to close the business. I wouldn't close. Right, right. OK. And then they put out an order to arrest me and start to lift them for me. And I was running all over town. It was funny. Wow. Yeah. So are you doing anything else? Sorry, are you doing any other, any big business ventures? Do you buy in real estate or anything? Continuously buy real estate. What kind of real estate you buy? Business. You just buy your buying business. Just business. Yeah. OK. Now, not businesses. Commercial property. Wherehouse is in school. Wherehouse is? Yeah. OK. Yeah. One of the warehouses I bought now is the IRS's office. So I'm there, man. Is you bought the IRS? I didn't buy it. They came to me and wanted to put it in there. Really? My bill that you. Where's this building in Tampa? Yeah. It's right on the Delmabery and Boy Scout road. Wow. Now, do you actively buy and sell or do you sit and sit and hold them for a while? Just collect them. No, I don't sell any. So you're not flipping stuff. No. We have a brewery that's opening up in the very shortly, probably in Wesley Chapel. Really? A strut and brewery. OK. Florida Avenue Brewing. I don't know if it's my new brewery. How well have to come check that out? Florida Avenue Brewery. OK. Florida Avenue. Is this your first brewery? No, it's a cigar city. It was my son and I's first brewery. It was probably, it was all here mixed up for my money. Right. OK. Now, all the cigar city is probably the most one of the most, except for an advisor. One of the most well-known breweries in the world. Oh, yeah, definitely. Highline. You guys made highline a bunch of other brands, right? Yeah. Highline was what made it famous, really. Now, all this, all this investing, all these businesses that you're buying. Actually, actually, we out at the endeavor, they had the beer, whatever you call it, the beer things every year. They give out awards and all that. You enter beer and they give out awards. And we out beat for awards for gold medals and all the medals we beat to our city this year. So we're ahead of them. Really? We're the number 10 brewery in the country. Wow. For small breweries. That's open now. Yeah, Florida. Well, the Florida Avenue Brewing is here in Tampa. And then we're going to expand into Wesley Chapel. Both nice piece of property up there. They're going to have a nice restaurant. We're doing a lot of beer. Oh, yeah. Now, all this stuff started from just money that you've made from Monse Venus. And you just started investing in other stuff and diversifying. Yeah. Yeah, it all came from Monse Venus. Yeah, it all started. That's incredible. Yeah. Then we just sold to our city. So OK, not too long ago. Made all the money there. Yeah, that's nice. So things, you know, things work out. Cool. On to the next fight. Yeah. So when is the when is like the next date for the Supreme Court for that case or anything? Well, they had fit. We we found our motion for hearing. And they have 15 days in order to answer that. So nothing happens for 15 days. OK. And they'll probably ask for an extension that the last minute, which tolls it. So the state, they just think it in the way of everything. In other words, they stall stall stall stall stall. They don't want to go anywhere fast. Right. They'll try and break you. You know, it's just going to court. It's not cheap. No, that's what they're trying to do. You've got to be rich, very, very rich to do this, or be a big corporation. Right. Yeah, that's not cheap. These lawyers don't do not come cheap. Believe me, you're going to have deep pockets to fight those people. I'm going to over a million in these two losses. And just these two. Yeah. Wow. Yep. What keeps the drive to keep fighting these fights? Being attacked. Yeah. I have a right to do it. They're attacking me by telling me I can't. So I got to fight. What do you do? I have to roll over and die. I think a lot of people probably would. A lot of people would definitely would. Yeah, but they're not. I was, I didn't develop this or anything. I was born with whatever I am. I was born with in order to do anything else. I'd have to mess myself up as far as I'm concerned. Right. Right. Yeah. You just have a higher purpose. You know that burning fire. You're not burning it. Get my interest. Right. Satisfies me. It makes me feel like I have some worth. Yeah. So people like you are needed. I mean, if you don't fight the fight, then who's going to? Right. Um, hopefully there's another guy. But I don't know. I got it. Yeah, you got it. I have to. I have no choice. Well, we thank you for that. Yeah. You're an inspiration to us and many others. Thank you. Awesome. Well, thanks again for your time, Joe. Yes, I will. All right. It's a touch again soon. Really nice.