And I'm so happy to be here. Thank you. I'm legitimately glad to be here. Thank you. That is a great country. And thank you for saying that. That has been this is our 12th city. And out of 16 and one of the things that I wanted, I love you, too. Thank you. I wanted, you know, if you spend your life experiencing the states to your phone, which I think all of us do, you really lose track of what it's actually like. And you do. And I do think that part of the lie, part of the plan for the rest of us, is to convince us that our country sucks. And that's not true at all. And that's why it's been such a blessing to go coast to cry. 8 30 this morning, I was on the Conestoga River in your state. Beautiful. You could have been anywhere, Montana, New Zealand, it was incredible. And I ran into people in the park where I was looming, not in a threatening way, but you know, wonder when I'm one of your parks. And they said to me, oh my gosh, we just saw Alex Jones wandering in the park. Actually, and they weren't afraid. They weren't delighted. And they were great people. And that's kind of the point is that in 12 cities from east coast to west coast to the middle to back to these coast, I've been met a single angry person. I haven't met a single nasty person. I haven't met anybody mistreating anybody else. I met exactly the opposite. I have met the warmest, kindest, most loving, hilarious, eccentric people I've ever met. And those are the people I grew up with. This is the country I remember. And so, no, it's true though. It actually is great. And I've just been reminded of that. So thank you. And thank you for having me. So with that said, and I've been in a good mood despite being away from my wife and dogs. I've been in a good mood every day for the last 21 days. I'm really in tell today when I got back from wandering around one of your parks. And I see this picture of your governor. You know, I actually don't really want to show up in somebody else's state and attack their politicians, because that's not my state or commonwealth. But I saw a photograph of your governor, Josh Shapiro, standing with a foreign leader, being an artillery shell, that is going to kill civilians in a country we're not at war with, with a grin on his face. And I had a couple of thoughts. I was disgusted by it actually. I was enraged by it. And here's why. Let me be specific about here's why. The first reason is, you know, I've been driving around Pennsylvania and actually I've fished here a lot over the course of my life. And so I know the state pretty well. And there are some, I mean, this is really one of the prettiest out of 50, maybe the prettiest in spots out of 50. It's ridiculous how pretty it is. But there are some hurting places in this state, like hurting, like actually, where people don't have jobs, where beautiful buildings in utter disrepair, walking back from dinner on a site, people sleeping on the sidewalk. You know, things that we should not put up with in a country with self-respect, and our leaders did that actually. And so for anybody in charge of anything in this country, particularly in this state, to be spending time, money, or concern on a foreign country's problems, enraged me. It enraged me. How dare you lecture me about problems in some other place, whether it's in Eastern Europe or the Middle East, or I don't Central Africa, I don't care. I don't wish any of those people harmed at all. I wish everyone well. But for you to spend your time worrying about that and paying for that, when your own state, people in your own state are literally living on the sidewalk damn you, actually. I thought that I mean that. Because a leader, a leader's only job is to take care of the people he leads. Period. It's not to end global climate change. It's not to defeat Vladimir Putin or anybody else. It's to protect and watch over the people he leads. This is true of any organization starting with the most basic organization in any society, which is the family. A father's job is to watch over his family. And if his kids are sick and have drug problems, and he takes off to another country to deal with other people's children in a faraway land, he has abandoned his family. And I don't care what story he tells you about himself and what a great and caring and compassionate person he is and I don't care how much he attacks you for noticing. He is a bad father and a bad man. Because he has violated his sacred duty to his own children. That's why he's here is to watch over his children the same is true for all organizations. Whether it's a military unit or the office you work in or the town you live in or the state you reside in or the nation you were born in, the people who run and have one job and that's to watch out for you because they're your leaders. And when they ignore that, they are evil. Period. They're not misguided. There's no way that someone who lives in this state, particularly who claims to represent this state was born in this state. I'm one of you. I'm from Pennsylvania. You don't notice that there's, you take a city like the one I woke up in this morning where my wife went to grade school and it's a beautiful city built over centuries by hardworking immigrants, by the way, German mostly but probably from lots of other places and they spend hundreds of years making this a great city and I walked through it this morning on the way to the park and the streets are covered in garbage and broken needles. And it's like, you don't notice that, really, you're a spirit. You don't notice that? How can you not notice that? There's someone sleeping right there and you're lecturing me about you crane. Damn you. There's no concern at all and where there's no concern, there's no love actually. Concern grows from love. It's organic. It's easy. You didn't have to read a book about how to love your children. It's a name naturally to you. They're your children. And by the way, that's enough. Oh, I know, but why? One of them. You're not super well-educated, non-geniuses. We have a lot of dumb parents who are pretty good parents. Not because they learn some theory about parenting from the Harvard School of Parenting, but because they love their children. And if you love your children, you may make a mistake here and there. I have. Every parent has. Over time, if your actions are guided by a sincere love for your child, that child's going to be OK. Because that's all that matters. And so if over time, you totally ignore the material and spiritual condition of your people if they wind up sleeping on the street and the storefronts are closed and the windows are broken and they can't walk to CBS without getting mugged. And it's physically unclean. That's not an accident. They don't love you. They hate you. That is true. Do not listen. I talk for a living. So I think a lot about this. About words. And they're used. And I use words. We all do to communicate with other people. What separates us from the animals. It's not the opposable thumb. Whoever thought of that as an idiot. It's language. It's language. It's the ability to be precise about the way we feel and communicate that to another person to pass on information to pass on our history. That's what our culture is. It's talking. And that's great. But words are also, if you think about it, a means of deception. They are a vector for lying. How do the lies reach you because they come out of somebody's mouth? So if you're in my business and you think a lot about language and you're around people who are lying for a living after a while, you lose faith in it. You do. And after a while, at least if you're me, you decide you know I'm going to be a lot more like my dog. My dog is not a fluent English speaker. Genius, but doesn't speak English. And yet my dog and your dog and everyone's dog knows exactly what's up. They can't hear a word you say they only watch you. And when you move over and pick up the bullets at dinner time, you didn't tell them that they're watching what you do. And I've decided that's a much more accurate way to judge intent. You can say, well, I have a plan because I'm so compassionate. I really care about you and all your communities. First of all, anyone who uses the word community is lying to you. Because there's no such thing as a community. There are only people actually with names and fingerprints. There are only individuals. No woman ever gave birth to a community. There's no such thing. Talking about communities is a way of ignoring actual people. Really, name three people in the community. What are their middle names? Who are their moms? Do you know their moms? You don't know anything about the community. Community is a way to make your responsibility more diffuse and less specific. I don't want to hear about a community. How about that guy? He's unfentinal. There's a spreading puddle of urine in front of him. That's an American citizen. That's someone you're supposed to love. Your job is to love that person. And you're doing nothing for that person. Because you're lecturing me about the community is the truth. And I'm sorry to say I drive into this town. I've been coming to Reading not very often, but once every four or five years, it's like your college roommate's kids. They grow so fast. You don't see them that much. So I come to Reading sporadically, but pretty consistently over 40 years now. Not better. It's a beautiful town actually. It's a beautiful town. Someone spent a lot of time building Redding, Pennsylvania. It's super obvious as you drive in. It's not a bunch of dollars or no. There are a bunch of big substantial brick buildings built over 100 years by people who cared. And to see a town like that, dying from lack of care, from lack of love. But it's not just Josh Shapiro. Trust me, it's a whole line. It's decades of politicians who didn't love you. That enrages me. And then to see him direct his love toward a foreign leader in a foreign population, he knows nothing about he doesn't speak Ukrainian. What do you know about Ukraine, Josh Shapiro? No, it's a way for his friends to get rich and him to puff himself up like some sort of fake world leader. And see my key tears. He's got bigger concerns in my geopolitical, even if you may not know that word geopolitical. Josh Shapiro is no freaking idea what that word means. But more than the point, Josh Shapiro's only job is to protect and enhance the lives of people in Redding and Pots Town and every other town in this state. Including, and I'm just going to say it, you're going to cheer me, including Philadelphia. I know. Philadelphia, I got it. But Philadelphia, whatever else that you can say about his philanthropic and citizens. American citizens, your brothers and sisters in your common Americanness. Fellow citizens. Yeah, right there. And my nephew from Philadelphia, my brother-in-law from Philadelphia, right now here, great people, that's it he doing. I mean, it's a reliable source of political power for creeps like Josh Shapiro, because it's easy to rig it in Philadelphia. And that's what we spend all our time talking about. But what we never talk about is the zombies walking under public transportation there. And that zombies actually, they're Americans with names and they're dying. And he doesn't care. And giving them a safe place to shoot up is not love, it's hate. That's hate. I don't care what they call it. And that's what I mean about language. They can dress up hate as love. Oh, that's love, it's compassion, it's caring, it's harm reduction. Really? Your kid comes home and is like, I'm a junkier, like, well, here's some needles. I'm going to give you some U-time in your room to shoot fentanyl. What? You're going to chain them to the freaking radiator until he gets better. Of course, or do whatever you can to get that child off a drug that can and will kill him. You would never make it easier for your kid to kill himself. And that's exactly what they're doing. And then they're lecturing you about harm reduction. You're evil, actually. That's how I feel when I hear that. Having lost a lot of people I love to drugs. I bet there's not one person in this room who doesn't know someone who's died from drugs. You think Josh Shapiro stays up late about worrying about that? No. He stays up late, worrying that Ukraine doesn't have weapons and mass destruction to win some unwindable war. You're evil if that's your concern. So the only way you judge people is by the effects of what they do. You judge the tree by the fruit. And you can say, well, I'm a lemon tree. I'm a lemon tree. Bright orange tart, but delicious with diet coke. I'm a lemon tree. Really? Because those are pomegranates, honey. Those aren't lemons. You're lion. You are not a lemon tree. Those are pomegranates. I know because there's the fruit. You can tell me you care about the people of Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, but they're dying of drug odies. And you're doing nothing other than sending more weapons and mass destruction to some creepy guy in a track suit. And that's the other thing that enraged me. And I didn't expect to give a speech like this because I'm really trying to cool the temperature and remind all of us that we're all Americans and we all have something in common. But it just spun me up so completely watching that grinning ghoul with that other grinning ghoul signing an artillery shell. He's never seen one go up. I have. And anybody who takes delight in the death of civilians is a freak. That's just a fact. And there's something forbidden about saying that, particularly if you're on the right. I've been on the right my whole life. I've never been on the left. I've never been some freaky liberal. Okay? Okay? Ever. And I never will be. So I think I have the authority to say, if you take delight in the suffering of other human beings, you're evil. And I mean that. That's what my religion tells me. That's what common sense tells me. That's disgusting. That's disgusting. And yet they do. Because the truth is they're violence worshippers, actually. They're violence where they are. They are. And how do you know that by what they do? Now what they say, oh, it's all about freedom and compassion. Really? An entire generation of Ukrainians has been killed in a war they literally can't win. And they get off on it. They love it. They love violence. That's why every federal agency with guns they've taken over. No, they love it. And why do they love it? Because it makes them feel like God. That's why. Because the one power that God possesses that we do not possess is the power to create an end life. You can kill in self defense. We can argue about what the self defense is. I mean, that's, you know, it's a whole conversation, which is a legitimate conversation. But what we know we can't do because we are not God is murder people because they're in the way. Or murder people to get rich. You can't be Dick Cheney, actually. Sorry. It's not allowed. A lot of people seem to have been reaching the same conclusion recently, which is that being a little healthier, being spiritually grounded, eating right, paying attention to nature, all of those really matter. Sleep takes up a big portion of your day. Like one third of your life is spent asleep and sleeping well makes you much happier and more productive. So you shouldn't be surprised at some of the products that we've been looking at to think about entering into partnerships with are based on sleep. And we've got one we really like. It's called cozy earth. Cozy earth makes, among other things, bamboo sheets. Bamboo sheets. Well, we tried them and they're awesome. Bamboo sheets are really soft. And breathable and they keep you cool all night long and they get even softer with every wash. You got to try it. And they don't just make sheets. They do pajamas and robes, leisure wear bath towels and make a whole bunch of stuff out of bamboo. And it's cool. It's not just this weird. Oh, it's bamboo. Actually, it's great. Try it. They make great gifts. It goes here. If the quality is backed up by a 10 year warranty, they are for even a 100 night sleep trial, 100 nights. Hmm. Didn't take us a hundred nights to get into it. But try it for yourself. So make your life more comfortable head over to cozyearth.com slash Tucker and use the promo code Tucker from to 40% off. You will feel the difference. Cozy earth. Dot com slash Tucker and use the promo code Tucker for a big discount. And so when Dick Cheney and his creepy freaky little daughter join the Carmella Harris president campaign, everyone's like, oh, that's so shocking. I can't quite believe that. No, no, no. All the people who worship violence are now on the same side. Yeah, it's disgusting. And you may not have thought about how disgusting it is because the one thing they're good at, the only thing, they're unique talent. It's not building anything. It's not creating anything. What's less than someone built something beautiful and useful in redding? What's less than one of your leaders is like, you know, we're going to make it better in redding. No, it's been a long time. Josh Shapiro hasn't done it. But the one thing they are good at is seizing the moral high ground. Immediately no matter what they're doing, whether it's giving drugs to junkies, crack pipes to crackheads, embedding the largest example of human trafficking in the history of the West, which is what they're doing right now is they move 15 million people illegally into our country from around the world. The girls get sold off to coyotes. They did that. They're human traffickers at scale. No, that's just a fact that by the way, that's not a crackpot opinion. That's just true. And yet they turn to you, every person in this room, the people with useful jobs, the kind of jobs that actually are essential. And they're just bad people. Really? Oh, you're bad people. Really? There was an analysis done. Bobby Kennedy told me this and I checked in his true. In the last election, Biden voters on 70% of the wealth in the United States. And Trump voters on 30%. And I thought to myself, on the one hand, it's like, okay, public and party's down the party of working with us people great. But then I thought, how do they get 70% of the wealth? They don't do anything, actually. They have no skills. There's nothing they do that we really need. In fact, most of it's bad. I mean, ask yourself, if your average Biden voter somehow like I pulled out of the workforce, would you be okay? No, I'm really. Like, how long do you think this country could survive without private equity a week? For we all just starve to death. How long could you and your family make it without a DEI consultant on site? No, I'm serious. Could you get to Halloween? I would want if your little children stare up at you a dough-wise and say, Mommy, I need a DEI consultant. I need it now. I need it now. Honestly, I need a school counselor or some heavy-set nurse who's going to give this to me to go trans. I need that. Honestly, I need Tim Wallace talking to me out my sex life in high school. Really, I need a creep like Tim. No, I do. I need it. I need it bad. Yeah, that guy's not creepy. Okay. Let's your instincts be your guide on that one. Let me just say, as I always would tell my children, someone seems creepy. He is. Am I indicting him for the crime? Nope. I don't have any evidence. I don't need any. That guy's a creep. Sorry. My dogs would bark at Tim Wallace if he came over to my house 100%. Oh, yeah, they would. They'd back him into a corner. They'd like stop that and they wouldn't stop because they know. The point is that entire, not just political party, but class of people has created an entire economy and credentialing system to reward themselves with money and power that is not deserved. That's exactly the truth. I don't like to swear, but the phrase bullshit jobs is a real thing. Those are all bullshit jobs. Every single one. And yet, they're lecturing people who I don't know plumb your house. You from getting murdered, put out the fires when they start, rescue you after a car crash on the highway, build the building you live in, pave the road you drive on, grow the food you eat. Those are the deplorables. Really? Fuck when the power goes out, honey. You can call your average college administrator to save you. So I guess all I would say, and I will stop with this, do not write this on a note, post it to your fridge. Do not allow the worst and most useless people this country has ever produced. You've added nothing of beauty or value, never fought a war to keep you free. Never done anything for you. It is sat and watched as your communities died and laughed and got richer. Do not let those people for one second occupy the moral high ground. They're all Tim Wallace. They are. They're guilty. And they know they're guilty. That's why they're hysterical. When you see Kamala Harris, before she fully gets control of herself, you can see that glint of fear in her eyes. She has no idea what she's doing. She does no idea how she got here. She's never done anything in her life. And somehow she's the Democratic nominee. She could be elected president. And for one second, the camera does tell the truth and tell people, pull themselves together. For one second, you can see Kamala Harris in total panic. I'm Montel Williams's side piece. What am I doing here? That's how they all feel. They know how inadequate they are. They know how guilty they are. They know how Jeffrey Epstein died. And they're terrified that you will find out. So do not let them give you a lecture about anything. They are not your moral superiors. They're your moral infieres. They are lucky. You let them live here and never forget that. So with that, I want to invite on a friend of mine. Thank you so much. I want to give a speech about healing. But I was so mad about writing that I just lost it. I lost it. So Jack Fissotnick is actually from this area. He's so from this area. I just met his entire family at number in the hundreds. All awesome people. And he and I have talked about this because I actually am interested in Pennsylvania specifically. Older states. It was our capital. Like it's an amazing place within amazing history. And we've talked a lot about what's happened to it. And we've also talked a lot about Kamala Harris' latest surrogate, Zelensky. And so I thought it would be fun and interesting to bring him out. Jack Fissotnick and I respect and like personally, curious. Good everyone, join me in giving Tucker Carlson a warm Pennsylvania welcome tonight. Thank you for doing this. You and I have talked in private a lot about what's happened to this state. But I just have to ask you since I'm so spun up and I'll shut up and let you describe your views with your monitoring the mind. But Zelensky last I checked was like a foreign leader from a foreign country. And he flies over to the United States on US military aircraft at your expense. It could be going to the, you know, the guy dying right outside this building of a commodity. And he shows up in Pennsylvania the key swing state in the closest presidential election of my lifetime to stump for Kamala Harris and Democrats in this state. Am I misreading what's happening here? Tucker, the only thing that I would add, the only thing that I would add is that none of this is happening by chance. We didn't lose our homes, we didn't lose our towns, we didn't lose our economy, we didn't lose our cities like the great city of Philadelphia and it was a great city and it will be a great city again. We didn't lose it by chance, it was taken from us. It certainly was. In the name of compassion, it was. But I'm just sort of, I mean, no two officer until got you, big form policy background you've been around the world. Is it weird? I'm just stuck on this and I'll stop after this. Is it weird to have a foreign leader who saw we were paying, whose country we're supporting were paying the retirement benefits of Ukrainian civil servants when our people are really hurting? Is it weird to have that? Is he allowed to stump for Kamala Harris? What about all the freaking Republicans who voted to fund this goal? What are they saying about this? So here's how it works, right? So why does redding look the way that it does? Why does Montgomery County? And by the way, if anyone's here from Naras Town, Pennsylvania, I'm from Naras Town, Pennsylvania, born and raised 1400 block of Pennsylvania of Naras Town, Pennsylvania, Pal Street. Every single school that I've gone to since before college has been shut down. The hospital that I was born in has been demolished. My high school is currently in the process of being demolished. And you want to know where all that money went. You want to know where all that economic opportunity went. What's gone to places like Shanghai? And then now it's gone to places like Iraq. And then it went to places like Afghanistan. And now it's being sent to Ukraine to kill people, to kill Christians in a war that has nothing to do with us, that has nothing to do with the people in this room. And every single person in this room, by the way, is paying the cost. You're paying the cost of it in number one in terms of money. And then number two, it continues and goes even further the way they want it to. You'll pay the cost in blood. And I'll tell you this, when you look at Little Josh Shapiro, by the way, it's amazing how Josh Shapiro had to wear the big lips to make sure that he was a little taller than Zelensky. Because no, no, really. It's true because they're actually the same height. If you put Zelensky on Josh Shapiro's shoulders, they'd still both be looking up at Baron. That's quite an image, I gotta be honest. The meme serves will be hard at work. But what's really going on, Tucker, is go look at Zelensky in that video. Go look at Josh Shapiro. I've never seen Josh Shapiro, I'm known the guy for 18 years. I've never seen him more excited or giddy or gleeful as he was in that picture, sending the money and the war and the bombs and the violence abroad. And when you look at a guy like that, when you look at a guy who presided overturning my great hometown of Narstown into a killing zone, who presided currently over Philadelphia, which is a killing zone and is now going off and participating in the killing that's going on in Ukraine. You talked about religion, Tucker. And I just look at it and I say, this guy does not serve God. He serves death. Well, I mean, kind of by definition, I mean, without even getting the whole Ukraine thing, I'll just bottom line it and tell you, if you don't already know, you've been lied to, there was never a chance that Ukraine was going to beat Russia, whatever you think of it. I don't even have very strong feelings of it because I'm. I think all this bottom line didn't tell you if you don't already know you've been lied to there was never a chance that Ukraine was going to beat Russia Whatever you think of it. I don't even have very strong feelings, but I'm not from there. I'm from United States, but Russia is a hundred million more people. I mean it was always going to end as it has in the deaths of an entire generation of Ukrainians It's the saddest thing I've ever seen So let's keep his change the law so now foreign companies Kamah Harris donors can buy their farmland. They're gonna be no Ukraine Thanks to these monsters and it makes me sad as hell But it's not so different from what they've done to where you grew up So if you could just explain the town you grew up in what it was like and what it's like now So the town I grew up in Nars town and probably like a lot of the towns here by the way I think I'm related to like 50% of the people in the room tonight at least But my my whole family is here my mom my dad my wonderful wife Tanya my kids. They're all back here Hi guys my cousins. They're all right around here the whole peso vixer here by the way Kamala Harris was talking this morning about oh she was like excuse me Scamala Harris was talking about the because she is a complete scam the biggest scam that's ever perpetuated on the American people and She's now said that she's got the endorsement of the Polish Catholics and the Polish Americans of Pennsylvania Well, I don't know if we have any polls in this room, but I'm not gonna be voting for Kamala Harris and none of my family is either Is anyone in this room gonna vote for Kamala Harris? She really said the I'm no I'm no she said that this morning that the Polish American Catholics are the least likely ever to vote for me Is that what she said? She said all the Polish Americans and all polls are we pretty much only come on one flavor Tucker So that it's anonymous with with Catholic. She said they're all gonna be voting for me and that's eight hundred thousand This was up on her Twitter. So another campaign and I'm like And I said no, I don't think she has a chance of winning Polish Americans, but she's gonna speak for us so the town I grew up in was incredible and You know whatever you know people want to think about me or want to say about me I would trade everything that I have not my family, but all like the material things that I have If I could just have my town back if I could just have my town back because to me success To me to be successful meant Moving to a nicer part of my town or like a bigger house at the other end of the street You never I don't have any dreams of like being up on stage with Tucker Carlson or any of this stuff, you know and It was the ton of town where you know my family comes from Poland as I mentioned and we've been in NARS town for a hundred plus years and Every single member of my family was baptized at the same church and so my son Jack Jack who's sitting out there Jack Jack not too many video games and We had the same church with pretty much lived in the same block I grew up in the same house that my father grew up in when he was a little boy because that's what you did and the children that I played with were the kids of the children that my father played with and his father before and Your whole world was a couple of blocks and that's pretty and everybody knew everybody and it was good It wasn't the nicest place in the world. It wasn't the most fantastic Nobody was ever writing you know songs about it or anything But it was a good place. We're honest hardworking people could make a living to let go go home and make enough for their families and then go home and Maybe catch an Eagles game after not after work. I mean I think you've described what most people want actually most people don't dream of having helicopters They dream of living where they grew up with the people they went to high school with walking distance from their grandparents graves That that's not too much to ask is that my grandma lived at the other end of the street so we could go over here house to go swimming the school was within walking distance. It was all right there and the library was in walking distance and I used to go down the library and read a lot and My my mom would let me go by myself when I got a little bit older But then she stopped letting me go to the to the library by myself When the homeless people that kept being led in were stabbing each other in there and this mukkarmic County public library go look it up that It's this became a place for transients and vagrants and then all of a sudden during the 1990s Section 8 started coming in and all the other federal programs started coming in and then oh yes Nars town got turned into a sanctuary city so after that We got all the illegals that flooded over destroyed the health care system because they go where they go to the emergency room for their health care So I actually wrote a Like a letter to the editor in the paper saying we shouldn't do this because it's going in like you know End of the 90s. You know some I don't even know how I was and I said we shouldn't do this because this is gonna overload and overwhelm our health care System and as I just mentioned the hospital that I was born in is now a vacant lot next to a Planned Parenthood clinic And that's and that's look that's whatever. That's my story, but that's that's not a unique story Talk now. It's and and what's it like most of the people in this room either live through something like this or no people who live something like this and and what I've come to learn What I have come to learn that it's by politicians like Josh Shapiro and politicians like Joe Biden from Scranton and all the others Who have done this to us Tucker? This was being this was done by design people were taken for granted their lives were destroyed their communities were destroyed And I do not have any explanation for it other than they serve death and they hate the people they're supposed to represent Can you know it strikes me about what you're saying and it is such a familiar story particularly in this state? I have noticed all over the state, you know east to west is how fast it happened You're not 70 years old so you're saying you lived multiple generations of your family in the same town I'll went to the same church and then in like 10 years. It's all gone It was it was so fast and and as a kid, you know, it was it was kind of shocking and you know Look my parents when they when they moved this out they they wanted to keep us safe You know your your you know it starts with your bike get in stolen and then your next bike gets stolen and then your third bike gets stolen and You know this was a town where you know it's idyllic, you know, it's kind of the cliche, but you could Leave your leave your door unlocked, you know and your babysitters were like the girls who live next door That was a little bit older and then when you went out to play mom never said, you know Oh, I'm worried about you because you knew your neighbors and so your neighbors would say, okay Yeah, yeah, he's here and you know make sure you go home because it's gonna be nighttime and then you go out and then and that's how it was and Suddenly within that lifetime and I know my two boys are like sitting right there that jackjack and AJ I've never even taken them down the street where I grew up why? Because I'm worried they would be shot Because that's how bad the gang violence has gotten there in the time since they the open murder Or the take place there all the time the illegals that that are selling drugs all over the place We had like like a couple of Jamaicans that were behind us You know that were drug dealers and they would keep brought whileers out to keep people away and they kept getting arrested But then every time they got arrested they would it would something strange would happen Talker because they would come back after they got arrested and so when you're little you think oh, well You know the cops are the good guys and they can take away the bad guys and so you you want Wonder wait a minute. Why not the police just come and get rid of all these bad guys and wait a minute I think there's some bad guys over there and the bad guys over here and and suddenly you realize that all of the Standards of living and the quality of life and these basic suppositions that you have about the way the social contract is supposed to work Actually don't seem to work sometimes and it turns out the leaders aren't doing what they're supposed to be doing and suddenly The towns are being completely destroyed and you don't understand and as a kid you don't understand and even out So kind of asking questions. Why did that happen? But I did realize one thing Tucker I did realize one thing and throughout all of whatever I've done You know and by the way You know, I'm no no Georgetown. I gotta give a shout out to corporal. He's well. I'm up here corporal. He's tomato pie We'll get Tucker some corporal. He's all right. Trust me on this Tucker trust me. That's all right. It's a time You'll like it that best tomato pie in the state that pride of Philly by the way that It will not stop until it is stopped It will not stop until people get together and they vote and they take action and they do the ballots and the end the activity and the work Because every single time something like this is going on around the world whether it be Russia and the Bolsheviks whether it be China Whether it be Spain whether it be France and the French Revolution all of the insanity continues on until the people of that country the people of the state Rise up and say no Absolutely not no more you have gone too far You will not cross this line anymore and we are going to stop you and we're gonna find a leader and even If you try to kill that leader and even if you try which by the way right in the state Butler PA You know where they tried to take out Donald Trump on stage Funny how it is that Josh Shapiro doesn't seem interested in that investigation Doesn't seem interested in finding out who fired that bullet or why and didn't provide the Pennsylvania state police that he should have that day. We're writing an entire book about this that Bulletproof he's got it that you that you realize that at some point at some point Tucker is it indifference is it incompetence or is it complicity? We hear a lot from viewers about big tech censorship and those reports are more frequent than ever right now censorship meaning shutting down your access to information not wise or misinformation but true things It's only the truth that they censor Facts that get in the way of the wise are trying to tell you the net effect of this of course is Interfearing in the 2024 presidential elections That's why they're censoring more than ever now because the stakes are even higher you probably not shocked by this But the specific examples of it Do throw you back a little bit we've seen screenshots in videos showing how he Google search learn more about the attempts of assassination on Donald Trump Instead push users to information on Harry Truman or Bob Marley or the Pope Anything other than the relevant truth which is that they just shot Trump in the face They don't want you to know that because it might help Trump We see examples where Facebook marked true photos of a bloody didn't define Trump as misleading somehow those pictures were a lie and then limited their visibility It's AI assistant explicitly denied the shooting ever took place This is insanity, but it's at the core of big text editorial policy Which is denying the truth to you in order to control the outcome of this presidential election that's not democracy We've seen examples where generic search for information about Donald Trump was automatically Refraised to show positive stories about Kamala Harris instead is there any clear example of election interference? So what do you do about it? Well Parlor has been down this road parlor is pulled right off the internet for telling the truth But it's back and it's reaffirmed its lifelong unwavering commitment to free speech on parlor The Bill of Rights lives the first amendment is real you can say what you think because you're a human being in an American citizen and not a slate On parlor users can freely express themselves tell the truth Express their conscience and connect with others who are doing the same and they will not be interfered with they will not be censored Design is support a wide range of viewpoints everyone is welcome on parlor Pollers committed to ensuring that everybody is heard and so it's become a place where independent journalism is protected and Respected it's protected because it's respected So is this censorship by big tech intensifies? Standing up for your god-given right as an American to say what you think is essential We're on parlor. That's why we're on parlor our handle is at Tucker Carlson and we encourage you to join us there You have the right to say what you believe so does every American and you can do it on parlor get the parlor app today Well, I mean we don't need to guess right? I mean we always would say in the news business You can't know people's motive. I always would say that and you try to be humble about what you know and what you don't know But after a while you realize you do because the goal is the result actually The goal is the result the point of the system is what it does is the point of the system is what it does and that is true over time so if they come in and Make changes and your neighborhood goes from a cohesive Beautiful safe place to a slum in ten years They wanted to do that and if they do that to keep places all over your state They did that on purpose. Look. I don't think we need to guess do we and if you don't investigate attempted murder of a Presidential candidate you're in favor of the murder of a presidential candidate Well, I'll tell you something else and here's the good news. Here's the good news on that front so They tried to take out Trump once and we said we're gonna write an entire book about it in like a month which we did to write a snapbook about it called bulletproof and Then they tried to take him out again a Second time even before we finish that so we put that part in the second book as well and that guy funny enough Tucker Wouldn't you believe had just come from overseas? Do you know where the second shooter just came from Tucker? Ukraine He came from Ukraine where he was a foreign fighter over there who had received training and then used that training to come here to this country to try to kill the one person who's trying to Stop all of the things that we just talked about from happening and he said in order to do so It is morally correct. He said it's morally correct and then the DOJ this morning puts out a letter from this psychopath from Ukraine that says Even if I can't solve the job even if I can't get the job done myself There's a bounty on Trump's head for a hundred fifty thousand dollars and the DOJ of course put this out on purpose. They could have put that under seal They could have redacted how many things is a government redacted Tucker They could have redacted that they didn't well the Nashville shooting. We just got two years later Then I was shooting which which they fought tooth and nail to give us the menu the manifesto of which was like Oh, I hate Christians and I hate white people so I'm going to kill Christian white people. It's like oh wow what a surprise I was so shocked so we find out that and then on this one look Tucker I don't trust Josh Shapiro. I definitely don't trust Merrick Garland So what we've decided to do with this it started as a book We're launching our own investigation into what went on and we've hired a private investigative firm and some of whom are actually in the crowd today to Sephoyah and We are going to be expanding that investigation from Bethel Park to Butler down to West Palm Beach all the way out to Hawaii Tucker we're going to go to Ukraine if we have to we are going to get to the bottom of what happened We're calling it the bulletproof project because I just don't trust any of these people. I don't trust any of these people big Careful in Ukraine. I may not go personally again over there, but the one thing that we have learned Tucker is this This bounty the $150,000 and I promised people that I would drop some news So I had the information about the bounty on Friday We found that out today. I didn't know the Department of Justice who'd be publicizing the bounty like it's a John Wick movie, right? And and they put it out there Matt Gaetz comes on my show a couple of days ago and he says there's five assassination teams targeting Trump Five assassination teams three of which are foreign ties. I think we know one of them already and and then two of which are domestic What people need to understand is the bounty and the five assassination teams are tied It's it's like they're actually competing for this bounty Donald Trump's very life is on the line and every time he goes up to speak now He has to stand behind what I call leftist glass because they keep trying to kill him He's a brave man. I must say whatever you think of Trump. He doesn't need this Jack I really appreciate I hope you'll stay right there. I want to bring out our next guest who And let me let me just say We had a little trouble finding an arena that would take him because he's so controversial And I'm I'm grateful. I'm grateful to Where we are right now and to the people of Pennsylvania, but let me just say can I say one thing about Alex Jones? So Alex Jones was one of those is one of those people you're supposed to be very shocked by Here's the one fact about Alex Jones that I can't get over Alex Jones predicted 9-11 and he did know to think about it for a second and he did so on tape Now I worked in television my whole life when you're in TV. There's a timestamp We don't need to guess I'm on TV for decades saying super dumb things which live forever on YouTube Alex Jones in the summer of 2001 said You need to call the White House right now because planes are gonna hit the World Trade Center and they're gonna blame it on a Son of a bit lot he said that I've seen the tape you could look it up So no tickets out so I lived in DC at the time Trust me, I was in I had a daily new show on another channel Not one person was saying anything like that so Alex Jones says that it's on tape. We can prove he said that it Happens Why didn't the US government call Alex Jones and say how could you have not clearly clearly you're a prophet of some kind? We need you in this global war on terror because clearly you can see things that nobody else can see That's incredible have you even met anybody who's predicted something like that? No, you have it like I've never met anyone I met everybody I've never met anybody who didn't anything like that But instead of celebrating Alex Jones for making the most Unbelievable call in the history of the news business they said about the FBI sets about trying to destroy him and So begins this incredible saga of lies about Alex Jones, which you probably all heard about I'm not gonna Relitigate it, but that was the FBI that did that and they try to bankrupt Alex Jones You try to put Alex Jones in prison. Why would you put the guy who called that in prison? This guy is clearly on the side of the United States He tried to help our country so That fact if there's only one thing you know about how everything I said is a hundred percent true by the way I'm not guessing but there's fact if there's one thing to know about Alex Jones It's that and on the basis of that I will always believe and I will always say in public that Alex Jones is the most extraordinary person I've ever met and so I am proud to have him not having him here because it's like naughty. Oh Alex Jones is like no, no, I'm proud to know Alex Jones I'm proud to know the person who tried to warn the country about the worst terror attack in our history and was persecuted for it and with that ladies and gentlemen Alex Jones And it's so funny going going back to the point That intro was too good. Well, it's true It's triggers of us not be Talker talker talker Well, it's true and it makes me mad and it goes back to what I was saying earlier that the only thing they're good at is seizing the moral high ground And they try to make you ashamed of the best things about your life like being married or having normal kids or not Actasticating your children or whatever or knowing Alex Jones like oh, how can you do? I'm so and I'm sick of it and I'm as you say that Alex Jones is my friend There's nothing to be ashamed of there Not ashamed and you shouldn't be either they should be ashamed He called 9 11 and they tried to put him in jail for it. So anyway, thank you. Well, thanks for having me I got to say This is a beautiful Day for a beautiful people and when we get president Trump elected all of us together are gonna lift the curse off of this country And we're gonna send the globalist a president and it is amazing It is amazing to me all these great people and whether they're black white old young to see the electricity in people's eyes that are Populists and that are Americans and that love God and that love children and love freedom and hate I can feel the strength in this auditorium Ready I told the globalist the long time ago. Oh, this is good end. Oh, sorry. They've got more B laugh Alex Jones so controversial love God love America love freedom. Oh, you're so radical When it was in Tucker Alex the one thing I always give Alex props for that no one ever gives him credit for Alex Jones has stood against war For 30 years every single day of his career But I'm poor peacefully with information against the globalist the real wars here with the globalist And sorrows and Obama in the new world order Black Rock they have the Cold War use you tongue the answer to 1984 is Right here right here 1776 1776 You know Alex you know Alex the real We're only about an hour away from where they did the real 1776. That's why exactly Bless you for saying that So what do you do you think what is gonna happen in the next 40 days? Do you think well? We all know that history repeats in rhymes and so just like to kick off of this country on July 4th 1776 Started an hour away from here and that's why coming right back history repeats the key battle Stayed again that the second battle to save the republic the first battle was launched to form the republic is happening right here in Pennsylvania and I interviewed today on amazing interview quick interview it was great together in between your busy schedule And you said look I feel confidence in my gut intellectually every level even if they steal this it doesn't matter Because the process of awakening is here and nothing is gonna turn that around so we Have the initiative we've turned the tide and whether it takes six months or 20 years We're gonna affect the globalest out of this country and we're gonna restore the Republic victory is ours that way So do you Do you feel that the hope that in the end? There's victory do you really feel that? Barring the global is starting a nuclear war, but then they'll still get beat in that process Those are the survival dig them out of their holes their bikers will be their tombs But other than them trying to start World War three which were very close to other than into the world stuff Our trajectory victory all over the world populist or winning all over the world the incumbents are getting thrown out all over the world I mean you go to a comment on Instagram where they even try to censor and Bill Gates was interviewed there'll be 20 million views and I'll read for an hour Can't find one person that isn't exposing him Klaus Schwab had to step down as the head of the W. F The global is terrated. They just had their big day most meeting earlier this year about getting trust back and I watched a Clinton Foundation with Chelsea up there at her and her gala going everyone hates us now more than ever What do we do we've got a suit for them more in Hillary crawls out from Iraq? We'll start our resting America's from their speech that'll teach them. I'll get you in your little dog, too We have forced them out the open the masters off and now the sleeping giant is awakened true isn't it? That no one you ever meet in real life outside the Atlantic magazine in the Aspen Institute and that freaky Rawls character No actual person is for any of this and nobody's for tampons and boys bathrooms But they are because we talked about this here today We're sure of his story and the journals you know about but most people don't know about it of course This is all deliberate the CIA in the 50s 60s 70s and 80s funded miss magazine Gloria Steinem planned parenthood the whole thing is it's run by the global is to get star country since the 47 national security act and they said in there we're gonna have ugly architecture ugly art ugly music We're gonna degrade the family. We're gonna under mine the symbol of men being strong in the home This salty classified and they sold that image to demoralize us and break our will And we were asleep back then. I didn't know the government had been hijacked They thought Americans were intimidated and bullied and we know we were asleep now They tried to debilitate us now they try to demoralize us now they try to break our will and we're conscious of it And we're like that's not breaking our will that's waking us up I gotta say that the main change that I've noticed and maybe it's just me But I'm from a very very secular background like most secular background you I'm literally from Southern California One person what are you doing in writing? It's good to have you California used to be a great red state It was the best but the point is I didn't grew up around religious people at all I didn't go to the church my grandmother went to at all I've worked in the media my whole life in a big city up until five years ago and in the last year I know more people in my secular world Who were mentioning God in conversation? And I I don't know if you're having this experience it's Very striking to me. Do you notice this? When we followed God we had nothing but prosperity of success we got rid of God everything fell apart I mean Tech people think Texas is the boom place. It's got the crime the filth the Satanism the degeneracy the pedophiles Pennsylvania gorgeous state fell apart in ten years California the one of those people places the world total deep red Ronald Reagan total crap hole now its spiritual blight and people are Recognizing that because now they understand we're getting sucked down a vortex into literal hell We got to reach back up to God and God will take us out of this Is it you've been saying that for decades? I've always wondered I've asked you this like 20 times in private over dinner. I'm proud to say we have dinner And I but I ask you so you never give me a straight answer, but since there are thousands of people watching Maybe you will now what's it like to be vindicated on everything? I mean it's scary because I mean I realized that with a lot of power to a lot of responsibility and a lot of times of the media I'll joke around satire wise and I'll see it the cover of the New York Times and clearly people aren't seeing the video I'm saying it's a joke like Jones wants to kill his neighbors. No, I said there's a nuclear war we all collapse and My kids are starving around a swivel food. I will eat the liberal neighbors not my conservative ones It's more of it's more of it's yolk, but so so when people take what I say so serious I joke a lot less I used to joke a lot, but now I You know the show is not a used to be like half comedy is I like that fun So I take it really serious now because I realize they twist everything so it's a lot of response though But also wish I was making predictions with the proviso that if you call the lighthouse to tell them Don't fly planes the World Trade Center and and then bring in the police state and then invade the Muslim countries to bring them in here You know not even go off to radical Islam if you do all I was saying if you call the lighthouse Don't do it. They may not do it, but of course that have a big enough audience people didn't believe me So we couldn't stop him so I make these predictions about probable futures It's not gonna see all the evidence pointing towards it so that we can stop it But but now the good news with Elon and you and so many others that are fully awake and reaching a lot of people that I ever did Folks are are really waking up and their knowledge curve is going parabolic right now So we're in the driver's seat, but that makes the globalist very dangerous and the empire is gonna strike back How well they always love to pre-program it's a plus-law is a cyber attack will make COVID look like a man that are in convenience How? Well, they always love to pre-program it's a cross-law, this is cyber attack, will make COVID look like a minor inconvenience. I don't know Russian access to the chairman. Of course, you are each the bugs and you will love it. But these are real quotes. We don't need too many people in the future to polish the robots. These are real quotes. You all know our R.I. All the futures not human. You're just obsolete. We're going to be the gods. I don't believe in God now, he said. But I'll be the god of the clouds. We encourage the Google. He says, I don't believe in God yet. I'm going to become a god. But to do that, all you folks just want to be good decent people and live a good life and experience God's great creation. I love God. You need to be gotten out of the way for the rise of their new, Uber mentioned Superman. So we're right back to all of that. And that's why the official plan of depopulation by the UN down to 500 million. That's an 80 plus percent reduction. That's official. That was when the Georgia God stones in Georgia till somebody blew it up. But nobody got hurt by God. So the agenda is your garbage. You're just a consumer. You're like weevils in the pantry eating their flower or something. And you just have to be gotten rid of it because you don't fit into their beautiful magic, wonderful plan. I was watching the table of screw. You'll have meetings all the time. But there were a government summit about a year ago. When Elon came on via video link and he said, listen, people don't want your world government. It centralizes things. It's tyranny. People are rejecting you. We need diversity of countries, the sovereignty and peoples like firewalls in a building or bulkheads in a ship. But in some of the other meetings, they had these bubbles and they're going, we're just doing something so beautiful that we're bringing them out. I don't know why they're opposing us and don't trust us. Well, because you just want to depopulate it's because your selfish, demonic pigs who love the raw power of destroying people because America for all its faults was the best house in a bad neighborhood and the whole world. The whole world for 100 to 200 plus years, but really last 100, a spired to come here, a spired to have our freedom. And the globalists can't have this country exist and have their horrible global technocracy slave plantation AI system in charge. If there's a place that's still free and open compared to everywhere else. So we've got to be brought down and used to bring tyranny to the world while we're being destroyed and while we're paying for it. So the whole world turns against us and we collapse. And so the idea of America is discredited so that other people around the world don't ever try to go the path of our republic, which is diametrically opposed to their globalist, satanic, death cult. And that's why they're attacking America. It's the idea and the spirit that is incompatible with their global slave state. The most interesting and newsworthy television show of the year is coming here to TCN. We are not bragging. That's actually true. So our long time producer Justin Wells and a team have been embedded with no publicity at all, with Donald Trump on the campaign trail for months. They're the only crew capturing what is going on on the campaign in real time, intimately. They're with Trump as he campaigns for the presidency across the country and they've shot some amazing footage. It shows you what it's really like in there. So if you're a member, you will soon be able to get this docuseries covering the historic campaign, the fall of Joe Biden, never before seen footage from the assassination attempt at the Butler Township, Pennsylvania Trump rally, and a lot more. It's gonna pull back the curtain completely. They are embedded inside the campaign. I can't wait to see it personally. But to get it first, but a Tucker Carlson dot com become a member. The greatest television event of the year, we're proud to offer it. I would make fun of you except every word is true. The thing that I can't get past is to put the destruction of other human beings as a goal, that's not a human desire. Like animals don't commit genocide actually. That's not natural at all. Like there may be people in your way and you're a bad person, you kill them. But the idea of desiring to kill huge numbers of people, that can only be supernatural. It feels like. And that's what the Bible tells us. There's an outside force putting powerful people of positions to carry this out, to keep humanity from reaching its potential destiny. And God gave us free will. And so there's the tester there. And so that is the mission and the existence of Satan, whether you believe that's a real thing, which as I know it is, or in art type, regardless of it's there. And if you read the Robert Barons 120 years ago and the social Darwinism that came out of it, they wrote books and said, when we do evil bad things and kill people in mass, we are the apex predator. We're doing them a favor to make them stronger. So it's really just huge in it. But at the end of the day, you study the globalists. They're not just trying to kill the weak and the infirm and the low IQ, which is you're not supposed to do as a human, made the image of God supposed to build up the weak. Christ said, separate the little children and what you do to the least to me, you've done to me better for you to have a millstone child right on that piece of one of the ocean. But the globalists put fluoride in the water for everybody. They hate the smartest and the best and the freest because it competes with them. And so they're trying to stop their competition. Those people that love God have free will because we're much stronger and more powerful than them. But we don't seek power. And every moment they're thinking if we wake up and take back control of our destiny, it's over for them. So that's why they hit us with a 5G and the GMO and the older garbage and the glyphosate in their own documents is the stonos and poison us so that they can dominate us, not because they're strong, but because they're weak. That's totally right. That's totally, well, that's why they've set up the fake economy in the United States. This town was built on manufacturing, men making things with their hands. And that's been replaced by lending money and interest and selling the same piece of ground over and over and over real estate. And they hate strength. They hate strong men, above all, obviously. I was talking to somebody the other day who's not conservative who said to me off camera, you know, the chemicals in our water, for example, are changing the sex of frogs. And I didn't want to be mean. I don't want to be mean. But I didn't say, are you telling me that they're turning the frogs, gay? And this person didn't get the reference at all and goes, yeah, that's basically right. Everything you've said about the chemical poisoning of the human body is now just kind of accepted. Like, is it weird to see science catch up to you? Well, I mean, look, what happened, and I knew what they were doing. This was like 15 years ago. I did like an hour long analysis from South African University in Japan, a university of, I think, rice in Houston in the university of Berkeley, in California, that just a little bit of a magazine would bend the gender of almost all the frogs, sterilized a lot of them, and turned a large portion of them where they would try to have sex with males and confuse them so much in their development as embryos floating around in the creek or pond. And so I did all that science. Then I said, listen, this isn't about hating gay people or something. This is about chemicals in the water that turn the friggin frogs gay. Well, to say, and then their populations collapse and they die. Then the frogs are a microcosm of us. Well, then, every within two weeks, every late night comedy show, every one of them came out into the monologue and attacked me. And then it turned out later that they were being directed by major foundations and the CIA. They were later bragged, oh yeah, Chuck E. Schumer, we worked with a body with him in a foundation. They actually came with them with a script that said, attack Alex Jones, they went, ignore the hour of serious stuff he talked about, make it a joke. So their joke about frogs made it blow up even bigger in their face. But yet to understand, they know people don't believe the news anymore at least for 20 years. So it's the nightly comedy shows that are totally written by the globalists and they give the comedy writers what they want them to do. And so whenever you see them, like, oh look, the shots are good. We're all getting them taped in there. It all works wonderful. Ah, ah, you know, rest on a Trump. That's literally the CIA, the Carnegie Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation assaulting you. You're an omen, you're gonna be here trying to watch some comedy. And so that's, I mean, I didn't, people think I predicted God, he was right. The frogs are all turning gay. And then they're dying, you know, no, it's been known forever. And that's Bertrand Russell. He wrote back in the 60s, he said, we ought to have a world government that just drops hydrogen bombs on most of the populations. Because the two big of population will have wars. We have to have a controlled nuclear war and that'll fix it and, you know, create all this. And he also went on it right in a bunch of books. You can go post quotes up. And so, I mean, listen, they used to have, all these top globalists were very honest about the 70s. They used to have like Paul, early, you can post up on Twitter or anywhere or X. Paul, it goes on a TV show in 79, one of the big Hollywood shows he goes, listen, we're working with the foundations and we're gonna have every father figure be lazy and stupid and dumb. And that'll break up the family. And then the kids that do live will control about a state, when everybody else will abort the kids, because there's too many people who will all be dead by 1987 at current rates. And I'll visit none of those true. Like Al Gore's saying about 2017, all the ice caps that melt, they're bigger than ever. It's all lies, they know it is. But back then they were very honest about, he was all over, you know, 60 minutes, you name it. Oh yeah, we're gonna destroy the family because the family creates people and too many people's bad. They're public. So, almost everything I say is from these dirtbag scumbags. I mean, you go watch, you go read the world economic forum. They say, no humans by 2045, only cyborgs. The future's not human. Listen, I remember reading in scientific publications. When I was first getting on there 30 years ago, because almost no shows like mine then saw us on bunch of radio stations. You've got a local station figured out a syndicate, call a syndicator, you know, said, hey, can I get on? They put none of the bunch of stations. And boom, I'm reading, and the people are sending me stuff. So I have like MIT quarterly coming to me saying, we've made the first humanized mice that are part mice, a part mice, part human. We've made the first goats that are part spider, the great body armor, but we don't show the public these facilities, so it was freak them out too much. That's 30 years ago. Now you hear about the humanized mice that are part human or salmon that are part grasshopper, the growth twice as fast, kill all the real normal salmon, and just folks, turn us about aliens and absolutely stuff going on. The globalists are making aliens by mixing humans and other animals and insects and plants, and then they test data and use cow uteruses to grow them. This is going on everywhere. So it's like a breakaway whole civilization that separate from us, the globalists have in life extension technologies, it's a cure to cancer and Parkinson's, but instead of getting us all the cures, they're keeping that for themselves, and they're just getting ready to wipe all of us out so we don't even have access to that, whether you think of it as moral or not, but they even have people in believe me, when I talk about it, when I was reading the documents, because we weren't on TV then, I'm reading this on error, people thinking that they weren't all getting MIT quarterly. Then MIT about seven years ago, looked this up, humanoid hybrid chimeras are gestating at facilities across the United States, and it goes on to say part pig, part human, part cow, part human, so that they won't be rejected by the cows that are growing them, and then harvest the organs, they harvest the stem cells, and they've got facilities now with thousands of cows per facility with humanoids growing in them, and this is in the literature, and they don't like me, because I go, here's the literature, but they won't let you on the basis. And let me tell you, what the spider goats, 25 years ago, I call up one of the places in New York where they've got spider goats that are part spider, okay, and they're milk makes body armor, and I get the head guy, a private contractor of a Pentagon, he's happy, like, he comes on two days later, he calls back, he goes, the Pentagon's really mad, I look, they didn't even tell him it was classified, they're gonna kill me, if you don't take that, take down that interview, okay, so you're hearing all this, look how spider goats, 30 year old stuff, okay, all of this, so as good as I tell you stuff is, it's also bad because there's a breakaway civilization that's really in like the year 2045, according to their estimates, they've already got way more advanced AI, everything else, but they can't get full control of the human population yet, because in an hour, if we wanted to tear up all the equipment and the AI systems that shut it down, we could, it's not that it's bad enough itself, it's how it's being deployed against us, that's why they've got to get rid of the farms and the ranches and the gardens, and people knowing how to build things and do things, they've got to make us obsolete first, and then they're gonna release the real bio weapons that kill the majority of people, that's why COVID was just to drill the admit it was, to get us locked down, so they release the real bio weapon, you just stay at home and die like you're supposed to, but we're not gonna do it, and if they release the big bio weapon, we know who to go after, Bill Gates, we'll get you in your bunker and sucker burn, we'll bring you to justice legally and lawfully to the court system, what you have to do is freak me out, I gotta say, I'm not gonna say, I'm not gonna say, well hey, I'm hoping people always come to the craziest time I said before that they are, I'm dead, everything I just told you is not even hidden, you're gonna be like what human clones for 30 years, spice with animals, and they're spicy humans with fish, with lizards, everything else, it's all public. Well so that's why it freaks me out because I know you're telling the truth. But I'm still stuck on the spider, we've been drinking spider milk, no, they've got goats that are only like, you know Al Gore used to talk about that, he would say we have the orb fighters, yeah, they've got look up spider goats, they've got goats, they classify for 30 years, in Tennessee, New York all over, for classified body armor. It's real, it's real. That the milk creates the spider web, filaments, and then it's like little expider man, and then you can have like a quarter inch body armor of it, and high caliber rounds just bounce off. So you gotta wonder why people, I mean, people are doing this, but the truth is, American taxpayers are paying for it, just like they paid for the development of the co-advirus, actually, in the Wuhan lab, and AI, and all of this stuff is being paid for by us, and there doesn't seem to be any effort at all, we're sort of sitting there watching the truck approach at a high speed about to get flattened. Why are our lawmakers saying, I'm sorry, we're not, we're defunding NIH, we're not doing this, or we're defunding DARPA, or whatever, why doesn't anyone try to stop it? Well you know, you know, there's better than you see, you're up DC, you've been around it. They get some little corrupt local politician, they promote them to mayor, they promote them to state wrath, they promote them to Congress, they promote them to the Senate, they promote them to the presidency, and all they want is a few gold bars and hookers and a private jet. They don't even, they're just reworked, they're told to, I'll tell a propter, their total publisher's no real statesman, so the statesman like Massey and Paul and others, you know, they try to shut down, they try to shoot, they try to kill, because you get a good old American like Trump, who loves the human system, loves his kids, loves his family, loves his grandkids, loves his golf courses, and he's like, we're gonna get rid of this, I don't wanna kill all the people I like them. And so it's gonna be the pro-human, pro-human future team humanity that I talk about Leon Musk, he creates a sweet-call-it-team humanity. He said yes on air, it's team humanity versus team dehumanization, towards team death, it's team humanity versus team annihilation, team mad scientists, out of the top of the food chain of the New World Order are these old, degenerate, inbred, crazy families with King Charles right at the head of it, total eugenicist dad, or to come back as a virus to kill any percent of the world population. Prince Philip, you've got those horrible, disgusting people and all the big banks below them, and then the mad scientists that are there offering life extension and all this to these elites are the real people controlling it, they're the technocrats that are bringing this system in, and we're like an old school, our old church, they just like demolish it, wipe it out. These people, they want too much, they want their freedom, just kill them. Because they believe they have to have a world government to stop nuclear war, but then they pull it straight to nuclear weapons themselves. Oh, they've got to have a world government to stop a biotech, and then they release the biotech. And so their excuse is, well this technology is too dangerous, we've got to have a smaller, more manageable world population, so we don't all kill each other, but then they're the ones that actually like to kill people. They're the ones that are actually the bad people, they're the ones that have to be removed from power and have the keys of control of society taken away from them, but first it's kind of like Thanksgiving, where the parents are over at the big table, and the kids are over here picking their nose to the little table. They see us as like little kids, we got to go over to the adult table and read what they're writing and saying, because they're so arrogant, I've read hundreds of books and thousands of white papers where they openly say, you know, we're in humans or a failed species, we're going to get rid of them. The future's not human, you've all know who we're in others, and they're literally talking about exterminating us, and if we don't stand up to them, then at a way we actually deserve it, but our children don't deserve it, so you need to research how evil your enemy is, because you defeat your enemy, you got to know your enemy is, and your enemy is the global us, transhumanist new world order. So I wonder, I agree with that. So what you are saying, I mean, you've just risen right above American politics, even global politics, and you're addressing the deep forces, the control things. I wonder, Jackson, you do cover American politics, are there any politicians who are seeing what's going on right now in terms that big? There is one guy, but I wouldn't call him a politician. His name's Donald Trump. Absolutely. So I will say though, no, I don't know that there's anyone who looks at that level because there's, most politicians, they have their timelines of, when do I get reelected? I got to raise more money, I'm going to go get reelected again, constantly come to this fund. Hey, I'm sure you can invite it all the time. Hey, he's talking to my fundraiser. Hey, come and help me raise some money, I got to raise money, I'm running, and they're not thinking about what's happening, and then I see Donald Trump get up there with his children, with his grandchildren, and he brings up to his rallies. After he's taken shots at his rallies, still brings his grandchildren up there and say, you want me? I'm right here, come take it, come after me. I'm not moving, and that's why, like, and folks, it's got to be us. It's got to be the people in this room, 10X in your boat, 10X in your ball, it's getting active, and look at me, look what I did. I'm just a kid from the R-sound, but I said, fine, if I'm going to go back home, I'm going to bring Tucker Carlson and Alex Jones with me. I think, well thank you, by the way. I like the way that Alex described Trump, because I think it's true. Trump's, the key to Trump is not just the ideas, he's not an ideologue really. Trump likes people on an animal level, he just likes people, you see it when he's in McDonald's, you see it at every rally, he just has a gut level affection for people. That is so different from when I watch Nancy Pelosi or that weird creepy little guy, is the Republican speaker right now. Like, they really, they seem like, when they talk, people are the problem. But Trump feels like, why just like people, I kind of like, you know, put my arm around and I'm like the way they smell, like they're, I like people. Trump comes from a hospitality family. Yes. And so his dad would tell you, a six years old would leave him in the summer, all day at a building site. And I'm gonna tell a story. I've harped on this a lot because it's a microcosm. It's like a skeleton key or a zettist down if you understand this. Like look at their keyhole, you see the large universe. On Mother's Day this year, the evil New York Senator, Chuck E. Schumer, put out a post on Acts, a post on Twitter. And you could pull it up and he said, I'm basically quoting it exactly as I quoted it so much. He says, I wanna wish everybody a great Mother's Day, my daughter and her wife had me over to their house to grill, he called it barbecue, but he said, this is wonderful for multiple generations. We've always been in high rises and have never had a backyard or cooked meat. And I was like, oh, that's human, that's nice. Maybe you'll become a human. And then I, cause, and then I look at the grill and it was fresh patties with a piece of cheese on it, and he's trying to serve a raw hamburger. Okay, so the point is, so many of these ultra-rich people in the leadest and other poor kids that grew up in the city who are impoverished as well, they literally grow up in a tiny little room with a television and crime all around them and all this crap going on and sirens and they know, they've never been out the woods, they've never been fishing, they've never been out to the desert, they've never traveled the world, they've never worked, you ever had a real job, they've never anything. And if you look at the politicians and Democrats particularly, they are not connected to reality. So to them, everything human is scared, scary, they want sanitized, shrunken. I mean, if you look at Democrat party politicians, they look like a demonic spider sucked their life for us out. So these are, wait, wait, wait, wait, I'm sorry, I want you to stop. When you look at a Democratic politician, they look like a demonic spider sucked their life for us out. I just want to acknowledge that as a great description. And you've been around with a person so alive. I mean, the five is 20 feet from Hillary, you repel stuff there like, I can't make face, I mean, horrifying and they're slithering around and I mean, it's like, and then God bless her soul. Sheila Jackson Lear, whatever just died. Before she did, she gets up and she goes, I saw her at a clip, you'd almost burned up the moon. We know the sun's the same size of the moon and the moon is hollow and glows. A lot of them aren't even evil, but they're dumber than hell. And the globalists, the globalists are counting on that. But look, knowledge is infectious, how the world works is infectious, they don't want people to get excited about knowledge. And once you do, it's addicting. And people ask me all the time, what do we tell young people to do? The opposite one, Hollywood tells you. Anything Democrats tell you, anything politicians say that are left is anything Hollywood says, anything black rock funts, it's simple. It's like somebody handing you cyanide or fentanyl. Don't take it, don't get near it. And just love your family, be strong. Don't feel bad cause you don't have a bunch of money. Don't feel bad cause you're trucking new. Don't feel bad. No, you've got a soul and you love God, you love your country, you love your family. And you are a trillion times richer that people like Zuckerberg and the rest of them. So be confident, be confident, and know you were born to be in this time. And you've been under covert globalist attack, but you're not a victim, you're not a loser. You are the sleeping giant that now is awoken. And our enemies are afraid, and they should be afraid. Mr. Jack. But you know, it's interesting. The real quick is that, you know, people say, you know, Alex, oh, that's crazy. I could never be real. We could never live in a country like that. You know, that would never happen. And then all of a sudden, Oprah Winfrey is doing these infomercials with Kamala Harris. Hold on, hold on. Right after the FBI seized all of the P-Diddy tapes that Oprah is on from the parties that he was holding. And so I used to think that, you know, we got to protect Trump, we got to keep him safe, we got to keep him safe. Now I realize there's somebody else we got to keep safe. We've got to keep Diddy safe, because that's the next guy. I'm going to ask you, they're going to go for this guy, could tell if you want to know how your government actually works, that's the guy we got to talk to Tucker. I don't know, maybe you have an in. Could you get Diddy on the tour, maybe? No, I'm serious. I'm serious. This is how they run the government, though. This is how the government of the rep's did. This is how there's an Epstein operation, and he's the black Epstein. Okay, he's just the black Epstein. He just did. I mean, it's not the idea. When you're on Epstein, if you behind Diddy, I think the question is that people would say, people would say, how is it that so many of our world leaders have gone to an island such as that? Right? They say, how could this have happened? How could it be such an open secret? And then when it happens, people come out and build gates again, by the way. And suddenly people say, oh, we all knew, we all knew there was stuff about Jeff. What do you mean you all knew about this? What do you mean you knew about this kind of stuff? And you realize we're looking at it backwards. In order to become a world leader, you have to go to the islands. In order to become a celebrity, you have to go to the Diddy party. This is the way their system works. It's a right of initiation. Absolutely, and that's what I've explained. There's like different mafia's, you have to kill somebody, so they have dirt on you. They know they're going to be videotaped doing illegal things, so they can get in the gang. It is the initiation structure. Yeah, there was a guy who actually infiltrated a certain initiation place called the Bohemian Grove. Maybe, well, the point is, the old fashioned time with the Republicans, that was the way to compromise them. Like, well, hey, you want to join this particular Republican club? You know, you got to do this. And Ronald Reagan and Nixon refused, that's well known. But that's how you get Republicans, hey, we'll tell you the decisions, you want to hear something. But for the Democrats, and some Republicans like Haster, it's like, hey, do you know that girl did a party? She was 16. Next, go in there with that 12-year-old girl, or you're not in the club. And the next is like, you know, that eight-year-old, going there, strangle her, we're going to kill you. And they're not just rape and kids. And I've seen Alan's stuff, and I talked about it 15 years ago, it's first talk about it. They're killing kids, ladies and gentlemen. So they're only talking about 15-year-old girls. They kill them. So can I just ask you to assess my last question to you, Alex Jones? I'm not really sure how Kamala Harris became the Democratic nominee in like one day from being someone everybody made fun of to being the most heroic figure in human history. I'm still kind of bewildered by it. But I would be interested in your take on Kamala Harris. Who is Kamala Harris and how did she get here? That's a great question. Well, Kamala Harris got the same amount of votes in the primaries as Ronald McDonald, which is zero. Kamala Harris is a soulless, truly empty flashback, who was admittedly a sex operative, just like Oprah Wempery meant that she was an underage sex slave. And then look at this all true. You can find Oprah giving the girls two Weinstein. Yeah, but see the pictures. And Oprah's admitted, and she's a victim. I've had a lot of victims have it become the victimizers. She said that she was an underage prostitute. I think it was since Chicago. But to dance the questions, clear that Kamala Harris was the political sex operative. Willie Brown talks about it all of it. And then she was so soulless and would put innocent people in prison. No, they were innocent on death row. Home invasions looking for legal guns saying she'd do it. Then when she was the attorney general, she would put pro-lifers that exposed the illegal killing of babies right at nine months when they were already born in the selling of their organs, including still beating baby hearts. She would put the journalists in jail for many years. That's her famous cases. So the system has, as she and her has passed her around, they know she's super stupid. And they can bring her in like Biden, and then blame everything that bad happens on her. And so she is the greatest example of a mindless puppet that they want to put in to further demoralize us to think that that's America to make America a further joke around the world. So that's who Kamala Harris says, a clear and present danger and a meat puppet. Is Pennsylvania gonna vote for Kamala Harris? Alex? Is Pennsylvania gonna vote for Kamala Harris? Look, can we have a free and fair election? It'd be like Reagan in 86. We eat Trump again 49 states. Alex is Pennsylvania going to vote for couple hairs? Look, we had a free and fair election. It'd be like Reagan in 86. He'd probably get 49 states. But because of the mass fraud in states for Democrats, once Democrats get control of your voting system, since the 90s, it's very hard to turn it back. And a Pennsylvania has tried to tighten up some things and taxes has taken millions of dead people and legal soft-the-voting roles. And so is Nevada's $800,000 off. So look, the evidence is just a long story, but Trump wanted to land slide in 2016. Barely won. People thought he was invincible and oh, he's going to win no problem in 2000. So he barely won, so they were able to steal it. He's going to have a bigger land slide in 42 days than he did in 2016. That's why they've tried to kill him twice now. And probably more times were being told we don't know about. So if he was losing the assassination attempts would be unnecessary. Absolutely. That's why the assassination attempts are happening. That's why there's five kill teams. So what? And I'll let you take us out on this, on a note of hope, which I, what you said, you gave advice for what children should be doing. What should the people in this room be doing? What should be their attitude? Not just for the next 42 days, but for the next year. And what can people do? OK, well, I never claimed to be some saint or tell me why I don't live their lives. I'm definitely not perfect. But I'll tell you what I've been doing since I was at least 18 years old. And I became a Christian before that. But it was, it was like I'm a Christian, but I really wasn't truly born again. You got to get on your knees in the morning, or in the middle of the night, or whatever you wake up. You got to get on your knees. You got to, until God, I can't do this. I need you. I need you to come into me and take control and leave God under rect me and tell me what to do. And you've got to, and you've got to change your values to where you don't care what the world says. Or what the system says. You care to do what the constants that God gave you, that guardian angel that you knows right there, looking over your shoulder, tells you to do. And you've got to not be a coward, and you've got to be strong. And the minute you step across that point, you don't even have courage anymore. You're on a mission, and you're not possessed by the Holy Spirit, but you let it in. And it's now driving and in control. And now you got God behind you. And nobody can stand against us if God's with us. Well, that is a hope for note, and I think that's true. And with that, Alex Jones, Jack Subbek, I'm proud to be friends with both of you. Thank you, Tucker. Got a little tear for you guys. A little gift. One for Tucker. Ton for Ellen. Ton for Tucker. Tucker, Tucker, Tucker. I love Tucker. I love Jack. Thank you. Thank you, Professor. The Big Tech Company's sensor are content. I hate to tell you that it's still going on in 2024. But you know what? They can't censor live events. And that's why we are hitting the road on a fall tour for the entire month of September, coast to coast. We will be in cities across the United States. We'll be in Ort, Texas with Roseanne Barr. Greenville, South Carolina with Marjorie Taylor, Green Sunrise, Florida with John Rich, Jacksonville, Florida with Donald Trump, Jr. You can get tickets at Tucker Carlson dot com. Hope to see you there.