[Music] So, hi Danny. Nice to meet you. Hi Rick. Pleasure to meet you too as well. Before we started rolling, we were talking about the effects of DMT. I told you I was super afraid to try it again by myself. And and people I've spoken with that know more about this than I do, which isn't saying much. has said that there's not really any um there's not any documented cases of people having any like real adverse effects of using DMT or overusing DMT. Yeah. Um that's not been my experience. every uh once or twice a year I get a note from a family member or a friend of somebody who has smoked way too much DMT uh and uh they develop a certain kind of mental state. It's um kind of messianic that they feel they have the answer um and uh if people don't agree with their answer they get mad. Yeah. So they're convinced that it's kind of messianic in nature. Have you ever heard of anybody smoking DMT and sort of like not coming back fully, getting like stuck in like this weird uh slippery version of reality like for forever? Cuz I've I have friends that in high school that took a lot of LSD or smoked a lot of weed and after a certain point they were just never the same. Yeah, that's hard to say. I mean, you know, personalities get modified, I think, under the influ or can be modified under the influence of a psychedelic, you know, but um it's more I think that they made those changes more real in their lives. Um and that might be what people are referring to is that they've changed. They maybe took more action on some of the ideas they had than otherwise would have been the case. Yeah. I I think that's how psychedelics work actually is they just increase they increase the strength and power of things which already exist in the mind. Uh if you want to be a happier person, you might become happier after taking a psychedelic because it's convinced you. Yeah. That it's good to be happy. So, um, you were the first person in the United States to do human research on psychedelics. You are probably like one of the most legendary people in the psychedelic world. And one of the things that really blew my mind uh was that you were explaining on I think it was Hamilton's podcast. I could be wrong. I think it was Hamilton's podcast. You were explaining how you had the idea to get this funded when you were hanging out with Terrence McKenna and you guys decided that it would be the best way to get it funded through the war on drugs. Right. Right. That's crazy. Yeah. It was 1988. Uh and I was kind of at a crossroads of where my career was going. M the melatonin and pineal work hadn't quite panned out the way I wanted it to. Uh but I was still interested in the pineal gland and in psychedelics mostly. Yeah. Um and I met Terrence a year or two before. Uh he's the first person to give me DMT actually. Oh really? Yeah. 1986 or something. Oh wow. And then a couple years later I was I was driving down from Canada. Stopped at their place and we spent the day up in his uh loft library. Wow. Yeah. And um you know we just the uh the war on uh you know the war on drugs was in full steam ahead. Uh there was a lot of money being poured into it. What a clever idea. And we we we came up with the idea of the ultimate study. Give DMT to people and see what it does. You can't really you can't really argue with that. And uh I described it as a abusable drug. It's a the prototypical classic psychedelic. Um, and people were still using psychedelics and we didn't know how they worked or really what they did in the face of like 20 years of intervening animal research. So, there were pretty straightforward uh kinds of arguments uh that could have been used against studying the drug or for studying the drug. And uh I framed it as let's find out more and uh no value judgment uh placed on the work. No therapy or religious u you know motivations. What what do you think DMT in a healthy dose does to the human brain? Not necessarily I'm I know it's speculative when you're talking about what it's doing to the brain when you're taking it when it's active, right? But like kind of like when it when it subsides like what do you think the after effect is? Well, I think it works on the imagination. uh so if you can you know uh you know divide the mind into an intellectual part and an imaginative part it's based on uh some of the ideas of Aristotle that uh the imaginative part of the mind holds on to um you know perceptions emotions uh the you feelings of certainty uh and the intellectual part is ideas abstract notions so I think that you know DMT ultimately uh stimulates the imagination uh as compared to stimulating the intellect. It makes things you know it it appears but what the appearance actually means uh is more dependent on the intellect. Yeah. One of the things Dave Nichols was explaining to me was that there was a technical word he used to describe how it actually increases neural density. And uh there's this term the scientific term for these neural branches like the branches on trees right that they grow and they become more connected and more full in the brain. Yeah. He was probably talking about neurogenesis and neuroplasticity. Yes. I think that's what it was. Yeah. Stem cells converting to neurons is neurogenesis. You're making new neurons, right? And uh neuroplasticity is increasing the number and complexity of connections among neurons. Yeah. Because every person I've ever talked to that does DMT, they're all super smart. Yeah. I don't know what that is. Yeah. There are a lot of ways to try and figure out what DMT is and what it's doing. And also, I think interesting to consider is why, you know, why is there DMT in our brains? Well, it's not just in the brain, right? It's all throughout the body. Isn't that true? Well, mostly it's been found most recently and most objectively in the brain. Most Okay. So it's mostly in the brain in the pineal gland or all throughout the brain uh in the in you know the cortexes uh visual cortex uh you know parietal cortex that there's a number of uh you know cortices uh on the brain uh and each is responsible for certain you bio psychological functions almost so do you think that is the idea that DMT existing in the brain is sort of what's respons responsible for giving us our perception of the world for the which it animates the world around us gives us this this depth and color and um there's this there's this other idea called the um which I think it was Andrew Gallamore who explained this to me the uh the filter idea of the brain being a filter where it filters out all this other stuff that could exist in reality to what so we can perceive only what we need to survive. Yeah. I I think you know It's really hard to say now what the role of naturally occurring DMT in the brain is. But uh you can consider it a like a way it maintains consensus reality. Uh you know too much makes things get really like psychedelic. Um and not enough might make things seem flat and boring. Yeah. I want I always wondered like is the is the DMT in there is that breaking down some sort of filter in the brain which is enabling us to see more or like temporarily making us see like like overloading the brain with information and that's maybe explains this stuff that we're seeing or these things that we're experiencing or communicating with and you know once it fades fades away maybe those filters are coming back into into place. Yeah. Yeah. Um well you know there's a part of the brain called the reticular activating system uh which people have considered for a long time to be that filtering mechanism. Reticular activating system. Yeah. It's in the re it's in the extremely primitive parts of the brain. Mhm. Um and uh many people have have you know thought about you know psychedelics or the function of that part of the brain right uh as acting as a filter. Interesting. And psychedelics affect that part of the brain pretty robustly. Now is this where the third ventricle is? Um that's probably let's see uh the water of life is in the third ventricle. Well that's what I've heard. Yeah. Well it's the cerebral spinal fluid. Right. Right. Yeah. Very interesting. Uh the pineal gland is right in the middle there. Uh okay. Yeah. It's right it's right dead in the center. Yeah. Yeah. The reticular activating system is up on the brain stem. Uh yeah. you know, so you know, there are receptors in that part of the brain that um psychedelics bind to h and uh you change the activity of the neurons there. Yes. So that could be you know the filter. Yeah. What do you make of these um these new experiments that are going on with the what Andrew Gallammore is doing? They're trying to put people on extended state intervenous DMT to see to try to map this DMT world. Yeah. Yeah. It's the Sounds wild. Yeah. Yeah. What's it uh a continuous infusion with DMT? Yeah. Um I speak about that toward the end of the DMT book, The Spirit Molecule, that maybe we could keep people in that state for longer. Uh an hour or two, you know, an extended period of time. You know, the problem with with smoking or giving one injection of DMT is it's over quite quickly and a continuous infusion would allow you to be in that space longer. Mhm. Yeah. You know, so there's a couple of um you know Oh, and then a few years later, Andrew approached me and you suggested that we write this paper uh which describes, you know, the basis anyway for a a study like that, right? Yeah. and Imperial College in London is doing work and there's a group in Switzerland. How I I can't imagine how that would look, right? You have somebody on an IV DMT all day long. Well, yeah, you're laying there hooked up to a crucifix. Well, you're laying in bed, but still. Okay. Right. Still, yeah, you got your arms out and flayed open and and like what do you do do you have to pull them out to get the data? Like pull them out like like briefly and say, "Tell me everything." Uh, I think they keep people in the state while they're talking to them and and getting the data. Um, man, no, it's reported in retrospect, you know, like you give DMT for a half hour at a pre-arranged infusion rate, right? Yeah. And the person comes down and you ask them to describe what it was like and then you throw them right back in. Well, you could go in and out like that. Um, I don't think anybody is doing that kind of work. I I think that kind of work would be helpful for psychotherapy. Uh you put people Well, I think it would be useful. You can be in a state for a while, DMT state or um very, you know, highly altered state for let's say a half hour. You come down and you talk with your therapist and you decide what to do next. You know, go deeper, uh go back lighter, you know, take some more time off. Yeah. you know, so I think that holds promise uh for therapeutic purposes too. Yeah. But I think, you know, characterizing that landscape uh is also important, you know, like the beings like you how do you interact with the beings once you've gotten used to their presence and right and what and what even are the beings like like cuz you said that this all all this stuff is is amplification of what's already in your mind. So how do you explain people seeing aliens that are talking to them? People like Andrew Huberman, Dr. Rhonda Patrick, and even Joe Rogan have talked about a compound called epicadakin that's found in dark chocolate and green tea. It's shown to improve blood flow, delivering more oxygen to the muscles, and brain. Studies have shown that it reduces stress and fatigue while improving mood, and enhancing muscle growth, strength, and recovery. One study found it boosted muscle growth factors by nearly 50% in just a week. But don't reach for chocolate bars. Processing destroys these compounds and you need an impossible amount to get results. That's why Verso created Morning Bean, a delicious morning chocolatey brew that is packed with epiaticanin, antioxidants, and electrolytes to fuel energy, performance, focus, and longevity. Unlike coffee or coffee alternatives, it supports muscle recovery, cardiovascular health, and cognitive function, all without caffeine crashes. Cocoa powders, drinks, and products are commonly contaminated with high levels of toxic heavy metals. But Verso conducts third-party testing on every batch to ensure they have pure high quality cocoa, prioritizing safety and high flavonol content. Not that long ago, I started taking Morning Bean to replace my second cup of coffee. And I feel way more energized, focused, and less stressed. In fact, in the mornings, I don't look as forward to my cup of coffee as I do to my first cup of morning being. I might just cut out the coffee altogether, to be honest. And I also love how I get my daily dose of superfoods from it. So, if you're looking to improve your health with something that's actually backed by research, click the link below or head on over to v.so/danny and use my code Danny to get 15% off your first order. Again, that's ver.so/danny and use the code dny to get 15% off your first order. It's down below. Now, back to the show. Well, I think you know the visions convey information. Um, and the brain uses what's in its um, is it like are you talking about like like epigenetic information? Well, you know, that's the question. Is it is it information that's coming from us or from an external source? Right. Right. When is it coming from us? Is it coming from our ancient past? which could also be argued that's that's kind of an extern external source because it's not really us now. Maybe us in the past. Mhm. Well, I think us from the future too. Or in the future. Yeah. Yeah. You know, kind of, you know, pulling us in a direction. Have you seen the um the uh my buddy Danny Gler was in here and he has this thing called the DMT laser experiment? Oh, yeah. Yeah. You've seen that? Yeah, I I have. That's crazy. Well, so have you looked at the red laser? I did. Yeah. And did I didn't see the code, but I I I might not have gone deep enough. So I saw I I saw kind of like we shine I had the laser here actually. We shined it on the wall and I looked at it and I could see the depth through the wall and I saw like at first it was like tiny little particles like you would see if you really stared at a laser beam on the wall and then those particles turned into gears all spinning. Yeah. All interconnected. Um, but I've talked to a few other people that have done it and and they my friend Neil came here and he did it. He said he saw like sanditrit Yeah. behind the laser or whatever. I'm going to try it again, but it's it's interesting cuz I I I I don't know of anything else. Maybe you can elaborate on this, but I I've never heard of any sort of psychedelic trip where people see like something that specific. All of them. Um well your friend mentioned it looked like Sanskrit but if he weren't familiar with what Sanskrit looked like in the first place he wouldn't have identified it that way right do you see you know so that is where I think uh you know what's already more or less just rattling around come you know comes to the four yeah that's the that's one of the questions I had too because if if if you're talking about seeing matrix code and there's like Hey, you know, take this and look at this thing. Tell me if you can find the matrix code. Maybe you're kind of like pushing them in that direction already. But there's an argument to be had that like, you know, you could tell them that a couple days before maybe they it wouldn't be at the front of their mind anymore, right? But I don't know. I don't know how that works. And how do you make that like a double blind sort of test to see if there's something there? Because you can't you can't take a picture of it. Um, you might be able to record the brain's re, you know, response at that time. M you is there some particular you know signature in brain connectivity uh that uh that is associated with seeing Sanskrit another might be seeing Hebrew another might be Japanese right yeah uh you could develop you know some profiles let's say uh and yeah you would have to uh give people DMT and you have them look at this uh at the laser to obtain some, you know, kind of, you know, firm association between brain activity and what they're seeing. Yeah. I think he recently took um he tried to step it up a notch and he took magnets and he put it behind a wall so people couldn't see where the magnet was and then like moved the magnet around and see if people could see if there was some sort of distortion in the code. Yeah. And and I think there was he said that there was nothing nothing significant that they could measure from that. Yeah. I wonder what percentage of people who do the experiment actually see code, right? Um, does Danny have an idea? Um, you know, I don't think he actually told me the percentage, but he said basically upwards of a few hundred people have written him or messaged him or have called him and told them that they and he sent them all this, you know, the laser or whatever and they said they saw the same exact thing that he saw. Yeah. But that's the same thing that you know you know Gallamore was questioning that like questioning um you know how credible that could be. Um especially if you're telling people what to expect beforehand but then you know he talked to Gallamore afterwards and I think Gallammore is going to try to help him with it. Yeah. In what well in terms of uh like a objectifiable right you know replicable study right. Yeah. Right. I don't know how you do that. Yeah. I don't know how you do that. Yeah. Well, I think if you image, you know, their brain function or, you know, their brain activity, uh, you might be able to discern, you know, some, you know, some similarities among people and some differences, right? You know, my guess is that it would depend on the person. Uh, there are certain, you know, kinds of of people, you know, let's say, um, you know, interested in eastern ideas, western ideas. Yeah. And it would manifest in that way. Yeah, that's interesting because that's what that was part of this famous John Hopkins study on psilocybin with the religious leaders that was for some reason never published and correct me if I'm wrong but the idea of it was to get religious leaders from different uh like Christianity, Judaism, Eastern religions and see if their religious worldview affected their experience on psychedelics. Is that what the basic gist of it was? Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Um, I've heard about that study. I don't know the details. I I thought that was the famous one that was never published. Um, I think it is going to be coming out. Oh, really? Yeah. I've got some like information regarding it. Yeah. I think it's been accepted finally. Uh, I'm not sure, but it was from a reliable person. What would you speculate would be the outcome of that? Well, you know, I think there's another motivation as well, which is to, you know, demonstrate that that there's a common spiritual experience regardless of your specific faith. I think that's one of them the motivations. Yeah. They're they're motivated to uh prove this idea called perennialism, I think it's called. Yeah. the mystical experience which is kind of this unitive ego dissolved um no time or space kind of experience which is you know part of most psychedelic experiences but um I don't think it necessarily precludes you know differences in religious experience as well which might even be more important I I think overall too it would it would make a a cleric you uh you know possibly more dedicated, you know, to uh, you know, the the clergy and the religion. Yeah, that's the interesting thing about what that's like, as Travis pointed out to me, which blew my mind, is that there I mean, there are so many different groups with different incentives that are looking into psychedelics and trying to use them to push forward their narrative. Right. Right. It's a wild moment in time. It is. Yeah. A few days ago, I was watching that clip of Alex Jones and Tucker uh Tucker Carlson discussing the demons. Uh yes, I saw that. I saw that. What was Alex? He was saying that there First of all, he said he ate some DMT or something. Can you find that clip? It'd be great to watch that so we could so we could get a a refresh. Go to YouTube, type in uh Alex Jones Tucker Carlson DMT. It's a short. Yeah, it's only 58 seconds. Yeah, it's like less than a minute. They're in a car. There it is. That's it right there. Yeah. Give us some volume on that. I haven't done DMT. That's what everybody says. Click on it. I haven't done DMT, but I know a lot of famous people that have and others. And the government since the 70s has been doing intervenous drip with it. It just didn't become popular the last 20 years by eating it. I've talked to well-known people off record who have gone to these big DMT rituals uh at sacred sites because reportedly those are like gates or places where dimensionally they've been doing sacrifices for thousands of years. So maybe the things hang around there or it's a lay line. They're not sure. But if you go there and take DMT, they're having groups of 20, 30, 40 people who are seeing the same hallucination on it at the same time. And they basically say aliens come up the steps of the pyramid or you know and and everybody's seeing at the same time they're having maybe it's not a hallucination. Well, exactly. This individual was seeing it. It's one thing, but then sometimes people in the group even get attacked by these things. I would be very afraid that those drugs open up a portal for something to enter me. What thoughts on that? Uh well, I think that they're partly right. uh you know the portal idea anyway uh you know I think that's one of the things that psychedelics and DMT does or do they are a portal to previously invisible kinds of information. Yeah. You know so if you open that you know portal there is that information conveyed by the visions uh which is angelic or demonic. Um so if you believe in angels I always say you believe in demons. So you know to the extent that one believes in angels then I think by you know necessity you need to believe in demons as well. Uh yeah it's kind of a imagery of uh good versus evil. I mean you have you ever heard of anybody getting chased by demons the way he explains it where like coming after them. Uh I guess fonts you I could imagine Iawaska you ceremonies where there's a lot of you know shamanic communication and information that you would be attacked by demons. Yeah. Or it would seem as if you were anyway. Right. Yeah. So this angels and demons worldview which is very much um you know I think Tucker Carlson and uh Alex Jones are like very devout Christians. They talk about it all the time on their on their programs. So like if they're trying to fit this DMT experience into their worldview, that would make sense. And going back to that that John Hopkins study where they're trying to prove some sort of common core to all religions. Um it's trying to basically paint the fact that like what what would the ultimate goal of that be? Would it would the goal of that be to say that psychedelics created all religions? Well, that the that certain aspects of the psychedelic experience uh which are defined by this um this rating scale called the mystical experience questionnaire. M uh that uh if you answer if all you if the uh irregardless of your denomination, if your score on the mystical experience scale was um number one high enough and number two, you know, cut across all of the categories, you know, that there was a common mystical experience that all those volunteers had, Jewish, Muslim or Christian, which uh would then lead to one being able to propose a universal religion. Oh god. Um, and that universal like if you know if it's all the same across all of the religions, there must be some universal religion that can be extracted, you know. But the problem with universal religion is, you know, whose universal religion, right? And what if you don't agree with it, right? Yeah. Then you become a heretic. Yeah. And how do you push people into a universal religion when people are already in their own unique religions that give them value to their life already? like how do you make how do you do that? Well, I don't think you can, right? And one of the even scarier ideas is that if you give the church access to psychedelic drugs or give them the license to bring psychedelic drugs into their spiritual practice. Now you're making these people who are already subscribed to this idea that there's this deacon that has direct communication with God who is giving these people the answers to their life problems. Now you're putting these these already vulnerable people on psychedelics. I can see where that can lead to problems. Well, I think yeah, you're pointing to the issue of how do you propagate a universal religion? Yeah. which I think uh yeah I think the cult of personality would start playing a very big role with the enhanced like transference that occurs on psychedelics because people when they're on psych I think you've said this before people on psychedelics are way more not not just vulnerable but they're um way more like agreeable uh yeah more suggestible suggestible that's what it was yes right um and you with repeated exposure to the same you suggestion over and over on psychedelics M yeah I I think it would get kind of you know fanatic in a way it could. Yeah. Yeah. Because even people who even people who are like you know huge psychedelic proponents who think that psychedelics are the panacea for everything in culture and society. I mean even they kind of get pretty fanatical to some extent where psychedelics become their god you know. Oh, or they become God somehow or they're God's messenger. You know, I was talking Messiah complex. Yeah. Yeah. You know, there's a lot of messianism in the idea of a universal religion like you know who would be the spokesman for example. Yeah. And then you would have a religious figure. Yeah. It would be a new religion. And a couple of years ago I wrote a you book review on Bill Richards book who was the lead therapist at John's Hopkins. And I referred to the idea of a psychedelic universal religion as the psychedelic religion of mystical consciousness. Imagine your hair 6 months from now. What does it look like? Now imagine you had him that whole time and how much better it could be. You're allowed to have thicker, fuller hair. And Hims has the power to bring your head back to its original greatness. Try Hims hair loss solutions and you'll be joining hundreds of thousands of subscribers who got their hair back again without ever leaving the couch. Here's the deal. HMS offers doctor approved clinically backed treatments like finasteride and minoxidil. The good stuff that's proven to actually regrow your hair in 3 to 6 months. Whether you're into chewables, pills, sprays, or serums, they've got the solution that fits your vibe. No awkward doctor visits and no waiting rooms. Just answer a few quick questions online and a medical provider will see if the treatment is right for you. And if it is, they'll ship it straight to your door for free. No insurance, no problem. One low price covers everything from treatments to ongoing care. And with hundreds of thousands of happy customers, HIMS is pretty much the go-to for getting back thicker, fuller hair and your confidence. Why wait? Hims has you covered, literally. Start your free online visit today at hymns.com/danny. That's hs.com/dny for your personalized hair loss treatment options. hymns.com/danny. Results vary based on studies of topical and oral minoxidil and finasteride. Prescription products require an online consultation with a healthcare provider who will determine if a prescription is appropriate. restrictions apply. See website for full details and important safety information. Make your hair great again with hymns. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. And you know, there would be some dogma and some authority and probably a hierarchy at some point. Um, you know, that would be the new religion, the institute of the new religion with a certain with a certain range of ideas. You know, the the problem with a universal religion based on the mystical experience is is that the mystical experience in and of itself is free of any content. There's no words. There aren't any ideas in that state. Um, all of those ideas are post hawk. Like you come down, if that's the right expression, post. Yeah. You come down and then you say what it was, right? Yeah. You you you try to put it into some sort of verbal context. Yeah. Yeah. But the interactive relational trip like where there are visions that you're interacting with that's full of information, specific information, uh often times verbal, you know. So if there's this thing saying to you X, Y, and Z. Yeah. It would be and you know those are words that you remember and then you write down and you know you transmit talk about. Yeah. as opposed to just a feeling which I think is the mystical experience a very intense feeling uh but there's no content you know so it's made up after the fact you know so it would be more dependent on the personality I think of the person who was in like you know the authority right right that that would have a huge effect on the person's experience yeah and the words they would use uh in order to describe it and you've also talked about it being some sort of like a super placebo and is that what you say by that you mean is that have to do with like your intention when you do it? Well, your intention which is part of the set. You know, there's set and there's everything that isn't your set. You know, the setting, you know, so the setting would be supportive and the set would be your intent and your mental and physical state at the time, your spiritual state. Um, but you would set an intent. So if it was for you know for scientific purposes or for spiritual purposes or for fun your intent will uh you know direct to a large to a large extent the experience itself you know there's also you know dealing with you know the anxiety of uh the initial experience of DMT it's very intense very it's you know quite high speed so uh you need to be able to work with anxiety as well you know It's a, you know, it's a complex, it's a, you know, to make the most of a psychedelic experience is a fairly complex task. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's a lot. It's a lot of it feel it feels like you're kind of like drinking from a fire hose of information when when it's happening and then afterwards you're like, "Oh my god, how do I digest all of this stuff?" I know. I know. That's the the problem is it's a feeling. You're you're overwhelmed, let's say, by the intensity of the stream of information. But what is that information right? Yeah. Often times it's very nebulous and usually quite related to the personality of a person having the experience. Like your friend who envisioned Sanskrit, he wouldn't have, you know, called it Sanskrit without some prior knowledge of s of of Yes. Uh at least, you know, seeing the That's interesting. Yeah. He even showed me um a bunch of photos afterwards of the um Lord of the Rings. the ring, the like a the kind of like engraving that's on that ring. He's like, "It looks just like this." And no one else I've ever heard has said it looked like Sanskrit. They all said it looks I think Gallamore said that that stuff looked like u some Japanese text um Oh, really? I forget what it was called, but he thought it was like some some like some obscure Japanese um type of like subtext that is used in that culture. But um you did the experiment, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so what happened to you? Yeah. So I did it and uh it was my first time doing DMT. First time. Really? Yeah. It was my first time. So So I kind of like I did it. I I did like the the four or five hits of the pin and then I was kind of like on the couch and I kind of closed my eyes for a little bit. That was the most intense part of it. After the super intense part of it was over, I was like, "Okay, I think I feel I'm back in my body now. I can go check out this laser." I really wanted to. Still very stoned though, right? Yes. Still very stoned. Not not anywhere near the peak of the experience though. Well, you can't move on the peak. You're a completely different place. Yes, exactly. That's the weird thing about it is it feels like a completely different place. It couldn't be any more similar to It was crazy. I I was explaining it felt like it literally like I've I've talked about this at Nauseium, but it it was my the way I am such a lightweight when it comes to drugs. cuz I was terrified even when it when it comes to like smoking pot. I I can easily go over the edge. So I was super terrified that this was going to like send be that times a million. I don't know anything about this stuff. What do I know? But it was like nothing like that. It was just my soul being ejected out of the top of my head and like leaving leaving behind every attachment I have to my mortal being like my wife, my kids, the p this podcast, like everything I've ever known. just being completely detached and just my soul being shuttled through like light arteries and and then you know I opened my eyes and depth was crazier like my depth perception was like on steroids and I could see like pockets of space floating around. Anyways, after that ended I was like I want to check out this laser. So he had it shined on the wall. I walked over to it and I stared at it for a little bit and like I said, I could see these little speckles of light and gears. These once I focused on these little specks of light, I could see gears connected and rotating together back behind the wall. So like it was like a rip in the wall. The light was creating a tear in the wall and I could see this pocket of space back there where these gears were moving around. Yeah. And what were those gears doing? Just spinning. Just spinning. As far as I can remember, they were just spinning. And they were all connected. And I didn't see I never saw any sort of text or code or anything. Spinning. Like the the gears were big, small, how very tiny. Very tiny. Very tiny gears. Millions of them. And they were all connected. Yeah. The first time I smoked a drug five mythoxy DMT, I found myself surrounded by dwarves like Snow White and the Seven Dwarves. And there were just countless countless just circling a big chamber that I was at the bottom of. Wow. Like a catwalk. Like a silo. Yeah, like a silo. Like Oh, wow. And uh big in an extensive catwalk. And the catwalk was completely filled with dwarves. Sounds amazing. It was kind of scary because I wasn't expecting it at all. And they didn't have the best uh motivation somehow. They seemed a little they seemed, you know, kind of sinister. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. And it was an interesting experience. I was a lot younger and I was wrestling at the time with the notion of good and evil and I and with you know the dwarves usually think of dwarves as fun but these had a malevolent feeling about them you know so did they communicate only by their expression they'd look at me the through the corner of their eyes oh god that was a little sinister it was pretty sinister yeah and so I you came out of it and said is you know like you know to consider uh you know what should I choose? Should I choose good or should I choose evil? And she said there's no difference or you know uh something which oh wow there's no difference. Help calm me down. Wow. Yeah. The five the five mythoxy DMT seems terrifying. Is it Is it Is it nothing like NN or is it similar just on steroids? Uh it's the white light. You're completely like in most cases. You know, mine was atypical. Usually you uh you have no visions on five mythoxy. A more typical experience is it's just the white light things is just white out. Yeah. And it's ecstatic and you're out of body. Uh no time, no space or no. Is that the only time you had visions on the uh five mythoxy? It was the It was the first time I had You ever did it? Yeah. Oh, wow. Well, I've only done DMT. Like I've only had one big DMT experience. is a very strange thing. You would expect that I would have had thousands, but uh I know mostly about DMP through my volunteers. I mean, that's uh yeah, that's the truth. You've only done it how many times? Just one time, actually. One big time. Yeah. For real. And that was the time you just explained. Uh that was the time, you know, in the mid 1980s. Yeah. It convinced me to study DMT. And uh Why haven't you done it since? M haven't really felt the urge to or the need to. It was so intense. I mean who needs to I mean you do take a risk entering into such an intense experience and uh I thought I had really done well with the first one and I would just leave it at that. It's it's you know kind of like I guess you know going you know attaining the mountaintop the first time. So there didn't seem to be any need to repeat that. Interesting. I would have imagined you would have done it thousands of times. Yeah. I know because that was the basis of your latest book, right? That was that the latest book that you published was the the first time that you talked about all your personal experiences with psychedelics, right? My altered states. My altered states, right? That came out in December. Mhm. Yeah. Um let me Mhm. Yeah. I just I don't know. I can't imagine that somebody like you would have only done it one time. Just once. 1986 or so. Yeah. I was at the point of ending my melatonin research and I didn't know what to do. I was speaking at a conference and um was speaking about DMT in the pineal gland and that's when Terrence came up and said, "Would you like to smoke some DMT?" Yeah. So, I said, "Sure." How do you say no to that? Yeah. Went to a room, had some good friends around. What was the uh background with your melatonin research? Well, I was looking for an an indogenous compound for spiritual experience. I kind of came up with this uh fascination uh in college that believing that there was a part of the brain or a substance the brain made that created spiritual experience that um spiritual experiences which were like the psychedelic drug one and spiritual experiences like those brought about by meditation. I thought there was some common biological factor that was activated in both those states. So the pineal gland was the first place I looked. I was uh at Stanford at the time. Jim Fatiman was there as well. Jim gave me the idea to look into the pineal. Uh and I found out about melatonin which nobody knew much about the human physiology back then in the early 1980s. So there was some evidence that it was uh psychedelic that it made dreams more intense um you know all by itself might be psychedelic. So we studied melatonin. I was wondering if the pineal gland was that substance. Oh interesting. Responsible for psychedelic experiences. Oh wow. Uh you spiritual ones which had psychedelic um you know properties. Yeah. Yeah, I learned recently that uh melatonin is created through this thing called melanopsin which is a chemical or not a chemical but it's a hormone that your is created through your eyes. So like when you wake up early and you watch the sunrise your your eyes produce this chemical called melanopsin or a hormone called melanopsin which is converted to melatonin which regulates your circadian rhythm. And I guess the melatonin kicks in really heavy 12 hours after that first light enters your eyes or your retina. Well, my understanding is that um tryptophan is the precursor for melatonin. Uh that that it begins with dietary tryptophan. Oh, interesting. Dietary tryptophan. And that gets modified to melatonin uh ultimately. Melanopsin. Gosh, I think that's I I think that's a protein or an enzyme. Can you can you find that, Steve? Find out uh the connection between uh melanopsin and melatonin because I might be getting that wrong, but I could have I could have sworn that was the way Alexis explained it to us. Uh this might be a good pea break time. Yeah. Yeah, sure. All right, we're back. Um, so it was saying the so to clear up the melanopsin thing, it's a uh it's a photopigment that belongs in the opsson family that basically um it suppresses melatonin for 12 hours after it's created in the eye. And I think it has something to do with sunlight. Oh, blue visible light. Yeah. So the so the short wavelengths of blue light from the sun. Mhm. Yeah. That was discovered in 98 and I got out of the field in ' 87 88 or so. Yeah. Yeah. We found out melatonin was not especially psychoactive and so that led me to DMT. Oh, wow. So, what made you decide to publish this book all about your personal experiences with psychedelics? Oh, right. My altered states. My altered states. Yeah. That came out in December. Yeah. It's an illustrated memoir of my altered state experiences in youth. Yeah. And a number of them are psychedelic experiences. First time I smoked cannabis was psychedelic. First time I took LSD. First time I like dissolved into nothing. Those you maybe one half or so of the chapters involve psychedelic experiences. Oh wow. Yeah. And there's some some there's some from meditation, uh some from uh depression, some from actual physical abuse, the altered state that happens then. Yeah. And um a friend of mine illustrated a gal from Alabama, Merrily Chalice. I think the images really are impressive. They help convey much more uh of the feeling aspect of the experiences than the written word alone can. Yeah. I still find it so interesting that you never pursued DMT more than once because like after I said I did it the first time, I I haven't been able to stop thinking about doing it again. I don't think I went far enough. Mhm. I never saw any sort of beings or any had any communication like that. Yeah. Like I've never vaped a DMT. Oh, you didn't vape it? How did you do it? Yeah. I smoke the free base. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so I what I've heard is that you don't get as high with a vape pen as smoking it. Okay, that would explain it. That could be. Or you didn't take enough hits like, you know, could you still, you know, like when you were smoking from the vape, you um did you uh find you couldn't like inhale anymore at a certain point? You had to put it down? No, I never had I never had any sort of um issues. people I was with, my friends that I was with, they were having trouble coughing, but I had no I had no problem holding it in or anything like that or hitting it. I was um I think it was the fact that I was just scared. I was because I did it I did remember I did the first hit. I felt a little tingly. He's like, "Okay, go again." And I held it in for 5 seconds and then exhaled. Second hit I was like, "Okay, now I'm feeling loopy." He's like, "Do a third." I did a third and I'm like, "Holy crap, there's no I can't do anymore." I'm like, "I'm getting I'm like really tripping now. I'm seeing the patterns. I'm seeing the fractals. all this stuff, GE geometry, right? He goes, "Okay, now you have to go again." I'm like, "What?" I'm like, "I couldn't even think how to even hold the pen by the time he told me to do it again, let alone take a hit of it." So, I I managed to take one more hit and as soon as I did the inhale, that's when I just ejected out of my body. Mhm. Well, that's a pretty intense experience. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so that sounds a lot more like what happens when you smoke the the freebase. But I wanted to meet an alien and I didn't get to meet an alien. Oh, well, maybe next time. But, uh, well, I I mean, why? Because it just sounds fun to meet an alien and communicate with an alien and find some profound, you know, I want to get I I I'm interested in the idea of using it as a tool. Mhm. To improve my life or improve my thinking or Yeah. Well, you know, so what would you ask it? Oh, God. I don't know. That's a good question. Yeah. I don't know. But would I even be able to ask a question in that state if you if you knew what was going on there? Yeah, if you were able to, you know, keep your focus. Yeah, that's a good question. I don't know what I would ask it. You know, one of the one of the interesting things that I've noticed, at least with marijuana, is that whenever I get whenever I get really high and I I always come out with at least one thing that I can use in my life out of that experience cuz usually it's kind of like, as I told you before we started, it's it's been if I go too far, my world kind of caves in on me and I start to focus on all the negative things in my life. M but I but at the end of it I always take something positive out of it. And one of the most recent things I've been taking out of it and one of the messages I've been getting from it is to is to basically just spend more time with my kids. Mhm. Well, that's good advice. Yeah, I would guess. I mean, yeah. Well, so where did that advice come from, though? That's a good question. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. My feeling is it it comes from yourself. Mhm. Yeah. It might it's some sort of deep deep untapped something deep in the soul. Uh it could be that it might uncover what you previously weren't aware of or it may just you know strengthen things you had a glimmer of their truth before. Right. So it's like a magnifier. Mhm. Yeah. Yeah. Stan Gra the uh the Czech psychiatrist he worked with LSD uh when you know it was legal and he developed breath work technique as well uh described them as non-specific or non non-specific amplifiers of the unconscious but they also seem to me to be non-specific amplifiers of everything which is in your mind unconscious conscious preconcious um like it couldn't act on anything else, right? Yeah. No, that makes perfect. That that does make sense. Oh. Oh, you're asking about the super placebo idea. Yeah. Yeah. Well, if you you well, you know, back when the interest in psychedelics was really cresting, you could see an article, a scientific paper once a week on the benefits of taking psychedelics that make you more compassionate, more open, uh more progressive, more environmentally attuned. Um and it seemed like there and it helped depression, helped alcohol abuse, helped end of life despair. So they were you know basically uh you know doing you know they were doing everything to everyone for every condition. Mhm. Um which made me think about you panacea which is a cure all. Um and you know panaceas work through placebo or at least are are you know kind of related to the placebo response. Um so if you're amplifying the placebo response uh you're kind of you know directing the outcome in the direction that that you already want it to be. Yeah. you know, so that's why I think of them as super placeos. They uh you know, you can use them, you can, you know, direct their power and their effect in any um in any direction. Um it just depends on what's already in your mind. Wow. Yeah. I've never heard of it described that way before. That's super interesting. But it it does make a ton of sense. It's a unifying you theory of how psychedelics work you know they are drugs they work on receptors and they work on uh you know functional connectivity and brain network you know but you subjectively or objectively even within your body uh they seem you know to activate innate mechanisms uh have you ever heard stories of people describing um because I know you've studied or are currently studying um the idea of a tolerance being able to be built through with DMT because there's like a tolerance with LSD. If you take LSD for X amount of days, it starts to have an stops to have an effect. But um have you ever heard stories of people all of a sudden not being able to get high on DMT? Oh, yeah. I've I heard from somebody not long ago who described that he smoked DMT in the past, you know, full-on experiences. Yeah. And then just stopped responding. Yeah. That's that's very weird. I I I well it's a mutation in the serotonin receptor I think but uh yeah how could that come about you know it's a very strange yeah this guy I just had on recently uh Zoloton Bathie was explaining to me and he's the guy who I was explaining has done this thousands of times and he was saying that he went in thousands or maybe a little not maybe thousands maybe a thousand or more I think is what it was still still that's a lot um he was explaining that he went somewhere He saw some being. He was in a room with a being and then like the being became aware of him. He's like like noticed him out of the corner of his eyes like okay what do you want to know? And then his response was I don't know like what do you mean what do I want to know? I don't I have no idea. He's like and the being was sort of annoyed by this that he showed up without any sort of intention or wanting to know anything. Right? And then all of a sudden he was kicked back into reality and then he kept trying to go back for weeks and months afterwards and he couldn't get it to work. Yeah. And he thinks he was intentionally kicked out by these beings. Um well, I think you need to know what's going on when you're interacting with the being. what you were describing reminded me of of the of um Zechariah, one of the prophets in the Bible who was experiencing a vision of horses and or well of horses, you know, one time another time it was you know the manora the you know candlestick in the temple uh a vision of that and he was speaking with an angel and you know the angel you said to him what do you see and Uh, Zechariah you said, "I don't know. That's why I'm asking you." And uh, you know, the angel says, "Well, um, do you know then? Uh, you don't you know you why don't you know?" And he said, "I don't know. That's the reason I'm asking." And you then the angel describes the meaning of the vision. Oh, wow. That's interesting. Yeah. you know, so if you know what to ask or if you know how to ask, I think uh it makes it more likely you'll get, you know, an answer that you, you know, can use. But what would be the the chemical explanation for why this stuff would all of a sudden stop working? Has that ever been studied? Like, do we know for a fact like serotonin receptors can just be turned off? Um you can do knockouts uh you know knockout mutations. You can develop let's say a strain of rats that is knocked the gene for the expression of a certain protein like a receptor uh is knocked out. Oh really? Yeah they're called you know knockout genes knockout mice knockout rats. Oh okay. Yeah, you knock out, you know, the gene, you know, for example, for the serotonin 2A receptor, you can breed animals which uh which um let's see, let me think. Yeah. Yeah, there's an enzyme that's involved in the synthesis of DMT. You can make knockout mice that don't make that enzyme. So, they just don't have it from birth. They they never have the enzyme. Uh they never have the enzyme. No. No. and they still make DMT which is very interesting. It's a it's an enzyme called indole nmethyl transferase uh and that's the way that you know tryptoamine is methylated into DMT uh in the in making DMT the body first you know takes in tryptophan you know from the diet which becomes tryptoine and then two methyl groups are added on to the tryptoamine to make a dimethyl tryptoamine. Yeah. Yeah. And there's a hormone uh there's an enzyme in NMT. Yeah. Which you can knock out the gene that that produces it, but they still produce DMT. So, and then it just somehow comes back after it gets knocked out. Um, no, it just continues. Yeah. Nick Glennos in Ann Arbor, uh, you did his doctoral work looking at those knockout animals. Yeah. And they and they still make DMT. Yeah. you were saying that you had, you know, Dave Nichols in the other day. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so you know, what is indogenous DMT doing? Uh, which is a, you know, its own conversation, but uh, yeah, you know, concentrations in the brain actually are rather high. You Nick. Yeah. I was asking him about this and and and Dave was explaining to me that it could have something more to do with endorphins. Yeah. Yeah. like the I think I was specifically asking him about dreams and lucid dreams and things like this. Mhm. And uh you know his idea was that the DMT in the brain is not enough to have any significant effect. Yeah. Um the presence of DMT in the pineal is still equivocal. It's still not really nailed down. Mhm. Uh but you know kind So how can't why why can't we figure it out? Why is it so difficult? Um, why is that so difficult? Well, there's not much interest in endogenous DMT. So, it's hard to do the studies. Well, people aren't doing the studies. People just don't do it. There's no funding. Yeah, there's no there's no funding, right? Uh, the woman in Ann Arbor who's overseen a lot of the DMT work there is GMO Burgan. Um, who's been un you know, hasn't been able to get you funding to look at the role of endogenous DMT. you what is you know what is DMT doing in the brain of mammals and you know human brains well not even just what is it doing just base level how much is there like can't can't we just like cut out some pineal glands and inspect them for like measure the DMT how hard is it to measure DMT in somebody's pineal gland or even their blood well it's quite difficult in blood concentrations are in poggrams per mill which is in the range of you know billionths right of grams per mill You can't really depend on you peripheral levels of DMT in the blood in in the brain. I mean you or in you know the living brain the living pineal. Yeah. You'd have to get fresh frozen brain tissue or something and Yeah. You take a look. Yeah. Because I guess I wonder if it's like after death if the somehow dissipates, you know, or if you could study people that are like close to death because people say that there's these uh these near-death experiences people have are very similar to DMT and uh even people that are like even my grandmother who uh recently passed away. I know there's she was uh explaining this how she was seeing visions of like dead relatives like speaking to her, communicating with her and like she had never experience done any psychedelics or anything like this. This was just like these voices and visions she was having like weeks before she passed away. And I've read lots of other descriptions of this where people kind of have these deathbed visions. And is that that one of the ideas people speculate is that that might have something to do with the DMT. Yeah. Yeah. Well, the Michigan group demonstrated increases in brain DMT in the dying animal and the dead animal. Oh, really? Especially in the visual cortex, uh, that part of the brain mediating vision, you know. So that could be a way to explain the visual components of the near-death experience. So they somehow were able to measure the brain levels of DMT in dying animals. Yeah. Yeah. Brain tissue. Wow. That's wild. Yeah. Uh yeah, it's pretty interesting. uh if like you know one of the interesting elements of DMT is it's neuroprotective in eskeemia um in the test what does that mean? Well it it means when you expose a neuron to low oxygen levels it'll um it will die. Okay. Um and with DMT it allows uh the neuron to live longer. Oh interesting. Yeah. And it also reduces stroke size. There's a Hungarian group's been working on that. Uh so it's been it's starting to be studied anyway in stroke uh because it's neuroprotective and it uh is like a other you know classical psychedelic. It stimulates neurogenesis. So so uh for people who have suffered strokes. Yeah. Yeah. There's a group in Canada, Aldrenon, that's been uh I've been consulting with or I have been consulting with that is working on a DMT stroke study. And how would they administer the DMT to these people? Yeah, they've worked out the, you know, the model. It's six or eight hours of subcsychedelic dose of DMT. Um, it still will, you know, have some biological effects, but it's not especially mindaltering, you know. So, it's a low steady dose. Oh, interesting. Yeah, that's fast. Are they still doing it? Oh yeah. Yeah. They're moving ahead with I think you know clinical work although I'm just not sure but I think they're you know thinking about clinical work at least. Yeah. One of the most interesting things to me is this um how people recall this telepathic experiences on DMT. And not only that there's telepathic experiences like within near-death experiences. There's story I don't know if you ever heard stories of people who've like been in a car accident together explaining they're in this having this near-death dream hallucinate whatever you want to call it with the other person that they were in that accident with and in some cases that person being carried off if they died them being put back into their body and then you have like like Dennis when he talks about what they you know him and Terrence and Laterera I think Dennis ate mushrooms like so many mushrooms assumes that he was in this other universe for like 10 days and him and Terrence were communicating telepathically the whole time. Yeah. Yeah. Very interesting. Well, you know, shared or you telepathic experiences like I ought to talk more about the book probably, you know, when the opportunity comes up and you this is a good example of u the first time I smoke any cannabis product. uh which is one of the chapters in my book, My Altered States. Yeah. I had a telepathic experience with my roommate. Oh wow. We were sitting on a Persian carpet on the floor and the floor just, you know, gave out from under us and we floated over town and we were, you know, controlling the movement of the rug as well as, you know, comparing what you we were seeing, you know, down below. Yeah. Oh, look at that. Oh, look. And we were, you seeing it together and we were, you know, steering it higher and lower. Wow. Uh, and we both Are you sure this this weed wasn't laced with anything? Well, it was it was hash actually. Oh, it was hash. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's a it's a funny story. Like it was a Friday night in November and Yeah. There was an knock on the door and the senior resident adviser came by and he said, "I I hear you haven't gotten stoned yet." Which was true. And would you like to, you know, smoke some blonde Lebanese hash? So yeah, he came, you know, he came in and we Yeah. And uh we smoked and some friends came in and you know the flying carpet experience took place. Oh wow, that's wild. Yeah, the telepathy thing. What? Like how do you explain that? Well, I think in I think it would be just sort of a step up from shared feelings or shared thoughts. you know, why not have, you know, shared perceptions, too? I think if you're, you know, if you're, you know, close enough, uh, you know, vibrationally, uh, and if DMT, let's say, were involved, uh, which would be mediating the visions, um, then you might be able to share an experience like that. H Have you ever heard anybody ever engaging in any kind of trip like how Dennis describes what they did in Laera where he's basically gone for 10 days and he explained that like he had to eat the mushrooms that was just like their calories for the day and he couldn't even he couldn't even like [ __ ] on his own. He explained he literally explained like how he had to take a [ __ ] He had to like ask somebody to take a [ __ ] for him. And he was just like completely out of his body for 10 days communicating with Terrence. Yeah. Yeah. And like I don't know if there's ever been anything like that done before. And I'd be curious um like how many of those experiences where people are sharing an experience like that and communicating telepathically. How many times has that been done or recorded? Yeah. I've got a colleague in at Bastier University up in uh uh up in Seattle who's interested in actually, you know, doing, you know, brain scans on people in distant rooms uh and you seeing if they can be telepathic and if so, would their brain function, their their their EEG be similar? Yeah. Yeah, that would be fascinating. Yeah, that's a very cool study. it. I don't I don't know if it's been finished or published or whatnot, but uh you know, I think that that's one of the ways that you know, you could start to study telepathy. I always wonder if if like these experiences that we have are like something that we were more attuned to centuries ago or even, you know, hundreds of thousands of years ago. If we had if we had these abilities to communicate telepathically or to, you know, even be in more of an altered state or have just more of an experience of reality in real life, similar to how people experience how did people describe their experiences like when they go to the Amazon for the first time. How they explain like all these dormant senses just wake up being in the jungle, being disconnected from technology and all this and all these things, you know. Yeah. And that's one of the ways in which they become more telepathic, right? I like I wonder if like like this telepathic if just ancient humans were more our bodies were more technologically advanced and we had ways to communicate without verbal, right? And and just because we're so because we had our antennas were more in tune to something else. Yeah. that now our antennas are kind of just they've gone dormant because of the evolution of technology and phones and the internet and all these things. Yeah. Are you familiar with Julian James and the bicamal mind? I've heard of it. Yeah. Yeah. I've heard of the biccameal mind. Yeah. Yes. So you know James taught that uh you know there was the spoken voice which occurred all of the time in everyone and then at some point biologically that just uh or at at you yes at some point there were changes in brain structure and function uh that made the spoken voice go away. You know, it's it's interesting within the tradition of Hebrew Bible prophecy, you know, there's an end of prophecy that occurred at a certain point, you know, so uh you know, that would not have taken place as far back as James is suggesting. So, she's saying the human mind operated in a non-concious state until about 3,000 years ago where individuals experienced auditory hallucinations as commands from God guiding their actions. Whoa. Yeah. So, it uh you places you know the self on the side of the body and uh yeah you know there was no self. There was no personal self. If you were just kind of responding to this thing, the right hemisphere of the brain interpreted sensory data, judged and decided informed language while the left hemisphere acted as acted on these commands without being aware of the decision-making process. Mhm. No free will for you. Oh wow. Or was it it it was experienced anyway as no free will and you then you know the authority became you know interrojected you know you for some reason uh which um may have come about you know because of volcanic activity earthquakes those kinds of things some you know natural catastrophes h 3,000 years ago yeah you know the end of the prophetic stream was about you Oh, I don't know 2500 years ago or so. The end of the prophetic stream. Yeah. With So, this is your So, so you wrote the whole book on on um the Hebrew Bible and prophets. Mhm. And the idea is like the idea of prophets and um psychedelic hallucinations like there's like there's a connection there. Well, I think there's a lot of similarities phenomenologically. you know, the visions are the same, you know, type like Ezekiel. Ezekiel's vision is very psychedelic, very much like DMT. You know, there's beings with wings and eyes on the on the wings and uh there's lightning and there's frozen ice and there's wheels and there's circles and flashes of lightning. It's quite psychedelic. Yeah. And uh you know, you know, those are what are called the cananical prophets, the ones who have books written about them or by them. uh and the canananical prophets ended at a certain point in in history. Mhm. You know, uh maybe halfway through the second temple, you know, so maybe I don't know. When was the Hebrew Bible written? Like a thousand AD. Uh it was written, you know, before the common era. It was closed at about 150. I thought it was I thought it was written a thousand AD. Maybe I'm What am I thinking of? It it was written in in Hebrew tenths the Hebrew Bible. It's quite old. It's you know the basis of Christianity and is mentioned you know regularly by the Quran. But so 10th century what it's like 10,000 years. That's not true. There's no way because the Septuagent was when was the Septuagent written? Uh around the turn of the era maybe 100 years before. The Septuagent was hellenistic. I thought it was Greek. Yeah. Right. 10,000 BC. Okay. So, okay. So, this one is saying 12,000 to 100. That's more like it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that sounds about right. So the crazy thing, the crazy thing about the prophets is the crazy thing to me about the Bible is that all these prophets that are written about that were like Moses, Ezekiel, um all these people, there's they're only written about in the Bible and there's no other historical writing about it. Mh. You know, like even like Moses, I think I think he he existed like a thousand years before the first allegedly when when the Bible says he existed was a thousand years before he was ever even written about. Yeah. Well, you have to go even, you know, further back than that to Abraham. Even Abraham, right? Yeah. Like Abraham, you know, preceded Moses by, you know, by many generations. Yeah. So, it's like to me like it's so fascinating how like you have in antiquity all this stuff that's going on. You have you have all this philosophy, all the science, all the medical literature. I think Galen wrote like 10% of the classical literature um that exists today in Greek. Um, you have comedy, you have legal documents that are written in antiquity, but then you have this narrow lane of the Bible where you have all these other stories, but none of those people are corroborated anywhere out of the Bible, right? Like there's no like none of these people in the Bible, Ezekiel, Muhama, like none of them. Are is there any historical text about them? Is there any medical texts about them? Did any of these guys have physicians? Was because that's usually how you corroborate things when you're studying classical history, right? You look at like when even quoting people like um Julius Caesar when he quotes a historian, that's how you validate that historian and the things that he writes about. Well, and you're wondering then if the stories in the Bible and the figures are real, right? Well, I mean, I don't think I think they're all fairy tales, but like that's that's just one of the most obvious things to me. It's like the way I love to look at it, which is a way uh a friend of mine who's a classical philologist explained this to me. Um it's like it imagine in 2,000 years from now there's people that are saying Gandalf is real. And how do they know Gandalf is real? It's because there's this divine trilogy that was written about Gandalf and how he lives in the middle of the earth and it's called the Lord of the Rings, but there's no one no one else is writing about Gandalf except for in this trilogy. It's like it's the same it's the same thing almost. Well, it's been a couple of thousand years and the Bible hasn't been replaced yet, you know, which I think is an interesting aspect that, you know, characterizes it as possibly unique. Yeah. you know, it's been very influential. Uh, you know, our kids are named after, you know, uh, figures in the Bible, our law. Oh, yeah. Our theology, um, architecture, art, poetry, wisdom, literature, you know, it's all contained in the Bible. It, you know, it's influenced governments, uh, you know, the church, you know, Christianity is founded on, you know, the texts. Um, you know, so it's been quite enduring and quite influential. Uh, yeah, I agree. Which I think makes it a a unique book. Yeah. Yeah. You know, compared to Gandalf, you know, which has influenced people, but you know, there's not, you know, churches and that there's not a, you know, clerical establishment. Yeah. It's, you know, more of a recreational at this point probably compared to, you know, the influence of the Hebrew Bible. Yeah. No, it's been a it's been a huge influence, but like times are different right now, right, with like technology and and everything else. Back then people were so different. Well, you think so? You're not sure? In certain ways. In certain ways. Yeah. Well, it's strange. It's that like, you know, one half of the world's population uh is either Christian or Muslim. That's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. But it's not Is it the same way? Is like the way people the way people are Christian and Muslim and Jewish today, is that the same way that people thought about religions in antiquity? Like did they live and die by their religions back then or were like like for example like think about pagan religions. People would just they just use religions. They could swap religions. They could have five different religions they ascribe to. They could believe in five different gods, 10 different gods. Sure. Now it's like the way it's fused into culture and how it's so black and white, you know, and how people and then when you add the internet into that and the way people communicate now, you know, it's become this just confusing cauldron of ideas and ways for people to argue and and and it's become, I think, more divisive than ever. Yeah. Well, do you think that's because of the invasion of demonic forces? Speaking of I don't know how how what do you what do you call a demon? How do you define a demon? Uh well, you know it when you see it. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's effect on you as well. Are you a better person or not? Yes. Like are you prone to destruction versus building things up? Right. Yeah. Do you thrive on chaos or not? M well I think also you know do you tell the truth? A few months back I read a book on the antichrist which was you know called the antichrist. And the antichrist is characterized by the big lie you by the lie. The antichrist is a liar. Um and that's you know the way he's been defined or has been defined over the millennia. Huh. Where did the antichrist first come from? Who was the first antichrist? uh the first antichrist. Well, you know, you probably people who didn't believe in, you know, Christ as the Messiah. Is Satan the first antichrist? Um, well, you say or was that a word? Was it was it a term? It was It was a term that only appears twice in the Hebrew Bible. And in both times it means accuser. Yeah. Like a prosecutor or opponent, right? Or opponent. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's the story of the pagan uh prophet um who um I got my train of thought. Bam um had uh yeah well he was a false prophet uh as a pagan prophet but was quite potent in his predictions and his poetry. Yeah. When I get to that point I'll you remember Yeah. Yeah. There's a um there's an idea that oh oh the antichrist the Satan. Yeah. Yeah. You you know so um he's like you beating his animal uh you know because uh well you know to get off the road because there's an angel and placed on the road that is uh you know threatening him and um you know the threatening part is the the Hebrew root is the formation or you know the basis of Satan or Satan. M Have you ever heard of the idea of um Christ being a drug term? You know John Allegro? Um Oh yes, John. Yeah, I heard of it. Yeah, Ruck actually endorsed his book, Sacred Mushroom in the Cross. Uh Sacred Mushroom and the Cross. Yeah. Yeah, that's a classic. I've never read it. Yeah. No, his is different. I I think there's a lot of uh gaping holes in his idea because he he traces he traces the Hebrew I guess he was a scholar of the Dead Sea Scrolls, right? He studied the Dead Sea Scrolls for a long time. For a long time. Yeah. He was one of the initial investigators. He translated the Hebrew and one of his he was making a lot of connections in that book to Sumerian roots. And I don't think Hebrew has any shared commonality or or roots with Sumerian. As far as I know, no. Yeah. Yeah. It you there's a Kadian influences and Hittite, Assyrian, right? and and Arabic as well, right? So his idea like the I mean the main connection I think he made was that like a mushroom isn't fertilized. It just comes from like the the rain is the semen of God and then it hits the earth and the mushroom is divine. Well, I think you need to be careful in uh analogizing or allegorizing the text. Yes. Yeah. You can really take it too far from you know the basis of the text which is what the which is what it's intended to communicate. Mhm. But no, what when the um idea I was talking about was there's um the word Christ in antiquity in Greek means to apply drugs to somebody to to give somebody drugs. And there's there's multiple different definitions of the word Christ. But um and that's the hard part about trying to define what this meant. Uh according to um a classical philologist that I talked to and a bunch of other people that study this stuff, the ancient Greek um his name's Almond. He's a guy who lives in Ta Dr. Almond Helman and he's a classical philologist. Um there's there's different meanings to to Christ. Um to put roofs on uh to add put roofs on houses, that's called Christing. Um, but basically the idea of his idea of what Christing was during Jesus's time was some it was somebody who just did drugs and gave people drugs or was kind of like a like a prophet in a drug sense. Yeah. Yeah. That's taking great liberty with the word meaning. Um, yeah. the um yeah, you know, the Hebrew root. We we've looked it up on the um on the on the Greek there's a a website where you can translate Greek and it was it was one of the one of the many definitions that are there. Yeah, it uh is the basis of the idea of um of christening um and often times you know that there's an anointing involved. Yes. An anointing by oil, right? Yeah. Correct. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so the Hebrew root uh has to do with anointing. Um and uh uh you know, Christos, you anoint, you christen. Mhm. You know, by oil, you know, and mash or the Hebrew root is the root of Messiah as well. Yeah. So that's the word where you get the anointing and and the Messiah in the name of Christ from from christening. Right. Right. Yeah. And um yeah, it isn't related, you know, to drugs as far as I know you from the Hebrew Bible. It might have been a Well, it's an interpretation of Algro then. He's like uh you know, back engineering almost. Yeah. No, this is I I don't think it has anything to do with Algro because this guy doesn't he only translates Greek. So he reads all the all the ancient Greek. So, so what he does is he takes he reads all the Greek from classical antiquity and tries to figure out what words meant in certain time periods like between like the word Christ had different meanings from 1,00 BC than it did at 100 BC. So he reads like the medical stuff. He mainly read he mainly focused on the medical texts. Yeah. Like Galen and and other things. But he also read like comedies, philosophy, um all kinds of different because there were so much Greek literature on Christ. It was unbelievable. No, no, not just on Christ, but everywhere. But lots of people were using the word Christ in random areas throughout all the literature, right? A lot of it was in medical literature. So he's like, "Okay, let's take the the consensus on what people were what the context was for the word Christ during this time from Julius Caesar to, you know, a couple hundred years AD." And and his idea is that overwhelmingly it's used as a drug term to apply drugs. Yeah. Could it just be applying oil for therapeutic reasons? Well, like some kind of oil. I don't know. Maybe some kind of medical oil. It would be I thought Yeah. I think it would you be anointing. Yeah. But his so so his dissertation was on Galen who was Marcus Aurelius's physician and from which you know also happens to be like 10% of the literature we have from antiquity right and Galen just talks about you know all the drugs being used and everything he's prescribing Marcus Aurelius and Marcus Aurelius gets hooked on opium and he's writing in his journals all about all the opium he has to keep giving Marcus Aurelius. He's like he keeps having to increase the dose and he's getting annoyed by how much more opium he has to give him and uh you know they're using viper venoms. They're trying to create antidotes to viper venoms by like by using the the human the human immune system. So they're they're impregnating bandages with viper venom, North African viper venoms, basically, you know, putting a little bit of viper venom on the bandage, cutting children, wrapping their cut in viper venom so that because they have the most robust immune systems, they're going to develop more antibodies. So they can use the children's blood or their bodily fluids as an antidote to to snake bites. Really like all kinds of crazy stuff. He has this thing called the theak where they mix this concoction of like 12 different North African snakes into the flesh and the viper and all this other crazy stuff. And he they explained that as like a panacea and he was giving it to Marcus Aurelius and he's like in his notes he's like he's like uh the king is starting to look better you know after taking the the but you know this could be just you know looking through the the lens of somebody who was focused on ancient drugs. Mhm. Well, and so he's, you know, primarily focusing on the Samrian. No, he's focusing on the Greek. On on the ancient Greek. The ancient Greek. Okay. Okay. That's right. Which was, he explains is was everywhere. You know, the library of Alexandria had over 150,000 copies in it in its height. Yeah. It was burned down and it was all Greek. Yeah. All Greek. No Hebrew, no Latin, nothing else. Yeah. Was this uh you know fellow talking about the psychedelic experience at all? No, he never he was never into psychedelics really himself I don't think. Yeah. You know sometimes people report you know mastery of a foreign language that they didn't have before you know they were studying it but you know then they became expert in it really like modern day people. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, I know a woman who's a member of one of the Iawaska churches in uh, New Mexico who was was struggling with learning Portuguese and then on Iawaska was able to just really, you know, hone in on it and become quite fluent. Really? Yeah. Very quickly. Oh wow. I got to tell him about this. Maybe it'll help him. No, he's still he's he spent his whole life he has a master or he has a PhD in Greek in classical philology which is the basically translation of ancient Greek. Yeah. Yeah. Philology is interesting. The meaning of words. Yeah. When I was beginning my study of the Hebrew Bible, I had two huge dictionaries next to me and just just spend all my time going back and forth back and forth. Yeah. Is it Isn't it interesting that there's no there's nothing in ancient Hebrew outside of the Bible? It's all bib. It's all canonical. Yeah. There's no like ancient medical texts in Hebrew. There's no ancient philosoph philosophical texts in Hebrew. Yeah. And it's 7,000 words, right? Not, you know, not from from ancient Greek. Yeah. Are you talking I'm sorry. Ancient Hebrew. I'm sorry. Ancient Hebrew. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you know, it's an old text, so not much has survived, right? You know, the Palestinian Talmud and the Jerusalem Talmud are rather old, but uh yeah, you know, they were written like after the turn of the common era. Yeah. You know, they're written in Hebrew. Uh but there's you know, there isn't anything contemporaneous with the Hebrew Bible, you know, uh that has been discovered like, you know, uh philosophy, you know, medicine. I wonder if those texts are found in the Dead Sea Scrolls. I'm not that familiar with them. So, the Dead Sea Scrolls, as far as I understand, they're all religious texts. Oh, there's no medical text. There's no medical text. There might have been, you know what? I think there was a few receipts or something like from people, you know, borrowing a cow or buying a cow in exchange for something else or whatever. Yeah. Um, but they were all religious texts and there was Greek in there, too. Yeah. Yeah. And those were discovered when? Uh, 1947. 1940s and they dated them to what? They dated him to like 200 BC or something like that. 150 BC. Uh not that far back, but pretty far back, right? Yeah. Yeah. I had a Dead Sea uh scroll scholar in here was explaining to me all the crazy stuff. Like he was explaining to me how there's like all these uh there's this huge market of people pedalling fake tech, fake scrolls, like fake fragments of scrolls, selling them for hundreds of thousands of dollars. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, have most of them been discovered? Most of the Dead Sea Scrolls are they still think they're Yeah. I don't know. I mean, they found them in some cave in the middle of the desert. Some random caves. Some cave. And a number of caves. Yeah. After they discovered that first one in Kuman. Kuman. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, some people think, you know, you know, that's the origin of early Christianity. It occurred within that community. Dead Sea Scrolls, right? Found [Music] Does it say the date? Some remain. It was early. It was it was uh I think it was like one 1 to 150 they tried to date them to. Yeah. The second temple uh which was destroyed in you 70 CE. But stood for almost I don't know 4 or 500 years. So yeah. Um it's at least you know they're at least you know 200 years BCE, right? Yeah. Probably not much further back. Yeah, but this guy um this this uh classicalologist Almond he was explaining to me like like reading Greek reading ancient Greek is almost like a mindexpanding drug in itself. Oh yeah absolutely. If you really study those ancient religious uh you know languages they put you in an altered state. Yeah that's what he was explaining to me. Yeah I think it's like reading sutras uh in in you know pali let's say you know Buddhist you know sutras in their original language. Yeah. It produces a meditative state. I think the more you understand the language, the the more it affects you mentally. Yeah. Yeah. I spend a I I spend about an hour every day studying the Hebrew Bible. So Oh, wow. Really? Yeah. And it's the English and, you know, the Hebrews, you know, side by side. Oh, you know, that was, you know, the basis ultimately of that prophetic states book. Oh, wow. Yeah. Um, ancient Greek has like over over a million unique words. Crazy. Yeah, there's like well unique words. Um, is it? Well, you know, the Hebrew language is based on threeletter roots and there aren't and there aren't that many uh under a thousand. Yeah. You know, but the whole, you know, language is built upon words that are built upon these threeletter roots. Do you think that uh do you believe that people in that time period around the time of Christ were experiencing mindaltering drugs? Um yeah, probably. But I don't think it Oh, right. Yeah. I don't think it was that widespread. It might have been under Yeah, I don't think it in in Yeah, I don't think it was that common. Yeah, I I just don't know that. I'm not a historian of drug use, right? Yeah. Because like from one of his books was called the chemical muse. He was talking about how like in antiquity people were dying all the time from everything. And the import like the infant mortality rate was like 50%. There was always combat going on. There was always plague, famine, people dying in the worst ways all the time. M and people were um one of the things he explained was people would walk through the town and basically fumigate the town with cannabis. Mhm. Yeah. And people were just always trying to get high just to get through the day. Oh, really? Yeah. According to according to his book. Yeah. Yeah. But you know, it's interesting. Yeah. And then you have the Elucinian mysteries. What was going on there? That's crazy, too. Yeah. Well, you know that urgot containing uh mixture, what was it called? The Kaikon. Kion. Kyon. Yeah. Yakar rock and all that. Yeah. The road to Elusus. Yeah. With Wasan and Hoffman. Yeah. Um you the whole you relationship between, you know, drugs and early Christianity. Very interesting. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that one of the things um Dave Nichols was explaining to me was that or we were talking about there's a was actually an Urgot museum. Oh, really? In the US. And this was tied to one of the guys I his name's escaping me right now. Who was trying to synthesize a lot of LSD and he got arrested. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um I brought him up. I brought him up to David and he kind of rolled his eyes at me. Yeah. But this was like this was like right be before or No, I think he got money for MK Ultra. He got some sort of a grant as a part of MK Ultra for like a couple hundred,000. Yeah. So, how long ago was this? To synthesize DMT. Oh god, I want to say it was in the late 60s, early 70s. Oh, okay. Yeah. Long time ago. Yeah. Yeah, there was all kinds of monkey business going on back then. Yeah. Yeah. No, it makes me wonder what's going on now. Like, you know, I mean, because this is, you know, another thing I was explaining today. I'm like, every single thing that gets the every single technology or every single bit of research that gets the most amount of funding gets it from the United States military-industrial complex. Mhm. Yeah. they have the most money to throw at just blue sky anything. Just like the throw throw a billion and see what happens. I think that's the case. Yeah. Like like even with the remote viewing program that we had in the 70s like they threw millions and millions of dollars at that. And I think the excuse for that was we have no we have we can't prove this is real with a scientific method. We can't measure this in a lab. But if there's even a 1% chance that this works and we can spy in the Soviet Union using this remote viewing stuff, All right. Then it's worth it's worth $10 million. Yeah. Small price to pay really. Yeah. And if we're doing it, then other people are doing it, right? Right. And that was the whole story behind the whole MK Ultra thing and trying to use LSD for mind control and Yeah. Yeah. Well, you know, they well, you know, the CI CIA established, you know, these you these houses uh where, you know, people would be, you know, lured in by prostitutes. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And the prostitutes were front front folks, you know, gave people LSD without them knowing about it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That was pretty pretty crazy time in history. That was a weird time in history. That Cold War history. and and you know Charles Manson like you know he was the end result it seems what do you think happened to him do you think he was do you think they were like because he was obviously I think Tom O'Neal proved beyond a shadow of a doubt like with he has brought brings receipts in his book that that that hate ashberry clinic was funded by a CIA cutout and they were doing experiments with LSD and inetamines on people that were going there and he was going there him and his people him and his girls were documented being there even his probation officer admitted He was there. Yeah. Well, have you seen Chaos? That new uh documentary about Manson by Errol Morris. It's out. Yeah. What? Yeah. I heard about them working on that. I had no idea it was out. That's what I understand. You know, Steve, can you see if it's out? Oh, I had no [ __ ] clue this was out. When did this come out? March. It just came out. Holy crap. That's crazy. I gotta watch it. What's it on? Netflix. Errol Morris is one of my favorite filmmakers ever. Yeah. And I had never I didn't I didn't even make the connection to him and Hamilton until like a couple years ago. Yeah. I was like my mind was exploded when I figured that out. Well, do you know Hamilton? Have you had him on your show? No, but he's coming. He's coming next month. Yeah. Great. Yeah. Yeah. I was on a show just a couple months ago. I I just listened to it. Yeah. Yeah. He's fascinating guy. Super deep into this stuff. the chemistry of psychedelics. He's like a legendary. I mean, he's kind of like a legend in this field. Um, yeah. Did you know that uh Errol Morris, he like invented this special camera where so he can because he he kind of um he kind of pioneered this way of interviewing people where they talk directly into the camera, right? So, when you watch a lot of his old films, um, when the interview subject is talking, they're looking straight down the barrel of the lens. And it's hard to do when you're conducting an interview. Usually, the interviewer sits next to the camera and they're kind of looking off camera when they're talking. So he created this uh like a like a mirror contraption where it reflects his face up through like a tube and then reflects his face projects his face like on a mirror in front of the camera so that the person is looking directly down the barrel of the lens and seeing his face. Yeah. So they're talking that that's it right there. So they're talking directly to his face and they're talking right into the camera. It's fascinating. Super interesting guy. Yeah. Oh, you know, I could use a a bathroom break. Yeah. Yeah, let's do a pickle. We're back. We're back from our our our pea break. Okay. Um, we were talking about uh you said so you didn't do your first interview with Rogan until 2022, but you knew him for years before that. Like he was even a part of that documentary. Yeah, I met him on my 50th high school reunion weekend. Yeah. Which would have been in 20 Uh 200 2019. No. Oh, you met him in Oh, you met him that late? No, I met him before that. Okay. Um Oh, my let's see 40th. It was the 40th reunion. So, yeah. 2009. Oh, wow. Yeah, that's what I that's that's what I thought. Yeah. Yeah. I heard about Joe from a person who just contacted me who said, "Have you ever heard of Joe Rogan? He's just talking about your book. And so he said, I I hadn't heard of Joe at that time, asked him and I and I got his number and I called him. I said, "Hey, you know, thanks for, you know, putting the word out about the book." Yeah. He said, "Hey, man, cool. I've got the book. I'm at the airport. I'm reading it right now." So, yeah, he's been really a very strong supporter. Isn't it crazy how he was like he's been hugely responsible for catapulting this stuff into the mainstream in the last 10 years? Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting. He's like created the whole meme. There's a whole meme about him talking about DMT because that was like his first podcast. It's like asking every guest. Yeah. I think it blew I think it blew his mind. Yeah. Most of the most of the people he was interviewing, he would ask if they had smoked DMT. Yeah. And that's like the ongoing meme. Yeah. Have you smoked DMT? And then he would just talk about it on every single podcast. Yeah. How could that not blow your mind? Yeah. He's gotten uh he's really helped, you know, bring it to a larger audience. What the hell was I going to ask you about before we stopped? I think I lost my mind. It's somewhere. Let's see. It's somewhere around here. Oh god. We have just watched the trailer. Oh yes, we were watching the trailer for Chaos, right? For that new uh for on Tom O'Neal's book. Yeah, that the Cold War. The Cold War was so crazy. Who? Um, Jolly West. He gave an elephant a huge dose of LSD. Uh-huh. Tusco. Yeah. That was the elephant's name. It was at the St. Louis Zoo. And I think I think the elephant died. Well, it went into convulsions and then he gave it a big dose of thorazine and you know, then it died. So, a combination of What is the What is thorazine? Thorazine. It's an antiscychotic. Oh, it's an anti-sych. So, it's supposed to like be an antidote to the LSD. Well, you know, theoretically they gave him an elephant sized dose, I guess. God, Lord. And he was like Tom was explaining how uh Jolly West when he wrote about that, he was like so proud of it. Yeah. It was a strange, you know, time in psychedelic research, you know. What do you think about the current interest in in psychedelics? Do you think it's a good thing, a a bad thing? I mean, what's motivating it? Yeah. Right now, you mean? Yeah. Yeah. Right now. Yeah. As compared to back then? Um, yeah. I mean, like I said, I'm like kind of new into this world and I I probably am not the best person to ask of to to get some sort of grounded um vision on or idea on what where it's going. It seems to me though like it's going in many different directions. I think, like I said, when Travis Kitchens came on here, he elucidated it to me in a way that made the most sense. It just seems like there's there's so many different groups, whether it be commercial groups like like uh people trying to use it to monetize it in a commercial way. It seems like there's people that are trying to take it and use it in a religious way to revive Christianity. There's that one idea with Mayor Rescue's book and then there, you know, I obviously it seems like there's a huge interest in the government and DARPA with that $27 million fund to take the trip out of psychedelics for soldiers. Mhm. So, it seems like it's all over the place, but like I don't know. What do you I I can't help but wonder uh if there's you know some under current some underlying methodology you know behind or you know you belief system behind all their research you know all that's you know all that's out there I think um you know has kind of oh it's it's you beginning to focus on the religious implications of psychedelic research you know because people describe religious his experiences on psychedelics and you know is there a way you know to harness that uh with either new traditions or older you know traditions? Yeah. Like infuse Christianity with a psychedelic boost to try to revive it. Yeah. I'm just not sure. Well, I think that idea is predicated on the role of the psychedelic experience in the creation of Christianity. And I I just don't know if there's enough support and if it's a good thing, you know, uh you'd have to be, you know, developed enough to partake. I think just uh Totally. Yeah. Yeah. You have to have the right intent, the right setting, the right setting. You um one of my one of my lately favorite authors is Leo Peruts. Uh he was an Austrian writer and also a statistician. What is his last name? Peruts. P E R U TZ. Okay. And in the 30s before the discovery of LSD, he wrote a book called St. Peter's Snow. You know, Travis actually was the first person to tell me about that book. And it's about a chemist developing an urgot alkaloid to give to the masses to bring about a religious revolution. Really? Very interesting. And this was like 10 years before the discovery of LSD in Switzerland. Early 1900s. Yeah. There may have been some Urgot chemistry going on way before uh Hoffman discovered LSD. Wow. But we've never been able to prove, right? We never been able to actually prove that there was any sort of urgot in any of those uh vases that we found in Athens. Yeah. I'm just not sure. I'm not current on on that. So the idea is that if you look at the if you take Ruck's book with Gordon Wson and Albert Hoffman, right, they're looking at the alooinian mysteries and the experiences people are having with this wine that they were drinking that was infused with something barley. Uh well with some kind of urgal uh some kind of urgot alkaloid. Do we know for a fact that they was is there any literature that says anything about urgot being in that in that wine? Um that you know of. Yeah that's medicinal chemistry. I don't know you Dave Nichols would be the guy to ask. So like the idea is that if they were doing that 800 BC is that are are these psychedelic experiences what created religion in the first place? Is that where they got the idea to create these religions or even have the idea of God and the idea of you know even these prophets or these crazy mystical experiences and if that is the ultimate creation state of religion and that you know say like you know even if back then in antiquity there was all these you know these pagan gods and all these different religions that people describe to eventually it bottlenecked, right? And then we get kind of like lost control of it. Well, I think what you're talking about is, you know, the source of the visions, you know, was it just coming from them or was it just an amplification of what was in their mind or was it coming from above like a objective freestanding source of information? Yeah. You know, so that's you know the difference I think between an you know top down model where the divine communicates us with you know through the visions or a bottom up one in which case it's just a amplification of what's already there and uncovering. Yes. Yes. which makes a lot of sense. But like but go one of the huge motivations behind you know like we said there's multiple people with multiple groups with multiple motivations um to study psychedelics but like one of the big groups is the the uh the church right that's I mean that's be that goes behind the immortality key book where he studies this stuff and he's trying to I guess in the like the beginning of it he kind of describes everything about the Illusinian mystery he's to Carl Rock and all this stuff and it's sort of the end of it. It's kind of like could this be something that could revive Christianity, right? Or is this like is there is there this common core of religion? Mhm. That can bring about a new spiritual renaissance or a new religious renaissance. Uh well, you'd have to, you know, go into more detail. I I think if you're going to talk about revitalizing any religion, you know, what exactly would that mean? Uh, you know, would it mean more art coming out of the sect or would it mean more, you know, literature or more involvement in, you know, the political system? Yeah. Yeah. I think um, you reviving any religion. I mean, what are you going to focus on? Yeah. and and Ruck's big thing is I mean so out of from my understanding which take it with a grain of salt there's a lot of people who study classical times and they study ancient religions and study all this stuff but Ruck's view which I've heard through the telephone game and from reading his books I would estimate his view to be that Christianity and religion in general is the source of just an immeasur more suffer suffering and more human some more human suffering and death than anything else in the history of humanity. Right? So he's not a huge proponent of the idea of of reviving any sort of world religion or any sort of Christianity. It seems like his view is more anti-Christian than most. Mhm. I don't know this for a fact. This is me speculating. Yeah. Well, I think it has to do with, you know, the source of the information. Is it just from the people themselves or or you know from God and you know like you're you know you know talking about uh the lack of a need for any new religion I think it has to do with you know the unity of a teaching with God. So you'd have to focus on the notion of God which is a very you know controversial notion. Yeah. Yeah. I've heard, you know, Booer describe it as the most maligned of all words and therefore Martin Booer uh he was a German Jewish theologian. Yeah. That it was one of the mo that that it was the most overused or abused word in the language. God. God. The word God. Yeah. With a capital G. And and and you know therefore the worthy of the most study and discussion. Yeah. Rather than avoiding it. Yeah. And um yeah, also the Jesuits are like the most interesting sect of Christianity. There they seem there seems to be more Jesuits in like the top levels of society than anywhere else. Well, if you look at the first DMT book, you know, there's a molecular, you know, drawing of the DMT molecule and that was written by a former Jesuit. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, wow. Yeah. Turn to chemist. And the Jesuits are like, from what I understand, they're like anti-war. They want to like make a they want to make they want world peace. And you know, they they seem to like the idea of there being like some sort of like harmonious one world society that everyone gets along. Well, they're studious and more, you know, philosophical, I think. Yeah. Yeah, definitely. But the one of the most interesting things to me is what the hell is the government doing right now in their research into this stuff that we don't even know about because we didn't know about MK Ultra until the church hearing the church comm um the stuff came out in 1975. The church commission. Yeah. Yeah. Um so like and that stuff was buried you know with Charles Manson and all that. No one knew about any of that till way later. I wonder like what could they be doing now that we won't find out until 15 20 years from now. Yeah. If that if we even ever find out, right? Well, as you mentioned, you know, the budget uh that you know, the government has got for you research grants is is uh immeasurable. $27 million to the University of North Carolina to study how to take the trip out of psychedelics to heal soldiers from PTSB, PTSD, and like combat fatigue. non- psychedelic psychedelics. Yeah. Um yeah, they are supposed to stimulate neuroplasticity and neurogenesis without the trip. Yeah. There's there's one which is a uh compound similar to ibeane called TBG or tabernacle and I think that's being uh studied in humans now. Yeah. Finally, it's one of these non-csychedelic psychedelics. Do you think that you can get like okay it's a super placebo? It it could be and it might be as effective as you like for example Prozac but do you think you can still get the effect that you get from psychedelics without because I feel like the I feel like the trip is is like the major component of it that gives you that effect. Right. Well, I feel like you can't have the psychedelic without the trip. Well, I know and that's still a point of raging controversy actually even within the academic community. Uh is the subjective experience necessary? You know, my feeling is that the non-csychedelic ones will be like super proacts and very helpful in most people who don't want to have a trip. Um and the drugs that continue causing trips will be used for the more difficult cases, you So you have a higher chance of responding but also higher chance of adverse effects. And that's the reason uh you know that you'd only use it in you cases that don't respond to non-csychoactive ones. Have you ever heard of any sort of use of psychedelics on the battlefield and not being used sort of post combat PTSD like as far as like enhancing people with like visual acuity, edge detection and more accuracy and stuff like this? Yeah, I've I've read accounts. Yeah, but I don't know if they're really, you know, based on objective data, but it, you know, maybe those are the kind of studies that are occurring behind the scenes. Travis sent me an article about this guy named Dana Beal. Yeah, I know Dana. Very nice. Really? Yeah. Quite a character. And um I think in this article it's explained how he was trying to take ibogga from Africa to and fly it to Ukraine to use with soldiers fighting in the Ukrainian Russian war, right? To give to these Russian s or these Ukrainian soldiers, but they weren't just using they were using it as like a way to get people back out there, right? like if they're if they're experiencing combat fatigue or PTSD, they can get them on this e i e i e i e i e i e i e i e i e i e i e i bogga or ibo gain and then like turn and burn like get them right back out into the battlefield. Yeah. Or even enhance their their combat skills. Yeah. I think smaller doses would be like a micro dose. You like a micro dose. Yes. Exactly. Right. And it could you theoretically enhance you know fighting ability. At the same time though, you know, it might also affect, you know, somebody's, you know, desire to fight. Oh, is this from the article? Cannabis activist and advocate for Ibagane travel to Ukraine to promote the use of Ibagane for treating war veterans. Right. This is all about the uh PTSD. You can turn soldier Oh, he believes Bill believes that you can use Ibagane to turn soldiers into super soldiers and has been actively campaigning for its use in Ukraine despite facing legal challenges in the United States. And then he was arrested. Yeah, he's been in and out of jail. Currently on bail. So if I was the militaryindustrial complex, I would be trying to figure out how to I would be throwing the most money on how to weaponize psychedelics. And they've been doing it. I mean, we know they did it all throughout the Cold War because they used Manson, right, to to basically stain the psychedelic movement, right? They they tried to Yeah. Did you see the movie Jacob's Ladder? No. It's about uh BZ uh which was used on soldiers in Vietnam. BZ BZ something. Yeah. Huh? Yeah. Look at Jacob's Ladder. See if you can find that, Steve. Jacob's ladder. Yeah. Tim Roth, I think. I'm not even going to try to say that. Quinceline. Uh, benzylate, a glycosate anti-cloronogenic clinager antiolineric that causes powerful hallucinations and altered behavior portrayed uh as chemical warfare agent that leads soldiers to experience nightmarish visions and lose control of their actions. This is this was like a a non-fiction. Uh, no, no, it's Oh, this was a Okay. Yeah, live action, I guess. Well, yeah. You know, so I think, you know, giving soldiers your psychedelics is fraught. I mean, what's the guarantee? Yeah. What's the guarantee? They're not just going to all like drop their weapons and give each other hugs. Right. Right. But what you don't you So with with micro doses, you don't experience a psychedelic effect, but I've never really micro doed. I've done it a couple times, but from what I hear from people who micro dose all the time is that it's it's a stimulant, right? Yeah. Which is why I think a micro dose of ibigane might make you soldiers more alert and able you uh to endure more discomfort. It would be far better than using methamphetamines which is I which the Russian soldiers are taking. They're taking capagon. Capagon. Very interesting compound. Yeah. Which is basically just a it's like a it's not a methamphetamine but it's a strong empetamine I think. Yeah. It's a stimulant that's for sure. Yeah. Super stimulant. Yeah. Yeah. Well, wasn't that like really an important source of income, you know, for one of the countries there? The Capagon exports. I think it was coming from Syria, right? Oh, okay. Right. And Syria and Russia were close allies. So, I think they're somehow exporting that or Russia was buying the Captagon from Syria. Isn't that what um Norman Oler was explaining to us? Oh well, well, you know, this uh you reminds me of I've been wanting to mention that uh the book by Philip K. Dick uh the the stigmata of Palmer Eldrich, the three stigmata of Palmer Eldridge. It's a book by Philip K. Dick. Yeah. Are you familiar with that? I'm familiar with PP PK Dick, but I'm not familiar with that book. Yeah. It's a competition for What's the name of it again? I'm sorry. The three stigmata of Palmer Eldrich. It's a novel that describes, you know, like a war for dominion uh of the you psychedelic market on planet Earth between a you tan psychedelic and one from an in an intrastellar really location. Yeah. you know, so the one that's made on Earth uh puts people into like a the world of Perky Pat who's uh in a dollhouse and you interact with the figures in the dollhouse and a lot of people spend time in that space. Uh you know, with the compound that's made on Earth and you know the one that you know comes in from interstellar space is totally weird. You take it once and you you never come down. Oh wow. you come down, but that's just part of the trip. Yeah. It just goes on and on. It's really just this nightmarish uh you know, limbo state, you know. So, Captagon, methamphetamine, uh you know, there's all this, you know, competition for what's the you know, what's going to be, you know, the drug that everyone is taking along the lines of like you brave new world even, right? Right. And s the infetamines. I mean, basically the Nazis proved that the infetamines didn't work, right? Because they wanted to do this blitz. They thought that they could put their soldiers on, which they did. They put them all on these like super strong pervatin, methamphetamine pills. Pervin. Yeah. Yeah. And then they uh they were awake for 20 days straight and then they were just burned out at the end of it. Well, they're just burned out. Yeah. It might help for a short period of time. Yeah. Yeah. you know, one of, you know, the towns in, uh, you know, New Mexico I worked in, uh, has a big oil and gas industry, and I worked, uh, at one of the, you know, clinics in that town. Yeah. And I, you saw a number of their workers. Uh, and, you know, when they started to work, they were given a they were given a, you know, lunchbox, you with an apple and a sandwich and methamphetamine. What? um in order to help them get through 18 hour shifts, you know, like on a regular basis. When was this? Uh this was, you know, 200 uh 4 2006. Wow. Is that legal? Uh I don't think so. No. No. It's bizarre how many people take meth and fet or not meth but empmphetamines around like how many people are prescribed inetamines for just things that could it seems like could be fixed with other like more healthy alternatives right because like every so many writers so many uh researchers and so many especially kids in college are just like they've been on I know people like friends who have been prescribed these amphetamines since they were, you know, in their early teens in school and they're like now they're in their late 20s, early 30s. Some of them got pregnant like, "Oh my god, I have to stop taking this Aderall now. I've been taking it since I was [ __ ] 12." Yeah. And they have this just insane withdrawal because they've been taking it their whole entire They've been prescribed it since the beginning of their lives. Yeah. Well, you know, in um some of the clinical situations I've worked, I would prescribe Adel. Yeah. Uh and it would be helpful when it was helpful. You This was in the early 2000s, though. I think people are more liberal with, you know, diagnosing you people with ADHD. But if you have bad ADHD, you know, stimulants can be like a miracle cure almost. Really? Yeah. Is it the idea of it that it basically just like stimulates dopamine release? It it stimulates the release of dopamine. I think it also, you know, directly stimulates dopamine receptors. Yeah. Because I think I have some level of of ADD or ADHD, but like whenever I take Adderall and I've taken it in the past, I hate the way I feel. And I hate the way I feel, especially the next day. The next day. Yeah. Yeah. Um, one of my friends once, uh, one of my friends once, uh, you gave me a, I think, 5 mgram dose of Aderal. Uh, and I went home and I wrote after I took it and it's like 20 pages. It really was effortless. Really? Yeah. But, you know, the following day I read what I wrote and it just was terrible. Yeah. Wasn't Stephen King doing just heaps of cocaine when he was writing Kujo and some of his other books? I think he writes I think he writes there's stories about how Stephen King was just doing drinking tons of alcohol and doing tons of coke when he was writing some of his novels. His stories are pretty dark. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. My stepkids used to buy Stephen King novels for Christmas for me. Oh, read this, Rick. It'll cheer you up. Yeah. Yeah. So, and PK Dick, too. What was he do you wasn't he taking stimulants when he was writing? Uh, yeah. stimulus methamphet. No, no, he wasn't taking meth. I think it was empmphetamine primarily. Just in fetamine. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Poor guy. God, he really burned burned bright while he burned. Yeah. Yeah. That's interesting. Some of the most prolific writers were just on heaps of drugs. And one of the one of the other things that was interesting um when we were learning about this stuff from Norman Oler the other day, he's a guy who wrote wrote the history of drugs in the Third Reich. Um this company called Merc. Merc. Yeah. the yeah pharmaceutical company that was um alive and well in Nazi Germany. They had they were developing I guess cocaine was like developed in the 80s and they had a cocaine or Merc was had developed a cocaine that didn't have any sort of negative withdrawal effects to it and there was actually an article I read which was fascinating about um one of the guys from the Rolling Stones was talking about how they would just have you know heaps of cocaine behind the speakers and the amplifiers on stage and they would be able to do it all Okay. They had to do shows, do cocaine, and they would never have any withdrawal symptoms. Yeah. Yeah. Because it was Merc cocaine. They were doing the actual pharmaceutical grade Merc. Yeah. Well, you can still, you know, find pharmaceutical uh you know, cocaine out there. It's it's it's um it is still used in medicine, right? Like for brain surgeries and things like this, I think. I I think you know, mostly for things that have to do with the eye. Yeah. Oh, really? It makes the cornea numb. Huh. Uh, you know, so it's it is still in use. It's schedule two, actually. It's not even schedule one. So like for cataract surgeries and things like this. Yeah, I think that's what they you put into my eyes. I had cataract surgery a few years. Yeah. Okay. Particularly for ear, nose, and throat procedures because it numbs it and it comes in dark colored glass bottles. Yeah. Wasn't MC making MDMMA too? Weren't they the ones? I think they were I think they were the first, you know, to synthesize. When was when was MDMA first synthesized? 1914, I think. 1914. Yeah. Yeah. You know, and it really wasn't u you know explored very far for application in uh you know clinical medicine. Yeah. It wasn't until like MDMA psychotherapy became a thing. Yeah. Back in the 80s. Yeah. And MDMA is another one that I've never tried, but I've heard lots of great stories. Yeah. And David made uh an made a bunch of MDMA. Yeah. Yeah. Uh I think that MDMMA that Dave Nichols made for MAPS is still being used. I mean, it was a huge amount. Yeah. He said he made a ton made a ton of it. Yeah. And when he So, how did you guys first meet and when he developed all the DMT for you? Yeah. Yeah. Uh so David Nichols made our DMT. I met him at uh I met him at the Eselin Institute for a conference um that was organized in ' 85. I think Rick Doblin organized it and it was a you collection of you people interested in doing psychedelic you know drug studies you Dave was there that's where I met him uh I met uh Schulen I met Stan Grath John Lily yeah you know so it was a yeah it was you place to convene yeah the history of maps is very interesting yeah you know Rick's history I've I've known Rick since 85 84 yeah oh wow Yeah. Um the interesting thing about that article that Travis did which was um that trial that never got the publishing the one that never got released the findings the religious one with the psilocybin. Yeah. Yeah. Um was I guess a lot of the the big push back to that stuff was a lot of the people that were doing these experiments were also engaging in using the the drugs themselves. Right. And that's frowned upon. Well, es especially for any kind of substance, any kind of uh you know drug with a lot of mindaltering characteristics. Yeah. If if you know the research team has you been indoctrinated let's say in a particular model and under the influence of psychedelics you know that's going to affect their uh you know treatment of a person in a psychedelic state. So would they would the ideal situation to be have somebody conducting the study who had never done psychedelics? Is that the argument? Well, I think it'd be interesting to compare and that comparison has never been done which is it wouldn't be that hard a study to do. Well, my thing is like what like how do you even have somebody interested in doing that study in the first place if they haven't experienced psychedelics, right? like like I don't I can't conceive how somebody would dedicate so much of their life to studying these things unless they had experienced them themselves. It's like with that with any discipline I would think. Yeah. But I think as a result of your experiences you would be coming in with a mind set based on your own experiences and if you hadn't experienced it then you would just be you coming in clinically let's say right? Yeah. It would be more of a blank slate. you you wouldn't have as many you preconceptions about what was going to happen to the person and you how to interpret it, right? And you knew John Lily? I met John Lily. Really? Yeah. He was doing I had a guy in here um Richard Oberry who was a dolphin trainer for Flipper. Oh, really? And he made that documentary The Cove which won Yeah. Yeah. an inc one like one of the top awards for documentaries. I forget what the awards are called, but they they documented the slaughter of all the dolphins in uh in Japan. And um he said that he befriended John Lily in Florida and John Lily and this was in what year would that have been? That that would have been what in the '60s. The 60s. That would have been in the 60s in Miami when uh Rick Oberry was working for the uh the SEquarium there. John Lily had some crazy funding from NASA to do studies on dolphins with psychedelics and he was like doing [ __ ] to their brains and putting them on LSD and things like this. Well, I think he was very interested in human animal communication. Oh yeah, that's what Yeah. And and he thought LSD might enhance that. Yeah. Between humans on dolphins, you know, both on acid. Mhm. They would be telepathic like we were talking about earlier, right? And I don't think he ever came up with anything. But the create the fact that NASA why why the hell was NASA funding that? Yeah. Well, I suppose if your astronauts are in suspended animation, you can keep them on DMT for three years and they'd be still be able to communicate with each other. A few really when I was doing, you know, my DMT studies on my wrote to NASA and I said, "If you want to go to Mars, this can be a long time. what are people going to do? And I thought, well, if they were just, you know, given DMT for three years or like for extensive periods of time, you know, that would make the time go by pretty fast while they're in space. Yeah. Yeah. I never heard back, I think. Oh god. Yeah. Like because you you know I don't know how long it would take to get to Mars. About 3 years. Three years. So is the idea that when we do Mars time travel that the astronauts would go to go to sleep for a large portion of that time? I think a large portion of that time. And so if you put the astronauts to sleep, you could give them DMT infusions and they would somehow be able to telepathically communicate in these Exactly. in these states. Oh my god. Yeah. That's crazy. That's crazy. We haven't been able to get back to the moon since the moon landing. Even, you know, and Elon wants to take us to Mars. Yeah. But it'll be the same human problems. You don't you think? I mean, you know, greed, hate, delusion, you know, we'll do that on Mars. Yeah. Are you familiar with with a science fiction writer from England named Olaf Stapleton? No. Yeah. You know, fascinating guy. Um, he wrote a book in the 40s on 19 species of humans, you know, in order to perfect the species, make this the, you know, species Oh, I have heard of this. Yeah. Yeah, it's like you know two billion years of human evolution. Yeah. So you know you know so telepathy is you know the final stage in human evolution everybody experiencing the same thing at one time. So like in far far in the future like hundreds of thousands of years from now we would be able to develop the ability through through normal evolution or would this be some sort of like No, it's all genetically engineered. It's genetically engineered. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so one specy or you know, one variant, you know, develops a new species. Oh wow. Yeah. And that species accelerates it into this with some sort of AI or or pharmacological stuff. Yeah. What do you think of telepathy? I mean, do you think it's a good thing? You know, Joe Rogan and I were discussing this about the chips, you know, the neural the neuralink stuff. Oh my god, it's terrifying to me, man. Yeah. and everybody has the same thoughts and he wondered he he was I I think he was you saying that's a good thing and I was I was not so sure he seems to be one of the themes uh what I've noticed about Joe is that he seems to be fascinated of this idea of in of humans integrating with machines and um people being able to communicate telepathically being able to read each other's incentives motives being able detect detect lies and just know people's automatic intentions, right? Well, there'd be no privacy. There'd be no privacy. Exactly. So, where's that going to lead? Yeah. And most people want to keep things private most of the time. I mean, do you think that he he thinks that's a good thing if if people were able to just read each other's minds and be able to to detect lies if people are being deceitful or dishonest? Yeah. It would force people to get that way. You know, that I think is, you know, the belief under it would force people to get that way, right? or at least the people that were that decided to integrate. Yeah. Yeah. You would be shamed otherwise or ostracized. Yeah. I think for most people though like going back to the writing process when you when you try to formulate ideas it it's not instantaneous right like when there during the writing process you have to like sit and just have this flow of consciousness through your pen and paper in from your pen to your paper and it's like through the process of editing are you able to refine your ideas right into something that people can digest and understand and in the mind it's typically just likely this chaotic nest or it's this chaotic horness nest of ideas happening all the time and if people are able to see that it seems like it's just going to be miscommunication you know sometimes and and sometimes like I don't think it would be a good idea to have say like for for some reason somebody has some like dark thoughts going through their mind you know some that's not their intent Right. Uh yeah. Um I know you there would be you lack like you there would be a lot of self-inccriminating evidence involved. Yeah. Yeah. It would just be not necessarily I mean also Yeah. Self-inccriminating absolutely but also like just because somebody has a million different ideas rattling around in their mind at one time. At one time, right? That doesn't necessarily mean that that's what they're that that's not you can't convey their intention or what their ultimate ideas are based on that on that soup of chaos in their head. Yeah. It's rife for misinterpretation. Totally rife for with misinterpretation. And you know, and if you compare like if you look at just the evolution of social media over the past decade and you look at, you know, how divisive that has been on our society and that's that's sort of taken a that's sort of broken down a barrier of communication at some level to where now people can just, you know, spew out some sort of random thought that they had on Twitter and people can argue about it all the time. So if you just take that like I I feel like the next technological level of that would be this neural link idea of telepathic communication where I I I don't know I can't imagine it being a good thing. Well there would have to be a new species of human to be able you know um to tolerate that and to be able to use it and that it would allow the preservation of the species. Otherwise there would just be chaos just a lot of destruction. Yeah. Yeah. you uh you know humans can get along but often times they don't right so uh it's those times that they don't that can be can be difficult and it almost goes against human nature to want to do that too right to want to integrate with a machine you'd have to be it's almost like you'd have to be forced to for that to become something that's ubiquitous I guess that the you know trade-off would be eternal life and you know that can be a good thing or Yeah. You know, the final species in Stapleton's book and First and Last Men, they live, you know, 35,000 years each because that's how is how long it takes to acquire all of knowledge that's accessible. Mhm. Very interesting. 30,000 years. Yeah. Yeah. 30 35,000 years. Have you ever studied uh John Mack's work? Yeah. Well, you know, John wrote a blurb for the first DMT book. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. John came by our place one afternoon. a long time ago. What do you what do you make of the experiences that he documented with all of his patients? Because all of those a lot of those experiences of those abductions, they seem to be also super similar compared to DMT too. If you look at, you know, the phenomenological descriptions, you know, the shaking and the white light and the transport and the beings interacting with you, telepathic communication, telepathic communication. Well, I think there's a spectrum of contact experiences. you know, one is just, you know, consciousness to consciousness. There's no stigma. There's no movement. Uh it's just your mind to the mind of you, the alien. Uh and there's, you know, physical examples, you know, physical uh you know, you part of the spectrum where you people move and they've got stigmata and there's more, you know, physical evidence. Yeah. You know, so the similarity between the DMT state and the consciousness to consciousness, you know, contact experience is you very interesting. Yeah. And and a lot of according to um a lot of his people that he he um interviewed and I think I don't know if he hypnotized people when he put them when he kind of documented their experiences. Yeah. Yeah. Kind of got them to regress at Yeah. put them in some sort of regression. A lot of them, so there's a chunk of them who explained these beings being from like another star system. I think Betty and Barney Hills said it was from like Zeta Reticuli or something. Yeah. And then there was also a vast majority of them that explained these beings, communicating to them, saying that they were from the future, that they were us from the future. Yeah. Yeah. That's just hard to say. you know there is like speculation anyway in Stapleton's you know book you know that it is a it's a history being you told to present day humans to prepare them to help them accept the development of the species you know so it's a message coming from the future you so you know it's you possible to predict or to to experience influence of the future on the present It's Yeah. Yeah. cause and effect. Yeah. Uh just a different type of cause and effect. There's one interesting story that stands out to me where there was these children that saw the I don't know if John Mack interviewed these people. I think this might have been earlier than John Mack, but there was this document of these two this two brothers that experienced seeing these beings that were outside of like some sort of craft or whatever. And they brought him into the craft and they were asking him all these questions and they were these beings were answering all these questions that they had like what does this do? What does that do? How does this thing fly? Where are you from? They said they were from the future and there was only one question allegedly that these beings wouldn't answer and they asked what is God or they asked them something about religion and they wouldn't answer that. Yeah. Yeah. I think people put a lot of stock in being you saved by aliens or them helping us out of our jam, you know, and the description of the aliens, I think, is the most compelling, you know, but I think you'd want You mean the physical description of them? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And their presence like, you know, what, you know, what is their intent? What's the information? And from a religious uh point of view, it'd be you who do they pray to, you know? So, it isn't like, you know, they're angelic. They're being, you know, kind of uh influenced, super uh supervised, you know, by something higher. You know, they were created. They were created. Yeah. And um you know, they have a mission of some sort. Yeah. One of the fascinating ideas to me is that like because a lot of those experiences also, according to John Mack, is that a lot of them had like eggs and semen extracted from them during their experiences. Very weird. I know. Very weird. I I don't know what to one of the most interesting uh theories I've heard about this is that if these are uh future humans and there was some sort of hypo so like just indulge me in the mind experiment that there was like some sort of cataclysm or bottlenecking event in humanity far in the future and they needed to in order to reproduce and not stagnate they would have to go into the past to diversify the human genetic gene pool in the future. So that's why they would be coming back to our time to get our DNA to repopulate themselves in the future if there was some sort of like I don't know global thermonuclear war or something like this. I know we should be able to look into the future. I think we can get an idea you generally but specifically hasn't I don't see how that would take place. Yeah. No, neither do I. But, you know, those are I've always been super curious to like what like how much does does um like the indogenous DMT have to do like what does that have to do with some of these experiences? Because then also you have a lot of the people that experience this stuff that seem to have had lots of trauma in their lives. Like people that have had lots of childhood trauma report having these experiences. Yeah. Well, you know, there is, you know, so much research that needs to be done. Yeah. You know, there's a lot of information out there. Um, you know, the Yeah, I think when you're talking about the beings, you still need to speculate, you know, where they come from. Are they just, you know, figments of our imagination? Are, you know, the brain on drugs or they really come from someplace else, right? Yeah. And why do they look so much like us? Like why? Like like anthrop anthrop what's that? Anthropomorphologically. Yeah. How do they have how are they bipeedal upright hominids that look just like us? Because they're being viewed by us. Yeah. Yeah. And that's all we know. Are they making themselves look like that or are they really from some some other star system? Like how do they how do they happen to evolve just like us? Yeah. I think it might be just our imagination. uh which you know gives them human form or they might have human form wherever they come from or we can only see them with human form right you when we view them. Yeah. This idea of the portal of this opening some sort of portal to something a portal in the brain or or a portal into the past seems like the most or like a magnifier like you explained it to be like a magnifier of something that's already deep buried inside the brain. Um or it might be from some other place right you know which is the notion of religion at least ones with an orientation you know towards an external god. Didn't you talk about having an experience of like a previous life like like having previous lives? Oh yeah, that's the first chapter in my altered stage in your new book, right? Yeah. It's a couple of uh a couple of uh your previous lives. You one was from the early 1900s. And how so so how did this come about? What what were you on? Yeah, I was on some variant of uh you psilocybin that had been taken by very few people. It seemed safe in animals. A variant. Uh yeah, like a Yeah. You know, like a molecular modification of psilocybin. Okay. So, like a synthetically created modified version. Yeah. It it was a lab product. Yeah. It had anything you had ever heard of before? Uh no, this was rather experimental. It seemed to be safe in humans. I I mean in lower animals. So, there was a handful of people interested in seeing what its effects were like in humans. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So the experience on that was uh the content of the first chapter in the book. Yeah. I'm I'm in the Ukraine actually in the early 1900s with my grandfather. Yeah. And they're frightened because of what's you know coming upon them. The other is a concentration camp uh past life being at the you bottom of a heap of you know you know corpses are almost corpses and then wow uh being you know born into this life. Yeah. very uh you know powerful. How long do these experiences last for? Do you know? Uh it was just one afternoon. Just one afternoon. Yeah. Yeah. With this new both of those experiences were in one afternoon. Yeah. Yeah. It was rough but it was uh very useful actually. It gave me empathy for my ancestors in a way I hadn't had before. So do you think that the So do you think that this can happen? Is there any documented accounts of this happening to other people where it somehow connects them to their ancestry or where they came from or anything like this? I think so. Yeah. But, you know, I haven't, you know, come across anything. It would seem like a natural reaction. You would, you know, experience past lives or at least you would read history books maybe in a different, you know, light after a big trip like that. Are you focused on just writing more stuff now or are you focused are you do you think that you'll ever participate in any more or get involved in any more of these um experiments or studies on humans? Yeah, I'm not sure like I still you know consult and mentor you know other researchers. Mhm. Um you know I gave a lot of DMT back then so I'm not all that much keen on you giving people big psychedelic trips. I mean, it's really uh very hard work. And especially back then, it was just on my own. Yeah. I've been mostly working on a version of Genesis, a translation and commentary in the book of Genesis. Oh, really? That's Well, it's been like a almost 20 year project now. Uh and it's beginning to take form in a a publishable manner. Yeah, it it's now 1,200 pages. So, I'm need to break it. How many? 1,200. 1,200. I I need to shrink it down to 200 to make it readable. Oh my gosh. Yeah, but it'll be a readable translation and commentary in Genesis, which is a really important book. I think you can understand the whole Hebrew Bible just through Genesis. Um, so that's what I've I'll I'll start with that. That's the first book of the five books of Moses. It was the result or this new book is a result of all the notes I scribbled in the margins of my translation of Genesis. And after a certain point, I just had too many and I there was no room to write anymore. So I put them into a word file which was just huge. Uh all the notes were from reading other you know commentaries over the years and the derivation of the words. How do you think these people that wrote this stuff came up with these ideas of these people? Well, you know, that's just it. They say it's the word of God. Yeah. you know, so there's just no question about it. Like the even the idea of Ezekiel and the wheel and all this stuff, like you're writing about something that happened a thousand years ago and where and even like during that time there's no record of even anybody being named Ezekiel. Yeah. Well, where is it coming from? I think it's a freestanding kind of level of existence that gradually merged into ours. you know, the world of the Bible like Adam and Eve and the Tower of Babel and Noah's Arc, you know, it took place but on a different plane and then, you know, gradually, you know, kind of interjected itself onto ours. And there's more historical evidence like of David, let's say, first temple, those kinds of phenomena. Yeah, it's super interesting, man. I don't know what to make of I don't know what to make of it. There's lots of uh interesting theories on on the Bible and and what was going on and you know how do these people these prophets come about and and and relay these experiences over centuries. Mhm. Well, and they're very influential. I mean those you know uh very yeah it's affected all aspect well it's in a lot of ways the foundation of the west you know it's a you biblical you know bible oriented west. Mhm. Yeah. You know, Christianity, Judaism, uh the Muslims refer to the text. Yeah. Yeah. And it's, you know, the oldest one. Yeah. I just love it. I just love the language. Yeah. And you know, the ideas are really the Hebrew language. Yeah. Yeah. The biblical Hebrew. Yeah. Yeah. I wonder I I sometimes think about like what would uh society look like right now if they had never burned down the temple of Elusus and if we still would have lived in this world of uh you know all these you know monotheistic religions with multiple gods and not just been stuck to one. It may be that the one god idea came about because of the loss of the bicamal mind. There was no longer a spoken voice which they may have thought was an angel for example and then when all the angels disappeared they had to you make up like a larger god you know to pray to and ask for advice from or to thank right the three kinds of prayer actually you thanking praising and uh pleading Yeah. Which I think can also have some sort of a placebo effect. Well, if you enter into a state, you know, as a result of doing that, Yeah. then I think you're more open to, you know, the placebo or panacea response. Have you ever studied eastern religions? Uh, Zen. Yeah. Yeah. I've uh practiced and studied under the supervision of a monastery for quite a long time in my my 20s. I never became a monk, but Right. I was ordained as a layman and was involved in a local organization. Yeah. Yeah. Zen Buddhism. The um during the Vietnam War when uh that guy that monk lit himself on fire, the burn the burning monk. Yeah. That was I think at one point one of the most uh like famous images on planet Earth. It was like the most shared. More people saw that. And that was um from what I understand recently, Zultan was explaining to me that that a lot of people think that that was like a political thing that he did. But according to him, it and according to other Buddhists is that um monks absolutely wanted nothing to do with any sort of political um ideas or movements at all. like they were almost like the like the idea of their practice was the actual opposite of politics. So what he believes that that burning monk was it was a a call like a recruiting call because I um from what I understand is more people got interested in Buddhism and meditation after that. Yeah. Um than ever in history. Yeah. Well, you know, speaking of the defense department and, you know, DARPA, um, when I was at Stanford, I took a, you know, class on Indian Buddhism, uh, by a freshly minted, uh, PhD from the University of Wisconsin who, you told us that these departments around the country were established by the defense department to understand Buddhism because they were thinking, who are these monks that set themselves on fire? Yeah. And so they established you centers of Buddhist studies at a number of American universities. Yeah. And she was one of, you know, the grad students right after this happened. Yeah. Whoa. Yeah. Yeah. Holy [ __ ] Great story, huh? That's bizarre. Oh my god. I don't even know what to think about that. Yeah, it was a national security uh kind of issue which I can understand but it you know they like they wanted to understand how you can attain that level of self-control or or or enlightenment to where you can light yourself on fire and not even blink an eye. Yeah. Yeah. I think it was of interest to understand what is Buddhism? What did they teach? You know, how did they do it? Oh god, that's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. It's uh well you know it established a number of you centers of Buddhist you studies around the country you so you there was a you positive outcome yeah the motivation was kind of uh mixed I've heard lots of stories of um not that it really relates to Buddhism in particular but um lots of people like high up in the defense department and like intelligence agencies and even um like uh people that are involved in like rocket launches like with NASA and formerly or formerly for NASA and now for SpaceX that are really into this idea of rosacrruianism. Oh, really? Yeah. I don't know anything about that. Yeah, I don't know much about it either, but like the the basic idea of it is um you can sort of follow these specific protocols to be more tapped into. This is like a kind of a Yian idea, but like you can you can tap yourself into this like universal consciousness and uh and and sharpen your antenna or or increase the the in the signal of your antenna to some other consciousness and kind of like where you can download information. Yeah. So, how did they do that? Um one of these guys who's who's described in a book by Diana Pulka, it's called American Cosmic. And uh he he was um I think a mission controller for NASA and he explained it by like he would he would go outside and get the get out in the sun first thing in the morning. Um spend a lot of time out in nature, not drink caffeine, drink lots of water. And somehow like the idea of having lots of water in your system and no like caffeine or stimulants somehow um tuned his antenna and this guy claims to be able to download. Now, this guy has like patents to all kinds of like really uh like crazy medical breakthrough patents where he's like made a lot of money doing it and he claims that he gets the this information from these downloads that just like come into his mind. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you wonder where that information comes from. Yeah. like is that just you know an like a latent bit of information or associations that he hadn't made before or some or you some kind of download from above? Mhm. Yeah. Well, do you think it like I've always wondered whether it's all that important at least from a psychological point of view because it's the you the message you know the information it's you know the message you know the information that's you know contained in that that state that's more important than what the state actually you know looks like. Yeah. What sto What stood out to me about that is like it seems like the more you get away from technology, if this is if this is true, if you can tap into something by doing the by following these protocols, it seems like the the general consensus of it is the farther away you get from technology and the diet, the like the the processed foods or energy drinks that we drink all the time or the [ __ ] uh what are those things, those caffeine pouches or nicotine pouches and all this stuff and the the the more you can tap into like this ancient antenna that we have buried in us Mhm. to get information. Yeah. Do well do those I was wondering if those ketone bars contribute. Yeah, I'm sure they do. You might get more fine-tuned. Yeah, the ketone stuff's interesting. Yeah. Um, there's also there's this crazy crazy story I heard of this guy who was like a whistleblower who was talking about how he worked for some like secret aerospace this private aerospace company where they went to they were trying to recruit people for some sort of psychic program where they were trying to basically get psychics into the military and into uh intelligence to sort control aircraft or to spy or whatever. And they found that the people with the most psychic abilities were people that were in third world countries that weren't connected to Western civilization at all. Yeah. And also young people. So, like there was this story that this guy told and he was a whistleblower and it was account of like two people that corroborated it that they went to Indonesia after there was like an earthquake and they went there to rescue a bunch of people and they were trying to find young people who were left-handed and homosexual and those were the people with those traits that specifically had the highest psychic or they called it psionic abilities, right? Um, well, you know, the one thing like I just moved to Albuquerque uh last year. I was living in a town called Gallup, New Mexico. Well, in the county actually outside of town and it was really quiet. Like it it just was really quiet. You could hear yourself walk. You know, there'd be a ringing in your ears. Yeah. Um Yeah. It was just you're really quiet. In Albuquerque, the main thing that I've had a problem with is the sound. Like it's really noisy in a city. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And it's and it's more difficult to think like I would just be alone for days and days at my place in Gallup. And that's, you know, and I could be a lot more creative or Yes, for sure. Yeah. Yeah. Productive, too. Yeah. With fewer distractions. Fewer distractions. Yeah. And, you know, the quiet was like it would produce a spiritual kind of effect at a low level. Yeah. You know, just just being still because there's nothing to react to. Yeah. I think there's definitely something to that. But um Rick, man, thank you for doing this. Yeah, this has been a fascinating conversation. Yeah, great. Yeah, thanks. I appreciate it. I'm glad uh I'm glad we met. And um also for people that are listening, they can find your books on your website. Is that right? Yeah. Yeah. And they can order through me. I'll scribe and sign books. Rickstman.com. Rick strawsman.com. Oh, and I just Oh, that's Amazon, Steve. Yeah. And I just joined X, you know, so I'm on Yeah. Rick_strossman. What a great cover. Yeah, you barely did that. Well, you know, it's got quite a few Easter eggs, you know, like there's a cat in the corner licking up some vomit. A Cheshshire cat. Uh, it was a real cat. Oh, real cat. Yeah. And you and cactuses. Yeah. A lot of cactus and, you know, crystals and looking at the back of your hand to determine the level of your altered state. That's amazing. Yeah. And you know the birds up above. Some friends and I were seeing you birds coming off of the wall and you know it's kind of scary. And your next one is going to be about Genesis. Yeah. It'll be a Yeah. Yeah. That's my hope is a book about a book of Genesis. You know I was like I was you know debating whether or not to do a volume you two of my altered states because I have a lot of notes. Right. Yeah. you know, so I was kind of waiting to see how things went with volume one. Yeah, it's been slower than my purely psychedelic work. What is the uh what is the best like protocol for you to write? Like is is there a state you have to be in a certain time a day? Certain drugs you like to mix in with it? Um, usually after Torah study, like I'll spend about an hour reading the Bible and then you like if I have a big stretch of time and I'm working under contract. Yeah. I'll smoke in the late morning. In the late morning. Yeah. Then work, you know, that's for the more creative stuff. Yeah. And once I start editing, I have to be, you know, pretty straight. Pretty straight. Pretty sober when you're editing. So Mhm. Yeah. It helps to talk out loud, too. That's one of the other things. Oh, really? While you're writing. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. kind of helps you only think one thought at a time. When you write, do you use a computer or do you write with pen and paper? I have a big old mount monanc. [Music] Oh, wow. That's cool. Yeah, it's very Yeah. Awesome, man. Well, thanks again. I appreciate Well, yeah. Great. Thanks. Yeah, this has been fun. Really enjoyed it. All right. Great. Good night, everybody.