two And we're live hello Paul. Hey, it's happened. How are you sir? Very well. How are you and you have new fangled mushroom hats? These are surprisingly durable So think about these mushroom hats there that you would think oh, it's gonna fall apart in your fingers But no, it's got like it's quite pliable It's quite pliable and it's known as German felt and This allowed the ice man ought to be able to travel into the Alps It was a fire starter mushroom really and this were actually revolutionized warfare because it helped flint spark guns Ignite the gunpowder really so on to on the do and It comes from a birch polyporum mushroom which is a subject of much of our research these days now when this grows in the wild What does it look like because this is you you've fashioned it into this hat? Well, so I had someone fashioned some ladies. It looks like yeah some ladies and transylvanies. Yeah, yeah It's called Fomies foam materials and allowed for the portability of fire. There's no doubt we all came from Africa I went north and we discovered winter this loud for fire to be carried for days and so your clan was Absolutely dependent upon fire starting in order to survive the winter and this mushroom allowed and enabled people to survive Wow, it's very light Is it edible? Excellent question Hippocrates first described it in 400 BCE As a treat as an anti-inflammatory so in teas yes, but you know, that's very very tough When you put it in ash and water it delaminates into my cilium and so some ladies and transylvanius still Make these and as a fabric that you pull that mushroom there will become One hat or maybe more because it just keeps on elongating and it's made of my cilium and So explain the process How would you take this slab of mushroom that I have that looks like a sort of like an enormous hertz? He's kiss and then you would put that in Water with ash from a fire from a fire at what why ask what is that? because it's highly alkaline and Then it helps it separated because it delaminate and literally you start pulling us and it's a fabric that you keep on Felting and so it's called German felt and it's been used for literally thousands of years and And beekeepers actually use this for smoking hives We could but it would be kind of It would be kind of bizarre We could that flick a bit and you'd burn up one of these things and there was a it's just amazing how much This is a fuse and one spark on this You know can ignite this entire thing over 15 20 minutes real yeah And so beekeepers use it for smoking. So if I lit this right now with this lighter Not that it lit this the powder with so you this The ash the powder powder dash and then the water and then how does it flatten out and become with the because it soaks up and My cilium makes mushrooms mushrooms make my cilium and so when you soak this and then it gets soggy And then it tenderizes and then you start breaking it and pulling it apart This is actually probably first discover because our ancestors noticed when insects were born The unprocessed version of it. This is what it's like on one side. Well, it's just made into a little table thing But it's the same thing basically so is this stitch together? How do they make it like this? Actually, it says using wood glue and but that's all the natural colors nothing's been added to it And these and so they just pull it apart pull it apart and make it a flat Yeah, I really want to make a coat. I'm that's my goal is it have somebody make a coat what it tear easily is Amazingly strong tensile fabric. It's mm-hmm. It absorbs water But you have to be careful and someone smoking a joint or narrow fire smoking a cigarette It happened to me. I got a big hole in one of mine. I was smiling the smoke my head my head was on fire More than once how many folks are out there wearing mushroom hat these days? Just a few hundred and we've been trying to actually keep the Industry alive by just inundating the there was like 25 or 30 of these hat makers in Transylvania 10 15 years ago then it shrunk down to four or five in a friend of mine David Somerland visited and said Paul This this hat making technology is on the verge of extinction and so we just sort of inundated them with orders in order to build the industry Keep alive so how could someone contribute to that if they wanted to people who listening to this how could they buy one of these hats? Well, if you go to my Facebook.com slash Paul Stamets I think his name is Mako actually, you know Squatted on my page to sell the hats and more power to him. So okay. Yeah cool Interesting, but this hat this mushroom has figuring they be very prominently important for saving bees and that's where our research has been astonishingly Interestingly, and where is that thing that you brought in? What is that? This is this is I so to get some context to this You know, I think Semidistically mushrooms plants animals become important because of a plurality of multiplicity of benefits This is one example not only revolutionized warfare Not only allow for the portability of fire for us to save ourselves from the coldness And we might go to the Europe from Africa Not only do bee caves use it for smoking But flyfish me use it also are drying flies but We have found that this mushroom is extremely powerful for reducing viruses that harm bees and and We are it's been described today in CNN be Insect apocalypse 40% of insects are under threat This just came out and This is it all really an all hands on deck moment But I'm optimistic because I think we can find solutions in nature so With my colleagues and when I was here before I talked to my work with a bio shield about defense program and these wood Conks are very strong and anti-viral properties against flu viruses and herpes etc I use these ideas and actually had a waking dream And I realized that the bees were being infected by mites with viruses and the deformed wing virus in particular is the worst virus And so I contacted Washington State University We started doing some research and I'm really really happy because I love skeptics who become my supporters We published in nature Only 7% of the articles submitted the nature get published the nature publication ecosystem To this day our articles on the top 1% of all articles ever published in a nature publication ecosystem Now that's phenomenal because that's the most credible scientific Journal in the world. Here it is right that extracts of polyporum mushroom mycelia reduce viruses and honey bees and the This Mushroom the omeadoo reduced the deformed wing virus 800 times to one with one treatment And and then the ratio mushroom mycelium reduces the Lake Sinai virus more than 45,000 to one now these are woodconks that grow in trees And we all grew up with a Winnie the Pooh But no one made the connection before me apparently that bees are attracted to rotted wood because of a meteorological benefit So omeadoo and ratio mushrooms we found and we published in this article that high significance and I think the reason why this article is not top 1% of all nature articles is that I've been able to present The theory and with proof now that a natural product can have a broader bio shield of benefits Than a pure pharmaceuticals up to this time. There's been no agents to reduce viruses and bees now the deformed wing virus Is being vectored by the viroa mite came in 1984 and then injects viruses and the bees and so it's like a dirty syringe And these viruses Debilitate the bees and shorten their with their ability to fly. Look at that poor bumblebee. Oh wow. That's crazy I mean I have that is so sad because that bumblebee can't fly Now bees can pawn it up to a thousand flowers a day and the average flight time of like honey bees was used to be nine days a thousand flowers a day Every almond you eat was visited by a bee. So one bee can pawn it a thousand flowers a day Nine days was our pollination flight time now. It's been reshortened to four days So we lost by 50% and they see an article that we just showed In China now they're hand pollinating Flowers, you know paint brushes paint of apples. Yeah, so apples cherries almond strawberry because of a lot of bees because they're absence of bees So it's really it's all hands on deck This is you know, I'm really optimistic about the future because we have Solutions in nature that we can now amplify and be able to deploy and So one of my inventions and I'm giving these away the 10,000 of these for free I've come up with a citizen scientist bee feeder that puts these extracts into sugar water and We have a sign up sheet up. It's all is for free. It's a funjai.com slash bees And we're gonna give away the first 10,000 of these And this basically allows Citizen scientists to help wild bees Because wild bees are giving about 80% of the benefits and if you scroll down There's a really we just got the CGI done you go all the way down and then click on the click on that video and we just So here's the bee feeder available on YouTube folks it says be mushroomed feeder Be mushroomed all one word and then feeder Yeah, no watch that's the bees visiting and they're taking the Sugar water. How much they're sucking out of it a little greedy bastards. Yeah, and that's crazy How it goes away so quickly and this is amazing bees are better at navigating mazes And so you can see the bees going in and out my grandson was afraid of bees It's really fascinated by this so I got him to do this and so These are something that we're gonna make these available all over and then I want to create vertical gardens in apartment buildings could be 25 200 feet you create ladders and ecological ladders and then This is way the citizen scientists all of the world can take action to be able to help bees from collapsing And then you station these in neighborhoods for bumblebees for other types of bees And then we have it with a Wi-Fi enabled device with solar panels and then we upload into the cloud all this data about bee pollination Visits so we'll create a metric on the baseline of bee pollination services So if you see a bees that are declining in suddenly below a baseline and Oklahoma two years ago 84% of the beehives died Now think if you're a cattle rancher and lost 84% of your cattle So the idea is to help bees immune system And if we create baselines with bee feeders upload the data and this becomes a new form of internet because they have Wifi ability so it's a distributed network as well, but they where is a Wi-Fi or not Well, we don't have this is in development right now We're working with a very very large computer company who's making all the instrumentation and they're into big data So we have a solar panel going in here We have blue LED lights good bees are attracted to blue light And they'll count the number of bees going in and out And so bees are only flying at a daytime. We don't need a battery and so the solar Power will then upload the data into the cloud. They won't create mega data sets And then we can look at Africa in Indonesia. How is it going to upload into the cloud? Was it using is it using lt lte cellular cellular system or low frequency long-range Communication systems could we help can we contribute? Is there's a way that this podcast can help? A lot it's I want to enable people with solutions that they can teach their children the importance of natural systems and they can take action This seems like a great one. I mean, I love this idea. I think it's awesome. I got a forward to give away 10,000 I talk to this computer company that Everybody knows but they asked me not to username and they asked how many do we need I said about 10 billion But billion billion and because this but I will do up to my capacity And then I'm hoping that you know, we're gonna Give these away for free and then eventually we'll create networks of hubs Where I have now 40 patents on this And helping bees survive from these extracts but not in Indonesia not in India not in Africa not in China Not in Japan. I've open source that for most of the world. Hmm. I'm basically commercial I'm gonna commercialize it so the haves can help to have knots. Hmm, and I think a lot of people want to help and if you And we're thinking about different ways of doing this. I'm open to all ideas, but the idea is It get maybe one person to sponsor 10 other people. They have a distributed network their own social media community Where they end up we getting Schools we will open source the code for 3d printers So that's really important for schools. So the codes gonna be open source But then if somebody want to make millions of these and sell them of course, you know, I wouldn't be happy without They have to work with me But individually we can empower individuals with and schools to have the open source 3d printing codes We just have to make it trendy to have one of these in your house like look at him helping Helping the bees. Hey, if we just did that it would really make a big difference. I know that's a gross way to look at it But what my grant works my grandson Kai is a perfect example. He was Shuttering and fear are being coming near to this and I just my friend Dr. Steve Shepherd entomologist taught me something about bees. I didn't know bees are moving so fast and We look like we're moving slow, but if we move really slow the bees think you're a statue and so the idea and so my grandson and Kai said look at this and you could see underneath you can see the bees going in and out I said to move really slow and then he got fascinated watching the bees See overcame his fear of bees. He was excited that he's helping bees survive now We've created something intergenerationally and saving the bees is a number wouldn't one bridge concept between Conservatives and liberals everyone wants to save the bees. That's number one. It's a number one bridge issue between Mending the fence so to speak across the political and social divide Everybody wants to say the bees. So this is something this an actionable solution and The you know the scientific data out there is pretty disturbing, you know 75% of flying insects and The past 27 years in report from Germany that just came out have disappeared Now many of your listeners are out in the country You know I grew up in the country. Remember all the bug splatter used to have against your windshield Mm-hmm. You don't see that anymore because the Insects are dying because exposure to pesticides monoculture When you have monoculture you have what's called pollination deserts when you have lots of biodiversity and lots of plants and and diversity The plants are pollinating at different times of the season when you do to a monoculture all the plants like almonds Yeah, all produced flowers all at once and then there's no pollen available So the immune system of the bees due to fact-reforming loss of habitat deforestation like phosphates, you know heavy metals pollution all those things are cofactors But the nail in the coffin is by far these viruses and so emonologically empowering and supporting the immune system of bees Then it gives the bees the opportunity of the ability to be able to survive longer do more pollination Is there a specific source of these viruses that they can isolate or these are new thing? Well, actually there's a Slide that shows the pandemic spread of these viruses throughout the world that came from Asia And it's now a global pandemic all bees in the world are infected with these viruses because when they Infected honey bee for instance visits the flower it leaves viral particles in the flower and the flower and then a wild bumblebee comes And this is it and it becomes infected. Mm-hmm. So there is a Unfortunate I don't want to use your perfect storm. It's a terrible storm of cofactors and because You know 80% of the benefit the farmers receive is from wild bees, right? Well, we can't count them and you know I have I have Beehives and and what happened to call into collapse? You got on Monday the bees are happy go on Thursday. They're all gone I mean, is really quick that quick and it's not like there's hundreds of dead bees around your beehive They're just gone and they could be hundreds of pounds of honey and the bees You know they're gone so they go off somewhere to the die what happens is because the newly hatched bees are called nurse bees and the nurse bees take care of the baby bees But when the colony senses there's none of pollen and food to support the brood and the colony The nurse bees are prematurely recruited to go out and find pollen So they abandoned the babies and then the Varroa mites are on They get to go on on controlled and they start injecting viruses and so There are other cofactors just like when you get an infection from a viral infection you can get bacterial infections And so there's a there's a cascade of opportunistic infections as they mean Immunologies decreased because these viruses. So isn't there a contributing factor that had to do with cell phones as well I actually I'm really glad you brought that up This is a contributing factor. I have not seen convincing evidence as a hypothesis. That's not fully flushed out There are some people quite adamant and they're belief in this but I'm driven by science and data I can the rhythms of the frequency of the high of cell phones Is it argument this made? It is not in the same coastline wave of the wave lengths that we experience in nature and so this is disruptive. I Understand that I'm still on the fence. I'd like to see really strong data and scientific evidence of that But it's a hypothesis that needs to be tested. That's what we're looking also at low frequency long range communication systems Hmm, I you know, I think I told you this story if I didn't apologize When we were on fear factor we had a bee stunt we had to cover these people in bees and a local bee colony flew in to check out what was going on and those bees and the Bees that were brought there met in the sky and worked it out and the beekeeper told us okay We have to shut down and everybody's got a back out of here So we had to shut down everything and back out for like about an hour at least a half hour What these bees communicated with each other so they're flying a giant swarm of them flying in the eye in the in the air Trying to figure out why he what he guys here for what are you doing? Why you in our neighborhood like oh, I'm not moving in or just filming a TV show like they had to work it out That is so unusual. It was really weird. That's an extraordinary. Yeah, so when a new queen Splits from a hive, you know Colony they then take a big group of them with them So it's all about protecting the queen. I still understand how they worked it out. There was no fight to the death There's no nothing they just sort of worked it out and the other bees took her off and the bees that were there came back to their high Their little colony. Yeah, that's there's a lot of this is also well That's I'm glad you mentioned that because there's also speaks to what's called be drift And so when we publish our article in nature scientific reports actually I think the data is understated because 10 to up to 20 percent of bees will drift from one colony to another So we had treatment colonies and we had treated colonies Well because 10 to 20 percent of the bees in the treated colonies went to the control colonies We actually deluded the differential because we had cross You know movement of control bees and be high versus treated bees And so when we actually I think another of some of my other co-authors thinks we actually have understated the data But when you look at the p-values of significance You know the extraordinary peas less than 0.009 on that for scientists is next extraordinarily significant data set That is clearly showing the evidence that these extracts help the immunity of bees and help them be able to survive and do a better job That's awesome and it's crazy that it's just a natural mushroom But it makes sense what you're saying that they built their beehives in these rotting trees knowing that these fungi were there Somehow or another being attracted to it. You know the I like to say the first five seconds that I got the first patent award My ego did swell and then 10 seconds later. I said are you frigging kidding? We're in the anorthols of nuclear weapons How could be the first one to have discovered that bees benefit from my selenium? immunologically, but there is no what's called prior art. There's no evidence and I mean think of that we have the intelligence of nature underneath our feet and this is something we need to tap into and The fact that we can show a natural product You know if you had HPV HIV and you went to a doctor 12 days after having one treatment of these extracts and your viruses drop 45,000 to one any physician would say Wow, you're doing really well and this is what we'll be able to see now that now We've been trying to find what's called the motive action. How are these viruses actually being reduced? Putatively our strongest hypothesis now is as providing essential nutrients that are important for the immune system to activate gene sequences then are that attack the viruses and Give a more host offensive immunity of protection about further infection now does this Work with humans as well like chaga is supposed to be good for your immune system, right? Well, it says this is a great convergence So traditional Chinese medicine and European medicine and medicine from indigenous peoples all over the world They've been using these mushrooms is that now we're finding scientific evidence that folklore The reputation of chaga of rishi of these mushrooms helping the immunity of humans. This is translational medicine so but bees is an animal clinical study Bees have been stated as being besides for soft law the second most well studied animal in the world This is a animal clinical study Past digestion Pass was called the sarticone p450 pathway which is your detoxification pathway mostly in our liver All animals use the sarticone p450 pathway to break down toxins and it's past the microbiome In the blood so this is actually this is an animal clinical study And I think it's a gateway for us to take This as credible evidence that natural products can be more useful An offer a broader bio shield of benefits than pure pharmaceuticals that go after one molecule with one target one set of receptors The our immunological fields have developed in the complexity of nature. This is what our foods are This is we are in concept by our molecular cue medication with the ecosystem We we've evolved in this complex Molecular environment and so our immune systems are up regulated who multiple stimuli And that's why I think these extracts because of their complexity They build upon the complexity of natural systems and help our immune system So you have hope that this is something that we could eventually see Being like a peer-reviewed proven thing for human beings as well Absolutely, I do believe that's on the near event horizon. There's a lot of research as now Is I I believe it's on the near event horizon. It's something that we're going to See more and more there's lots of clinical studies. I put for physicians. It's not no branding No sound like everything. It's I popular website called mushroom references.com I populate specifically for physician's. I just spoke at singularity university You stand for medical school in front of a thousand physicians I try to make the bridge of the credibility of the science for physicians who are just not educated yet Because they don't have the resources or the time so mushroom references.com. You can go that website It's got hundreds of references That then you can put in any Symptom or species etc. and you'll be able to find a peer-reviewed references There's about 30 references for instance on Soles Island right now Which is an area of research that I'm particularly focused on Now the there was for a long time a stigma associated with anything that had anything to do with mushrooms Particularly because of psychedelic mushrooms. Is that has that alleviated? I know that John Hopkins study on Soles Island has shown some pretty incredible benefits And there's a lot of people now that are starting to look to it for treatment for people with PTSD or addiction issues Has that become more mainstream in your experience? It's there's a vast title change in medical science. There's a slide These are just a few of the universities right now that have been approved by the FDA Another agencies for human clinical studies on Soles Island. Wow. So we're in Harvard stand for Purdue Pan Toronto University of Toronto. That's amazing. So that's only a few of them. I actually could put up apartment evictions affairs That's very interesting as well, right? If I could put up 20 more, but you couldn't read them because I had to be able to just to be able to so but this this is a huge shift in the the clinical studies are coming out for you know PTSD in particular Has been extremely useful But one of them that came out John Hopkins for breaking tobacco addiction 15 patients small clinical studies statistically significant 10 out of 15 people After one or two heroic doses of Soles Island 12 months later Had not smoked a cigarette. Wow. So I mean to break tobacco addiction was one of the most addictive Something says on this planet is phenomenal. That's incredible in the other research for PTSD depression I'm really excited about cognition creativity. I think we can There's a lot of smart people out there a lot of smart people listening to your podcast I think the idea of micro dosing and Being able to increase our ability of cognition and creativity to come up with the solutions That can get it out of get us out of this mess You just think of that we had hundreds of millions of people thinking about solutions like I've come up with The solved some of the environmental challenges we have today for food biosecurity The loss of bees is a threat to our national security. Just think about the threat to our economy So this micro dosing I think has enormous potential as well And when you think about The one of the issues I see right now with the clinical studies is like almost is too good to be true Oh, it statistically significant great universities great science Polish and peer reviewed journals at the top of their game But they these mushrooms have so many benefits for fighting dementia potentially Alzheimer's Johns Hopkins has an Alzheimer clinical study ongoing currently For a dose of soil Simon to see if it helps Free Alzheimer's patients and not go into full-blown Alzheimer's. There's so many different Benefits potentially. It's almost like a chaos of data. How is something too good to be true? So My my team in Pam Chris goes in MD from British Columbia. We've been working with people and We have just launched today an app That's at micro dose dot me the pond Andre Micro dose dot me is available on the Apple store and it's available on droid and this is a quick little We meant a micro-dosing study a moment Apple allowed this on the App Store. Yep. That's a big shift And it's because this a schedule one drug that they're talking about taking on Micro dose levels. I mean, I'm done. You know, I'm just saying what it is right. I mean Obviously, you know what camp I'm in. I want everybody to do it, but this this is really significant It measures your ability to hear Vision your the tap test, you know, and how quickly you can tap your fingers It's it's a what are you're stacking it with, but it's also good for non psychoactive substance use. What is your baseline? So you're getting older. I'm getting older. I'm getting younger dude. I have a new thing Okay I vote for you. I figured it out But the idea is to create baselines, you know, and then you create a baseline over time So you find out how far you deteriorated or what your trend line is versus the general population so the idea with with micro micro dose Dot me is it will create a massive data set massive amount of data And then we'll offer this to clinicians for them to see signal from the noise I suspect hypothetically. I don't have the evidence But several doctors have collected case studies of tonight as Ordinitas the with pronunciations are correct of the buzzing in your ears and being able and people have resolved that which is a collective case studies of tinnitus or tinnitus, the worth pronunciations are correct, of the buzzing in your ears and being able and people have resolved that from joining microdosing. Really, and 30% of Americans have hearing loss or more is progressive over time. How much hearing loss leads to depression because you can't hear your loved one say things, and you can arguments, and I didn't hear you, and you didn't say that. I mean, it just ramifies out. So the ability of being able to have better cognition, better neurological development and helping hearing vision, depression. The interesting thing about the microdosing that we've been collecting is that people tend to be happier and they're happier and they're more creative and they're more creative and they're more creative and they're happier. You're learning a new kata. You are excited the next day, you nailed it. You're up and going to do it again. You're writing a new book, you're doing an artist's work. So creativity breeds happiness, happiness, breeds creativity. And then the opposite is true. Malays and depression. You're not as creative. You're not enjoying life, you're not looking forward to the next day. So I think some of us are binary choice and the idea of using microdosing and then the definite microdosing is has sort of a variable interpretations. So using the salosse b cubensis scale, which is the most common soleside mushroom in the world, one gram is lift off. Five grams is what Terrence would say was the hero's journey. And when I was on last I did, you did 20 grams. So you know that was a little bit much, you might say. But when you do one tenth of a one gram, you don't feel it. 120th for sure you don't feel it. So the idea is you do microdosing below the threshold of intoxication, but then it benefits neurogenesis. Now there's an extraordinarily interesting study that came out with mice, but I think it's translational medicine and they were doing microdosing versus macrodosing. So these are some numbers, but basically one gram is almost equivalent to one milligram per kilogram of body weight, 70 kilos is 152 pounds. And so at one milligram per kilogram of with these mice, that's like one gram of cubensis, that's a dose. Super high dose, but it's a dose. So what they did with these mice is they had them in an arena with a metal floor and they gave a tone. Then 40 seconds later, they were shocked. So they had the tone again a few minutes later. 40 seconds later, they got shocked. After 10 rotations, the mice realize like Pavlov's dog, when there's a tone, there's going to be a negative consequence, a shock happening to the mice with power and fear. So then they dosed them with a microdose, 0.1 milligrams per kilogram, versus one milligram per kilogram, one tenth of a dose versus a full dose. Interestingly, the full dose, it took 10 rotations of no shock, the tone and no shock before they forgot or became re-aclimated not to have the fear-conditioned response. With the microdose, one tenth of that, and I took two rotations. Two rotations with the microdose and they dissociated, potentially PTSD. Why do you think it's the last? Well, it's a really good question. In the evidence, we have so far, and again, this is very early evidence. Lots of resources going on in this. It looks like the neurogenic benefits of microdosing are greater than the neurogenic benefits of macrodosing. You flood the receptors, you're having this incredible trip. It's fantastic. It's colorful. It's life-changing. Yes, that is all beneficial for changing your life. But, during microdosing over the long term, because the nerves don't regrow in six hours, but over weeks of regeneration of nerves with microdosing, it seems to me that the microdosing, instead of flooding and overwhelming all the receptors, are feeding these receptors, allowing for neurogenesis. Now, this is, again, a hypothesis. There's so many great people studying this right now, but I'm advocating to all of the clinic clinicians at Johns Hopkins, at Stanford, UCLA, at Harvard, please do testing of the patients for hearing, envision, and other behavioral tests that are not just about emotion and mood and PTSD, but let's actually get some physical measurements. So then you can track prior, during, during is too complicated, too, too much intervention. You're tripping your brains out. You don't have time to be tested for vision and auditing. But then, post-wise, and then looking at the residual effects. Now, Dr. James Fatteman, he has the Fatteman protocol. My protocol, the Stamos protocol, James Fatteman's protocol was microdosing one day on two days off, one days on. My protocol, suggesting this four days on three days off. And James and I are good friends. We talk about this. We laugh. We're just basically, these are hypothetical potential treatments. Are you comparing data between the two of you? This is what microdosing, not me, will do. We wanted to say, are you following the Stamos protocol, the Fatteman protocol, or your own protocol, or using it with niacin, where you're dealing with lion's mane, what are you using on it? Lion's mane. It's phenomenally powerful neurogenically. And there's two clinical studies out of Japan with mild cognitive decline and dementia, showing very positive results taking two to four grams of lion's mane per day, the mycelium. Interesting, not their field, but mycelium is much more powerful. And we just have been contracting with a neurological testing laboratory in France. Now we just got some amazing results back, showing that when we had lion's mane, extracts of the mycelium, exposed to neurons, and the composite control was the brain-derived nerve growth factor, nerve factor. And it was, it's used as a baseline for measuring neurogenic compounds comparatively. And the neurogenesis benefits from, this is where a pluripotent stem cells, stem cells that then differentiate the neurons. And the BDNF clearly shows that in a standard protocol. With a lion's mane, it also increased the number of neurons. Then we started looking at analogs of a cell sibin. And the analogs, when we added the lion's mane mycelium with a cell sibin analogs, which are perfectly legal. They're not scheduled one substances. Cell-side but analogs are not. What is it exactly a cell-side and analog? There's a number of them that have been reported in the literature. There's Bayo-Siston and Norbeiou's system are two of the more prominent ones. Now, I, I'm a psycho-not and 1960, Bayo-Siston, a report of a child died outside of Kelso, Washington from eating mushrooms in his yard. The family and just of the mushrooms. They went to the hospital. The child developed a fever eventually had renal failure and died. A chemist by a name of lung and then a Benedictine Tyler picked up on this. They analyzed the mushrooms looking for a new toxin. The mushrooms were identified as being salasibin Bayo-Siston. It is a mushroom that goes in Washington State and Oregon, sometimes in British Columbia, but not in Northern California. It's very very species, but grows in yards. When they analyzed the mushrooms looking for a new potential toxins, they found this alkaloid, it's a dimethylmercury-based compound, and they named it Bayo-Siston after a salasibia Bayo-Siston. So Bayo-Siston had the reputation of potentially being a deadly poisonous toxin. It's present in Cubensis, it's present in many cells-side mushrooms, and my book-salesibemushum to the world has charts that show how much Bayo-Siston is in these things. But no one had ever consumed Bayo-Siston because this reputation. Bayo-Siston is legal. I obtained some pure Bayo-Siston from laboratory legally. I have no salsibin. Nature provides, I don't people make it very clear. But I can possess these salasibin antilugs. And so since there was no reports in the scientific literature of whether this was truly toxic or not, I was a doctor friend of mine, MD, that measured my vitals and hooked me up to blood pressure, ECG, that all the biometrics that are needed. And so we did an end of one study. I decided that even how to history of potentially of killing this child, I think that's a false positive. I think it was bad science. I couldn't find no one who ever ingested this, so I decided I would ingest it. Now my friend Pam, she's an MD that goes into Antarctica. She's the only doctor on a research vessel. And so she goes down there and she gets to bring a roommate. And it was me. And so Pam and I were working really hard. We had all of our plane tickets. We're ready to go to Antarctica. We've been planning this for months. And then we decided we'll just before we go, Paul, let's do the Bayo-Siston test. We've been talking about this for months. We finally got the time to do this, but the next day we're going to Antarctica. So Pam looks at her cell phone, this Russian research vessel crashed into a reef tour hole in it. And it's like, it's now the trip is canceled. I mean, I've American Express, you know, plane tickets, hotels, I've got 24 hours to try to recapture all this money because we can't go. They shut the trips in cancel. So I had super high anxiety. And I told my doctor friend, I have too much anxiety. I can't go. This is too crazy. And then she kind of looked at me going, listen, we've been planning this for months. You know, please. And I listened to her. And so I did 10 milligrams of Bayo-Siston. She measured my heartbeat, blood pressure, all those metrics. My eyes did dilate. She said that was good. So I was out of drug like a fact. And then she checked in with me every 10, 15 minutes. 20 minutes a year, we have liftoff one hour, your full blown into it. And she checked with me, she checked with me. And she asked, and I didn't get high. I'm not alone. She goes, how do you feel? And I said, I feel great. I have no anxiety. Everything with this trip is going to be fine. So here we found an analog of Solasivon that does not get you high. That's legal that reduced anxiety. I think this is the tip of the proverbial iceberg because all the clinical studies are proved right now for pure Solasivon. What about the analogs? They activate other receptor sites, you know, in your field and in your neurological field. And that's why I think this is why looking at the natural form of these mushrooms standardized to a Solasivon a certain concentration versus the pure molecule. I think that is the way of the future because pure Solasivon is up to $6,000 a gram. And you can translate that into growing Solasivon mushrooms for $2 a gram. Now there are people out there listening saying, well, the price is coming down indeed it is. It's down maybe to $1,500 a gram. But how many people in the urban, low lower income, you know, impoverished populations suffering from PTSD who don't can't afford to go to Johns Hopkins to spend tens of thousands of dollars to have a clinical treatment. I think this democratizes the use of Solasivon and microdosing that could be a benefit across our society. And then why I'm proposing is you stack it with niacin. And the reason why you stack it with niacin is you take one tenth of a gram of Solasivon ces microdose. You add 100 to 200 milligrams of niacin. Now if someone tries to get high by taking 10 times as much, they'll have like two grams of niacin. This is a flushing niacin vitamin B3. And that flushing niacin will give you such an irritable reaction of skin to chin and people who've taken vitamin B, they three they know this. So it becomes the ant abuse for microdosing. But moreover, it excites the nerves at the end of the peripheral nervous system. And neuropathy is oftentimes present themselves as the deadening of the fingertips and toes. And it's also a vasodilator. So there's three attributes of stacking niacin with Solasivon mushrooms that prevents abuse, becomes the ant abuse. It dilates the blood vessels to deliver the neurogenic benefits of Solasivon to the end points of the peripheral nervous system and the central nervous system. And then and also excites the nerve endings. So I think those three reasons this could be I hope to see in the future, Solasivon mushroom coming over the counter vitamins approved by the FDA, stack with niacin that allows for the universality of use for the benefit of our culture. And what we were talking last time, can I pause here? Is there any other evidence of people taking these analogs and having this anti anxiety effect other than you? I mean, this seems a very small sample size, right? It's just one person. Yes, there are as an anti depressant as far as the anxiety and depression are interrelated. There are reports James Fademan in his studies, he is population study, which had been really small did not see an anti anxiety component. But other clinical studies that John Hopkins also the anxiety of dying from cancer. But that was actually so. But that was actually so. But what I'm saying with you is also you had a very profoundly stressful situation happening. Something he had prepared for for a long time that all of a sudden it was gone and all this money's gone. You've got to try to figure out to get it back. It's like it's immediate, right? Maybe with these other people, they didn't have such an immediate anxiety moment. And maybe their anxiety was harder to measure whether it was coming or going. Well, absolutely. Is there anyone study this needs this is just this people? Me. No, the other one with the other people that have experienced it, but didn't experience any anti anxiety. There's no one else that we know in the scientific literature. You'll have guards mentions he I published philosophy as a Russians with them, the most potent self- Mind the in the world. Yoan Garza says in one thing that he was asked and he said that the Bay of System was equal to that of Seoul. So I mean, I don't have high confidence in that statement. I consider Bay of System. I was ready for lift off. I was hoping for lift off. I know what lift off feels like. And I didn't get it. So this is what happens in science so much is the scientists when you can't do a clinical study. We buy a last say. This is very common. This is how Albert Hoefmann discovered, you know, LSD. He buy a last say that. So did he do it accidentally though? He did accidentally. He got in and went for this famous bike ride, but then he did it purposely after that. But nevertheless, this is what our scientific, you know, psychonauts must do sometimes. It's not so good. Yes, I'll just go on the famous for it. The most famous of all and the most revered. And he by a last say based on his knowledge of chemistry, he wasn't going to try to commit suicide. So this is really an area that I think has enormous value and several meta studies have come out. One that I had mentioned before is a population of several hundred thousand prisoners. And there was a 18% reduction in violent crime and 22% or so reduction in larceny and theft in a population where they reported they had one suicide mushroom experience. And statistically significant. Now association may not be causation, but it can be, but a more recent study from British Columbia, which I find to be so fascinating, is that they did a large population set and partner to partner violence. If your male partner had done one suicide in trip to statistically significant reduction of the probability of that partner being violent towards their other partner, statistically significant. So I always thought that if there's a dating app, maybe you should have the dating app. Have you tripped on Sol7? Yes. Well, that may be a better, you know, candidate for a predating. So I think Sol7 makes nicer people. And I think we a lot more nicer people that are more creative. They're dedicated to helping the community. And I think this is a potential paradigm shifting a drug. Unquestionably, and here's the other thing, this could be profit. I mean, these companies that are seeking to profit off a pharmaceutical drugs, you can profit off this stuff, particularly with the protocol that you just described with adding nice into it to ensure that people are doing only microdosing. Look, man, this could be a very profitable enterprise for some company. And the benefits, if people can mirror the benefits that you had of this alleviation of anxiety, my God, that's like most of what people struggle with. So many people out there listening to this right now, like, fuck, I wish there was something that didn't get me high, but just alleviated this fucking angst that so many people were struggling with every day. It's a massive disease complex that swept our societies. Yeah. And facing all these problems, how could you not become depressed? Well, you cannot become depressed by becoming creative. And I think that Sol7 and microdosing enables the creative pathways for ingenuity for us to feel but we're have meaning. We can make a meaningful difference. It's really important. You know, we've entered into six acts, the sixth greatest extinction event known in the history of life in this planet. We've had two other extinction events from asteroid impacts, 250 billion years ago, 65 million years ago, but we're now involved in a massive extinction event. And the research that came out today and the other research has come out with 75% of the insect population, 40% in immediate jeopardy. The research article came out said in Europe and North America, they have good data collection, Amazon, they don't. So we have a measure of the insect loss in the Amazon. But if you're a trout, if you're a bird, if you like drinking coffee and you like chocolate and like almonds, I mean, these are all dependent upon pollinators. So if we lose these flying insects, we lose the pollation services and it threatens worldwide food biosecurity. This is one of of the biggest threats that start ecosystem. Now, I think we can invent our ways out of this. If we creatively, you know, expand our ability to come up with novel solutions. And I think those solutions are literally underfoot and all around us today. We just have to wake up like I woke up to helping the bees. There are so many smart people out there. If they just started realizing that nature is a deep well of evolutionary knowledge and that we have evolved within this complexity, then to delve into that library of knowledge and pulling out apolitical solutions, vetted by science, controlled studies, but not looking at these pharmaceutical pure molecules as the way of the future, but looking at the complexity of the microbiome, the complex interrelationships, and selecting out microbiomes that then create guilds of solutions they are applicable to the problems that we face today. All right, I like that idea. All of it, it's just it's beautiful that there are these natural solutions that, you know, maybe if we could just shift people's ideas about how we view cellosive and how we view the analogs, how we view the interaction with people in nature that you can, you know, we can make a real change, a change that's tangible inside of our lifetime. And again, selling this stuff, like if, look, we're seeing what's happening right now with medical marijuana and then shifting to commercial marijuana and now hemp, it's giant. I mean, it's a huge industry through its change Colorado, Colorado, Denver's real estate's gone through the roof. People are moving there so much that they've got traffic problems now they never conceived of in the past. It's changed their economy and it's changed their economy due to just a really obvious shift. Here's the shift, marijuana's not bad for you. It's not. We thought it was. It's not. We're sorry. You could have it now. And now you could sell it and now it's legal. But federally, we're still dealing with schedule one. So it's it's there. These shifts are happening. These companies are investing money. There's a lot of profit to be made and a lot of people are profiting, but it's still in this weird transitionary stage. It is, but this is a people's revolution. You have decriminalized nature coming out of Oakland, which I'm fully in favor of how dare we make a species illegal. It makes no sense to me. What is Oakland specifically? They've made ayahuasca, so Siobhan, what else? All natural products with psychoactry properties, the best of my understanding, both Denver and Oakland, they remove the funding for prosecutors and judges in the courts. You can't use public funds in order to prosecute people for possession. So this is a very good deal. Rest them for it though? Well, the law enforcement officer is not getting paid. He's not doing his job. He's violating his code of conduct. If you arrest him and you take him to a prosecutor, the prosecutor is I have no funding for this. You're wasting our time. You're just coming here is wasting my time. I have murders. That's a solved. What if someone's selling it? Decriminalization does not prevent you from being prosecuted for selling a psycho- That's a really, really good question. I have thoughts on it. That's controversial because this speaks to the ability of some people having access and not. I only trip on socialide mushrooms once or twice a year. That's all I need. As Terrence McKenna, I think Alan Watts said when you get the message from the phone, hang it up. So if you just have these socialide mushrooms growing in your backyard or you know how to collect them, then you only need one or two doses a year and even microdosing. You know, you get a lot more extension of that. But my view, and I've never had any problem with law enforcement. In Washington, Oregon, British Columbia and Canada in particular, law enforcement has a very pretty mature attitude towards this. If you have a small amount and you're not trafficking and you're for individual use, it just doesn't raise the level of the need for enforcement. No, I understand that, but I just wish there was no incentive at all. There was nothing there. Like this, the idea that you have to rely on the good grace of a cop, you understand that there's no incentive to arrest you. That seems a core shit to me. Yeah. Like we're growing adults in 2019 with a mountain of evidence. This is not, we're not living the dark ages anymore. In fact, it's still a possibility that you get arrested or you could face some sort of criminal charges for having something that's only been demonstrated to be good. This is why the citizens movement, the federal government, I mean, the Republicans and conservatives and libertarians are all about state rights. This is a people's movement. They should get behind this because individual community rights against the big man, against the federal government. Yeah. The federal government, it would need to be a title change. And how do we do that is because we have decriminalized a nature in Oregon. We have the Denver initiative, other cities around the country. It's now spreading throughout the entire country. Yes. There's probably 20 cities in the next 16 months that are going to have decriminalization at the city councils. I also think it's a significant solution to this problem that we're facing with pills and a lot of destructive drugs. There's a lot of self-destructive drugs that people are taking because these people are hurting. What's still a sign that gives you that these drugs don't, it gives you a potential to heal. It gives you a moment to reflect. It gives you a change in the way you think and you interface with the world. And that just doesn't exist in those other drugs. Those drugs are escape drugs. And the need to escape is what we got to eliminate. And I think that's one of things that's so alive and can help. It can help alleviate the need to escape. And a shout out to Rick Doblin and Atlanta, a galooly of maps.org, the multi-disciplinary association for psychedelic studies. Maps.org and Maps.ca and Canada have been instrumental in bringing forward psychedelic drugs for PTSD and clinical studies. Maps is now on phase three. With MDMA. With MDMA. I've had Rick on a couple of times. Yeah. So yeah, he's a real pioneer in this. And so what's interesting in getting now from three different groups I've heard who've sat down with FDA scientists, there's been a new turnover within the FDA. And these scientists are looking at just pure science without politics. They don't care about politics. They want to help people. And several of them have said they've never seen a social side in particular a safer drug with such a dramatic impact with so it's in frequency of use one or two times. And so there's a movie that just came out called fantastic fungi. And Michael Pollan's in there. I'm in there. Louis Schwartzberg has put it out. He's been 12 years working on this movie. It's fantastic fun day.com. It's a grassroots movement. Theaters are selling out all over the country. They book at New York City for one night. They have to keep it in for a week because they're standing lines, standing room, long lines to get into the theater. And it's all about the use of mushrooms and the Johns Hopkins studies with end-of-life patients. It's very, very well done. But it speaks to this is that this is literally a quote-unquote underground movement that's welling up. And the attraction that people have for this is a reflection of the title change that is happening now. This is a worldwide movement that is sweeping through the mycelia wonderground and through connections. So something I'd very much encourage you to see fantastic fungi. It's not a Netflix. Louis was offered a lot of money for Netflix. But once it gets in the Netflix, it's a library book in the library. And he wanted to build community. So he's been out. And people can sponsor theater openings. It's got a hundred percent on rotten tomatoes. How many movies get a hundred percent on rotten tomatoes? So it's really a people's movie and a spreading, you know, where can you get it? You go to fantastic funj.com. And you can sign up for theaters. Norman. So it has to be in a theater? Yeah. Right now it will be eventually after this year it's going to be available on the web. Right now, Louis spent a lot of money, four or five million dollars, I think. Norman and Lynn Lear, Norman Lear, all in the family, you know, Archie Bunker. There are also co-producers of this. Yeah. And so yeah, Lynn Lear. Norman Lear's out there trippin. I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I, I thought Archie Bunker was one of the most lovable racist conservative assholes I've ever seen on TV. But um, well, Norman Lear did a lot more than that. Right. This is really interesting though that they've decided to release it in film theaters and versus on the web. Because if you really want to reach a lot of people, I mean, is it selling this way? It's just, I mean, it seems like if you spend a lot of money, the way to get that money back would be to sell it to Netflix. Like, why that's I would agree with you except Netflix. Netflix offered him one quarter to one half of the cost. And so it was not, they didn't value it and they didn't see it. I mean, South by Southwest turned them down. And it's got a hundred percent on rotten tomatoes. I mean, people just don't see this into it. Why they South by Southwest turned them down. Because it's not part I think of the Hollywood establishment. South by Southwest, you know, as so. I mean, I can't explain why South by Southwest turned it down or, or, you know, um, or the, the other festivals, um, the concepts that we'll et cetera. That's not my level of expertise. But what is happening is that these theaters are selling out days upon days in a huge response. People have an appetite for this because it gives them hope and meaning. And at a time of desperation, they see actionable solutions that cross political and cultural boundaries that can help the commons. And I think that we are suffering in our societies from the media, from the politics. ultra boundaries that can help the commons. And I think that we are suffering in our societies from the media, from the politics, from the science showing the loss of habitat health that we're under lots of stressors, just like the bees are, we have a multiplicity of stressors. And these stressors lead to malays, depression, disease, crime, and poverty. And this is something that I think can help to a title change for the better, provided us done responsibly. Now you've mentioned companies. There's 20 at least new Seoul-Sivan companies that have been formed in the past year. A lot of them from the Canadian cannabis industry. They made a ton of money, so they've several of them called me up. I've talked to two groups and both groups, when I asked them, have you done a heroic dose on Seoul-Sivan? None of them would admit that they did. They're scared. They had a new trip. Well, I asked them, have you done a small dose? They said, and then we went to England. And one group, I said, you folks just seem like economic opportunists. And one of them said, that's exactly what we are. We just try to make money. So I'll make a deal with them. Listen, I need one afternoon of your time. I think there's important to be- Come to Jesus. Yeah, that's a different subject. I mean, it would be amazing, right? Do that and say, look, I'll do this deal with you, but just give me five hours. You take five hours, have them all trip together, and now go, let's reevaluate this. I'm with you. I'm with you, brother. And that's what's needed because those of us who understand the importance of this, realize that this is something that we have to carefully shepherd for maximum benefit. And at these commercialization of these companies, I call it sport wars. Very soon, there's gonna be sport wars. Between all these companies. It's a good movie. That's a sequel. Sport wars. But this is in man- What it's exciting to me is it's not dirty anymore. Okay, the first time I did mushrooms, I think was very, very early 2000s. And God, it's helped people about it. They were like, what's wrong with you? You're a grown adult. You take pay taxes, you know? All my life. It's like what kind of a fuck up are you? At your age, you're doing mushrooms. My God, grow up. That's what it was like. And you tell them, no, I don't think that's what it is. I think it expands your consciousness. I think it connects you to higher levels of thinking. And it just makes you more entombed with the great beyond. There's something more there. And I'm like, you listen to yourself. Yeah, go to work. Go, goddamn. Get up in the morning and have a cup of coffee and go to work. But now it's people are slowly but surely the dirtiness of even and then the term microdosing is wonderful because people know you could take a little bit. I believe microdosing this podcast for Ari and I just took a couple stems recently. And then like, I guess it's probably a little more than microdosing. It was a pretty, we were definitely noticeably high. But like an hour in and like an hour and a half in, I go, I forgot, we took mushrooms. I'm like, why am I so happy? But that feeling, it's like I want people to experience that feeling because it's a relatively clean feeling. And after mushrooms, I feel younger. Yeah. And I go to these TED conferences every year. And I feel lighter. I feel like I was treated like a leper. And I went to TED. And the audience was never tetra. So afraid of it. I'm talking about psychedelic mushrooms. How many years ago was this? The 2008 when I first went microdosing. What's the like now though? That's right. This last time, I was treated like a super celebrity. These hugely, hugely powerful people, some of the names you probably know, who came up to me and would shake my shoulder, it's going, now I understand. Now I understand. And that's how to say down boy, you know, get down. And they're, they're, they're, they're, a walk into something and they're, they're mates, their friends, their business associates. You know, there seemed, the common theme is, wow, he was such a jerk before and he's so nice now. Yeah. And they're seeking cooperation and they still are productive. They're still are creative. They're banging it out. The coders and Silicon Valley know that microdosing helps their coding ability. So it's a competitive advantage to those other computer companies that do not, you know, I think any, any new business populated and particularly by young people who are not doing microdosing are going to be a competitive disadvantage. Because the creativity flow, the camaraderie, the community, seeking to benefit the commons and also reward yourself. I'm not saying it's just all, you know, just helping, helping the commons. But the idea of being able to reward yourself and people rejoice and your success and they benefit from it as well. It's really integrates people together. Yeah. It's also people need to understand that there's a lot of this squirreling away resources and money and things and, and trying to climb that corporate ladder. This is a finite life. It doesn't last that long. It's a trick. You get sucked into this trick. And this trick is whatever CEO and every head of every corporation, every chief financial officer, all these people that are just trying to like improve the bottom line, rake in more money, keep this company growing and keep kicking ass. It's a trick. You're sucked up in a trick. There's a natural human tendency to accumulate numbers for whatever reason, go back to our early days when resources were scarce. And if you get sucked into that trick one day, you're going to wake up and that that's going to be usually be too late. Usually it's on your deathbed. Usually it's close to it. Like what did I do? This is it. My health is failing. My life's falling apart. And what has my life been? It's been 10, 12, 14 hours a day in these stuffed offices under fluorescent lights, crunching numbers and trying to acquire things. And for what? What impact have I made on humans? What is the negative impact of my ambition on the people that around me? All this is the one thing that's so Simon and particularly just psychedelics in general can provide is a break from patterns, a stopping, a cease fire of all the momentum of our culture, civilization, finances, taxes, credit card debt, all that shit just stops. And you get a chance to step back and look at the machine, watch it all whirl and spin in front of you. And you get to say, oh, I got sucked into the trick. I'm sucked into a trick. A lot of people I've talked to exactly what you're mentioning. And they did do a heroic journey. Yeah. And they look back and going, why was I prioritizing that? And I want to be out with my children. Yes. And looking at birds or walking in nature. Yeah. And nature, like, one of my books, sell side mushrooms to the world has a great chapter. And I think called it good tips for great trips. And one of the things, I understand the clinically controlled settings for clinical studies, et cetera. A lot of us don't need that. But I really enjoy being on an ocean bluff or a high point. And by being in the mushrooms about half an hour before sunset, being with a loved one, also good to have an experienced person who's not tripping, who is the watcher, citter, a citter. A citter is there, thinking meditation practice in place, folks, gives these people some space who's just watching. And then the people who are in by being understand they have a watcher, they have somebody who's anchored, who can help them. And then to have this sun go down and the stars come out and the colors and then this oceanic expansive experience, it's just nothing short of spiritual. Agreed. I think there's one thing we should talk about, though. There are people that have a tendency towards schizophrenia. And these people have, sometimes they have psychedelic breaks. They'll have psychedelic experiences. And then they don't do well. They go off to me. I'm sorry about you brought that up. And that is a deselection from the clinical studies of candidates who want to engage. But my good friend, Mark Hayden, who runs maps Canada, had a very interesting story with the schizophrenia. And he also cautioned in every physician I know, is on the same page as you. Including medical marijuana. Edible. Edible marijuana. It seems to have a significant effect on people with it. What Mark noted with this one person who is a severe schizophrenic was that he still heard voices in his head, but the voices now were friendly. They were affirming. They weren't like, go kill somebody. It was like, you are a good person. And so he still had the voice in the head, but the tenor and tone and attitude of the voices were supportive. What I'm talking about is it bringing on these schizophrenic experiences. That there has been some evidence, particularly about marijuana, that the high doses of marijuana for people that have tendencies, and we don't know, right? What causes someone to have schizophrenic breaks? Because there is a difference between pre and post, right? People have had deteriorating mental health that correlates with schizophrenia. Like what it caused them to be less schizophrenic or not exhibiting any of the problems. And then all of a sudden having severe problems, post-psychulatory or post-large dose edible marijuana, and or even large dose smoking it, or some people, they dab and they smoke wax. And then it happens to people that smoke too much pot. There's certain people that have that tendency. I would defer to clinicians who are extremely skilled in this area, and who have seen many, many patients. I'm not a doctor, but I concur with you. I think that is a real concern. The difference between a toxin in a drug and oftentimes be dose, and lower doses, you can see things at the higher doses you don't. So it's an entire spectrum and it's so complex and individualities of people are so uniquely different. I have a friend who's a doctor, if he smokes a joint, he can't go to sleep. I smoke a joint, and I'm a cuddle puddle man, I'm ready for the pillow. At night, I use it for going to sleep. Yeah, I'm the opposite. I start writing, I want to read, I want to watch documentaries. But it's a Cateva thing too as well, right? Do you have a significant difference in the way your body responds to Cateva's versus Indica's? I would like to be educated in this subject. I've used both for a very long time. I love Afghanistan, Indica. I, you have a beard, I have a beard, I love the smell. Okay, I'm just like smelling your beard. Yeah, I wear it out. Yeah. It's my perfume, right? I get it. But there's a lot, you know, we're in a new realm of pharmacology and pharmacognosy. And this is, I think we have to navigate this carefully. The problem with natural products is how do you standardize them to the active constituent? Well, you have more than one active constituent. You know, how do you standardize them all? There's an entourage or a symphony effect. This speaks to the complexity of nature. But I have a phrase that I like, is don't let the perfect be the enemy of the good. Just because you can't understand it doesn't mean it necessarily does not have a valid outcome or you know, can't be used. And I think that what we need to do is correct large data sets. And that's why I'm hoping microdose, not me, is going to give us an enormous amount of data than that clinicians can harvest from and going, we didn't anticipate this. And like these meta studies about partner to partner violence, when if your partner, men had tripped on mushrooms, they were less prone to violence. That was signal from the noise. How many other signals from the noise of these big, big pedophiles that we can pull out? Then we can get serious scientists to really carefully control clinical studies to be able to see this. And then how do you combine them? And I mean, there's a whole new landscape that gets away from single molecules and into the complexity of nature that we can build upon. Navigating to that place is going to be a challenge. There's no doubt about it. But I think we're smart enough now. We have enough computer technologies and diagnostic tools that we should begin on that voyage today. What do you think is responsible for that shift from TED of 2008 to TED of 2019? Michael Pollan's book, by the way. Michael Pollan's book was the big bridge. And he has 40 pages on me. And Michael, if you're listening, buddy, dude, I told him not to reveal my secret mushroom touch. Never trusted journalist. And Michael Pollan bless his heart. I love him. He's a great guy. But he said in his books, so to speak, he says, Paul told me not to tell you where his secret mushroom patch is. But I can tell you that we slept in a yard. There are three state parks along the Columbia River. And two of them have Europe's. He just basically gave up your spot. He had a nice spot. And it's like, OK, Michael. Well, we do that. I think it's the urge of a writer trying to give something to their readership. So what happened to that spot? Get trampled. It's run over with people collecting social mushrooms. They have big signs everywhere. They rush people. It's a huge income source now for the cops, for the cops, because they bust people. But the good news about that is I have gone to these state parks. And because there's big signs of no mushroom picking, a lot of forced men's there, there's lots of mushrooms. They're everywhere. And so I can photograph them, but you're not allowed to touch them. So they would have checked you on your way out. Oh, they're like bees on honey. So it's big. Come on. They are hiding in the trees. Finding in the bushes. They are alpha male. Imagine that. They've got drugs growing out of the ground. And they're like, they start you. They swam. Don't touch it. I had a lot of fun with my friend, because I got a stick. And I go, OK, I touched the mushrooms with a stick. Now, am I actually touching the mushrooms or not? Because if you touch the mushrooms. They tech your pockets. They will search you. Yeah. They'll search you for just randomly. No, if they have reason to believe, reason to believe that can search you. Stuff them in your underwear, bro. Just take a big fat baggie. Or swallow them quickly. But I know this is preposterous. Yeah, what if they find you lying down with your eyes dilated? You'd have to talk to them. I don't know if they would do a fecal sample later on or what. Right. But it approaches the absurd. Yeah. And this is one of the law enforcement officers that I know who, you know, you've been in the martial arts a lot on your life myself as well. I had several schools for about 30 years. And I had several law enforcement officers of students. Yeah, they don't want to be involved that on. That's all now. No, they're they get roped into it by the system. Yeah, they like like this is not something they want to do. I know a ton of cops. They're not none of them give a shit about mushrooms. So yeah, it's it's hugely, hugely unfortunate consequence of really ridiculous laws. And the idea of grown adults telling other grown adults that they can't do something that is incredibly beneficial that they themselves have never experienced so they have no knowledge of it at all. Other than the ancient stereotypes, mushrooms being bad, mushrooms being for burnouts and losers and hippies and all you can't handle life. Or they're mushrooms. Or they're walking hypocrites. And they know that they use it themselves. And they're like tormented, but they have to do this. So I found the most law enforcement officers are extremely reasonable as long as you show intent. You know, your attention. Respect and respect. Yeah, 100%. So it's never been, but you know, I don't subscribe to the defense that someone doing for spiritual purposes and they have hundreds of pounds with lip lock bags with scales and the basement and a commercial operation. You're avoiding taxes. Right. You're producing this as a factory. You know, take it in the chin. You get busted. Hey, come to the territory. Yeah. Eyes wide open. Don't cloak it in like the available spirituality. You're trying to create a spiritual revolution. Unless you're a true saint and you're giving that shit away. Yeah. Well, that would be different. But yeah, I have a phrase, nature provides I don't because I don't want to be responsible for another person's experience. So for sure. What if they've been melped down and they blame Joe Rogan? Yes. The day Paul's down? Yes. I don't. I can't control that circumstance. I don't want the responsibility. That's one of the reasons why I've hesitated on getting involved in medical marijuana or commercial marijuana have been offered. And I'm always like, I just don't think this is right. Because you can't, especially with edibles. You can't control people. You don't know what they're going to do. I don't. I don't do edibles because I'm hilarious. Well, I was in Kenney College, a Kenyan college in 1973. And my dad was coming to visit. And one of my people on the floor at this dormitory, they made some marijuana brownies. Oh boy. And I had never stayed with you. And I never did. I never did. I ate two brownies. I got my dad's coming in two or three hours. So what the heck? And I was so friggin' stunned. I could not believe it. And I could barely get my eyes. Really, I was trying to maintain it. How it is. You're trying to look like you're not stone, but you're blitzed out of your gourd. And so my dad was like, you're looking at me really curiously. It was early 1970s. And so the next day, I said, hey, dad, I got to tell you something. I ate some marijuana brownies. And he goes, I knew something was wrong. I knew I could tell. I could tell. I don't know shit, Sherlock. I don't know. I'm finally on the floor. Yeah. But Mayor Wannell, did he get mad at you? No, he was actually amused and delighted that I explained to him why I looked so stone. Oh, well, that's great that you had that kind of communication. Yeah. Just before he died, he wanted to trip on mushrooms. And I turned him down because he was close to the end of his life. And he was very religious. And I was concerned out, shake his reality tree so severely that he would question his entire life. Because he was like a death of the salesman figure is a tragic life that he led. And the mushrooms could have helped him enormously. But I was concerned that he would look back and goes, I wasted my life. And so it was too much of too heavy for me. And maybe I'm being selfish because I was trying to protect my own feelings. But he wanted to do it. He asked me, actually, he said, I want to do so I have mushrooms with you. And he wouldn't smoke pot. Do you have regrets about that, but not doing it with him? I do. I have a lot of regrets about that. So I have met several people in the past several weeks. I had Stanford Medical School. These are the conferences that I go to where there's a brain-mind conference at Stanford Medical School. And the first two sentences they mentioned, SoulSibin, 120 neuroscientists, $150 billion in the room. And SoulSibin was immediately mentioned. And when I met some people there that are intergenerational, grandparent, parent, and 18, 19-year-old child all journeyed with mushrooms together. And their interpersonal relationships, they told me, there's no reason for us ever to get mad at each other. And I just thought that was really powerful. Wow. Yeah, that is powerful. That sounds inconceivable to someone who's never experienced psychedelics. But someone who has, you go, yeah, I see how you could get there. Yeah, they'll make mountains out of more hills. Yeah. You can disagree without being angry. And you can be civil about it. Yes. Well, that's a lesson in the world. Could you use right now? I think this is, in many ways, the antidote for some of the problems that we're seeing with social media. One of the problems we see with social media is this disconnect from the human experience, disconnect from communication, person to person communication. And this anger and vitriol and hate and this and rage. And people hide behind screen names and trolls. Yes. You know, you're Joe Rogan, I'm Paul Stamets. Yeah. Well, who are these people hiding on screen names? So you're just, and a great TED talk, which I did not understand. And the TED talk was fantastic talking about why trolls do the things that they do. They do it because they get excitement. Sure. The idea is just to disturb the fabric. And the more disturbance they get, that is a measure of their success and provoking a response, even though they're not wedded to it. They just want to be able to cause a ripple in the pond. Yeah. Well, they don't feel significant. So they want to do something that they can get some sort of reaction. They have a rock. They see a window. They want to throw it. It's a natural inclination. But it's stupid. It's barbaric. It's a way. It's at least a fucking time. And some people celebrate it. I'm like, OK, celebrate it. You're not doing shit. You're not doing shit for yourself. You're not doing shit for other people. You're not improving whatever your art is, whatever it is that you try to do in this life to leave your mark or to contribute or to be creative. You're not doing that if you're trolling. All right. All trawlers should eat mushrooms. Yes. Well, I'll have all angry people should eat mushrooms. Yeah, that's true. I really agree with that. Well, there is good evidence that lions mane also compensates in many of these neurogenic benefits. That's all that stuff. All the time. There's like a lion's mane of lickser that I pour. Tell me if that shit's any good. Well, it comes from China. And is that bad? Every Chinese expert that I've met is that I wouldn't dare buy a mushroom from China. Jesus Christ. So we have a spoonable lion's mane. And I put that in smoothies all the time. And that's my go to. And that's exactly the research. Can I put it in coffee? Yeah, I put it in coffee. And Jamie, can you pull up that? How much do I put in neurogenesis benefits of lions mane? How much do I put in foods? Open. It's hot open yet, right? No, it's a little bit. How much do I put in there? I put about a teaspoon and it's stirred in. What's that? But the neuro, that's good. And the neurogenesis, this company in France that we did the neurogenesis with found that my ceiling was far more active than mushroom fruit bodies. And so the lion's mane stimulates neuroite outgrowth. And basically, it stands the nerves from growing compared to baseline. So in seven to 12 days of substantial, up to 22% increase in neuroite outgrowth. What we found was actually, there was one of us at 8%, one was at 12%, and then separately, we stacked it with an analog of sole sivant. And rather than being the arithmetic additive of cumulative, we found this synergy. So we think that lions mane, the research has shown increases myelin regeneration on the sheath of the nerves and the sole sivant proliferates nerve tip growth. So it should conceivably help you learn. So this is an example. This is unexpected result. This is lion's name, mycelium, that's showing a 14.8% over a baseline. Then we have a sole sivant analog that didn't do all that great. Which analog is this again? I'm gonna describe the analog for now. For obvious reasons, but it's a legal analog. It creates a seven percent outgrowth of neuroides. But then we stacked it with lions mane and the sole sivant analog. There's a theoretical additive effect. 114 plus 107, 122. But we got 136. It's statistically significant. The outlier actually is even higher. So the neuroscientists in France did this study was extremely excited. And the more we titrated it to greater dilution, the more active it becomes. What's that mean? Well, what does that mean? Well, maybe we're diluting it. And these are human cells for potent stem cells. And what we found was originally we were told it was called three micrograms per milligram or three micrograms, a millithivogram. But when we went back to 0.03, 100 times less, the neurogenic benefits became greater. Now there's something called the PK conversion. The pharmacokinetics when you ingest something only a small portion of it, make it into your bloodstream. So the good news is that these things are so non-toxic and they're so potent. Now looking at the dosing regimen, it appears so far, we have known this clinically. This is human cells in vitro, but this laboratory is predictive of neurogenic compounds that the neurogenic benefits are so substantial that the PK conversion of ingesting them could be seen in the bloodstream as a fairly good conversion rate. So for instance, if you take vanilla casted, vanilla, about 2% will make it into your bloodstream. So if you take a one-hole gram of vanilla, you get to get to get to your bloodstream. So that's the PK conversion. So what we're seeing is right now is the potency of this is so strong at lower and lower dilutions where we're getting more and more potency. So this is, yeah, I like to say dilution is the solution to profitability. The more that we dilute, the more potent it becomes. So this is why the neuroscientists and the friends are doing the study going, this stuff is so potent. Please dilute it, dilute it, dilute it. So we see this is a tremendous horizon. That lion's man's legal, it's an edible and choice mushroom, 1,000-year history of use. We found that mycelium is far more potent in the mushrooms for really good reasons. The compounds are called aeronacines. And these are actually discovered by Kavagishi in 1994 looking for an antibacterial agent. And so when they, when he was looking at the mycelium, fighting bacteria, he found that the mycelium expressed this antibacterial cyanide thing derivative. And he gave the name, error-nacine, after heurysium, error-nacius, just like penicillin, the name of the penicillium. And so he'd stumbled on the fact that it has neurogenic properties and antibacterial properties. So the mycelium is navigating through the ground through a hostile environment. And once the mycelium has an immune system, this operational between 40 degrees Fahrenheit and 95 degrees Fahrenheit, 35 degrees Celsius, that's the window that is growing in. So it's immune system is operative in that window. When you do super hot water extracts, you're in the extreme zone. That's not part of the meteorological lifespan of the mushroom. You're decocting it. You're taking out ingredients, but you're not harnessing within the meteorological window of temperatures that the mycelium has evolved to fight off pathogens. And so what we have found is the mycelium is far more active than the fruit bodies. This is all new science, but they had mushroomreferences.com. It's populated with dozens upon dozens of peer-reviewed articles showing the mycelium as far more active than the fruit bodies. And a whole genome sequencing of ray-shey, for instance, finds 25 more, 25% more genes coding for proteins are expressed at the mycelial state than at the mushroom state. Well, it makes sense because the mushrooms at the end of millions of cell divisions over months, years, even decades, finally produced a mushroom that rots in five days. The mushroom doesn't need a good immune system. It's attracting mycovores, animals, deer. John just showed me some photographs of, he's going to show you he was in a campground and found deer in the morning digging up mushrooms out of the ground. Well, animals engage mushrooms. You're going to your colleagues here. Or maybe it's Jeff. I'm sorry. Jeff, when we go to work here. Yeah, okay. So the idea, but maybe mushrooms attract insects, people, animals because they're fragrant. They're protein, they're nutritionally dense, and they want to engage humans. The mycelium is navigating through a microbial hostel environment. And report came out in the literature of a thousand species of bacteria in a single gram. There's more than eight miles of mycelium and a sisetylcubic inch. So the mycelium is navigating through a hostel microbial environment and setting up. This is a bacteria in a single gram. There's more than eight miles of mycelium and a sisabacubic inch. So the mycelium is navigating through a hostile microbial environment and setting up guilds and microbiomes and collections of cooperating bacteria that can help them defend against pathogens. Look at that. Estimate it up to eight miles of mycelium in a single inch of soil. And it's only one cell wall thick. That's such a weird-looking image. So it's so hard to see what that is. That's a mushroom that's melted back into the ground. This mycelium that's just now the mushrooms generate mycelium and it goes underneath the ground. So every time you're walking on the ground, you're walking up on miles upon miles of mycelium and it knows that you're there. These are sensitive. These are not only externalized stomachs. They're digesting nutrients and externalized lungs, exhaling carbon dioxide, inhaling oxygen. But I believe these are extant neurological networks of nature. When you see that pervasiveness of those cells and the climate change sciences are coming around to this, 70% of the carbon biologically stored in mycelium in the ground. The way to find climate change is not only replanting trees, which is great. I love it. But it's the mycelium networks you're building in the humus that creates the soil that creates the biodiversity that then guarantees the health of the ecosystem. So as the mycelium networks that govern because they're so pervasive, they set up because they're antibacterial properties, and another example of this is in the microbiome of soils and inside of humans, stomachs, turkey tail mushrooms and a placebo controlled random, randomized clinical study with humans. From a scientist associated with Harvard, found that turkey tail mycelium is a prebiotic for the microbiome that feeds bifidobacterium, like the bacillus, and suppresses plostridium, which is an inflammatory bacterium. So it's really, really interesting that the mycelium is feeding nutrients to the beneficial bacteria within the microbiome that then gives us health. And so these are precursor nutrients that elevate the populations of the beneficial bacterium. So the two go hand in hand. What about edible mushrooms, things like shiitake, those type of mushrooms? Is there any nutritional benefit to those things? A enormous nutritional benefit. And there's been two also metastudges that have come off this year showing that the ingestion of mushrooms with elderly people over the age of 60, there's a 50% decrease odds of Alzheimer's, like symptoms with a population of people consuming three mushroom meals per week. Now they didn't specify the mushrooms as it's not a single poor, but the mushrooms that are commonly eating are oyster mushrooms, shiitake and shimaging. I may be some of some other mushrooms, but that's once metastudges that came out. There was a study out of Japan from Dr. Ikekawa, the National Cancer Center, that found statistically significant reduction in cancers across the board. I think 162,000 people in this data set, and he was sent over the Nagana Perfecture to look for this. And these are edible and delicious mushrooms, also the Empower of the Immune System. Again, signal from the noise, statistically significant reduction overall cancer rates associated with a food. The division now between foods and medicines is blurred. And yet it speaks to Hippocrates and diasporitis, standing that let food be like medicine, medicine be like food. So it's interesting because physicians have been taught, you know, this sort of monomolecular approach to medicine and now we're realizing that these foods are essential nutrients for the immune system that downright glazed inflammation. It's so interesting that we're learning all this during our lifetime too. So you think that would all be established by now? Well, I'm glad you asked that. We have a paper coming out in the next two or three days, maybe in the next week, and this on Turkey Tail, mycelium. We were growing on rice and we were able to find out something that no one had to be reported in the literature. The traditional Chinese medicine approaches that these are immunomodulators, they help the immune system, but they also are not inflammatory. When you have an immune response, oftentimes associated with an inflammatory response, blood rushes to the wound, you inflame, you have all these compounds that are being produced by the blood to suppress an infection. But you can over amp the immune system and have an proflammatory response that can cause oxidative stress damage at a clatterily. And so the article that's just coming out with BMC, Biomed Central, alternative in a company medicine peer reviewed, we have found that the mycelium when it grows on rice, biofinance the rice, to then produce a unique immunological response that upregulates what's called interleukin1RA and interleukin10. These are anti-inflammatory cytokines. And so the mycelium doesn't do that, the mushrooms do not do that, but the mycelium is bioframented, the rice like tempeh is transformed, or like yogurt comes from milk because of lactobacillus or acidophilus. And that transformation then makes it a novel product. We found the same thing that the rice compared to the rice control has no anti-inflammatory properties. The mycelium because of the extracellular metabolites changes the rice into a unique immunological product that excites the expression of anti-inflammatory compounds while also exciting the pro immune response. So it's a buffer to response. It's interesting too that you're bringing this up that it's growing on something else. That seems to be part of nature, right? This sort of symbiotic relationship that some of these mushrooms have with the plants and the environment around them. That's a really, really good point because the mycelium will be found with the bees. When we grew the mycelium on rice compared to on birchwood, the mycelium-bron rice reduced the viruses, 10 plus the 10 to one. The mycelium we grew it on birch reduced the viruses up to 1,000 to one. So that's a natural environment. That speaks of fact that there appears to be something that's coding within the ecosystem that then excites the mycelium to produce something that is more strongly result in anti-viral activity. That's the case with cordyceps as well, right? Cordyceps mushrooms grow on other things. Yeah, but the cordyceps mushrooms from the grow on the worms. This is something that was a big subject of debate because the cordycepsinensis is a... It's a mushroom that grows on a worm, basically. A little caterpillar. On a caterpillar, larvae, and the Himalayas elsewhere in China and the far east. And people were finding these cordyceps mushrooms and they were cloning them. And then they got the culture going and then they analyzed the culture and they got what's called an anamorph. It's not that complicated. It's just two faces at the same point. There's a mushroom fruit body and then there's this imperfect form that is a different looking organism, but they're actually the same. They have two different expressions. When they... All the scientific literature kept on coming up with different anamorphs. And so they all had all this competition in the scientific literature. What is the true anamorph of cordycepsinensis? What now is called ophio-corticepsinensis. They redefined it, it's called Censu-Stricto. And when they analyze the mushrooms not until recently discovered that another group of fungi are chasing the cordycepsinensis as the fruit body develops. Other fungi are chasing right behind the other fungus. So he have multiple fungi that are actually present in the cordyceps worm. It's not just one species. It's multiple species that are co-occurring chasing each other in the inside the cordyceps mushroom as its fruits. So again, it just speaks to the complexity of nature. So... So what... Where should you get your cordycepsaurus for health benefits? You know, that's a really good question. Cordycepsinillus does not have these issues. The cordycepsinensis does. The problem is cordycepsinensis, thousands of articles have been published really which one they're talking about. It's like it's all mixed up now. What is true anamorph for these scientists using? They're ones called psiliomyces. There's other ones that her cetelicinensis is now thought to be the true anamorph for cordycepsinensis. Well, all this lingo means is basically there's a mushroom with a whole bunch of other fungi. They're associated with it. And when they cultured these other fungi, they did clinical studies or research studies and they came up with results. The problem is that they've mixed it up into four or five different species and you can't sort of de-disambiguate the data now because it's too complicated. So it's a really good question. The cordycepsinuliteris does not have these issues. And so I would steer people to cordycepsinuliteris right now because the cordycepsinensis, the ophiocortycepsinensis issues are still complicated. And now virtually thousands of research articles are an all now suspect because no one has a foggiest idea what anamorph they were using. Oh wow. So it speaks to the complexity of the system. So... And how many people are actually working on this data too? Oh, thousands of researchers. And I'm thankful that the Chinese mycologist sort of, over the ones who finally sorted this out. There was a lot of conflict academically. There's a lot of big egos in academia. People got wedded to their own research. We're all like that. And the challenges went back and forth and fortunately a group of Chinese scientists finally were able to narrow down the argument to understand that everyone was actually doing good culture work. They were actually expert mycologists taking the right tissue, taking it from the right cordycepsinuliteris. It's just that at that time they had a different fungus that was naturally part of the inside of the mushroom. That was a mixture of fungi that were racing at different paces of the mushroom. Well, the Chinese were the first to use it for a performance benefit, right? Or they were the first to at least be publicized to use it in the Olympics. They were using cordycepsinuliteris. That was one of the reasons why I'd on it. We developed Shroom Tech Sport, which is a cordycepsinuliteris based supplement, which I love cordycepsinuliteris for workouts, for pre-workout. It's like it gives you an extra gear. It's really kind of crazy how effective it is, especially in combination with B12 and other adaptogens. It just has, it's a great pre-workout supplement because it doesn't get you jittery at all. It's not a stimulant, but you have like a little more juice when you exercise. And that's one of the things that those high altitude hurting populations have found, right? That's exactly right. It's likely to be a vasodilator and it has storodal, like benefits as well. So, yeah, the cordycepsinuliteris for athletes has been tried and true. And many of these, or any of the morphs that I mentioned, have those properties. So for athletes, what dose would you recommend? Like what? Well, I'm not a medical doctor, so when people ask me recommendations, I know that the common usage of these in the order of two grams, you know, there are usually 500 milligram capsules. There's lots of good companies that are producing this, you know, I would just make sure it's my mycelial base as not fruit body based of the clear evidence of showing the, the problem. How I'm one find out whether something's mycelial basis. Sure, the clearer. We say mushroom mycelium on all of our labels. So, and if you were going to take that, like if you wanted to take shrimp tech sport, if you wanted to make your own concoction, you would recommend two grams. And then. And make sure you had no the chain of custody of where it came from. Because a lot of these companies buy in the spot market. What company is this? You gave me post defense? Post defense. Is this yours? Yes, your company. Oh, okay, we'll support you. Host defense and there's their website where someone can grab this. Yeah, fudge.com or host defense.com. And do you sell quarter steps as well? Yes we do. Oh, there you go. Awesome. And do you take this stop before you exercise? Do you take absolute steps? Yeah, I take quarter steps. I take lion's mane and seven species blend in particular. Seven species blends. What's in that stuff? It's stem at seven. It's got chaga. It's got rishi as a garracron. It's got a birch polypore called pithapore, specialinus. And so it has my talking in it. And these are seven species blend. But the evidence for physicians and people who want to look at peer-reviewed articles, the single species have the most elaborated and convincing evidence when you start compounding these. So what we're doing, we have five or six full-time researchers, several PhDs and our staff. We are, again, trying to disambiguate the complexity of all these benefits by looking at one species at a time. So we're doing this methodically, spending hundreds of thousands of dollars, literally a year now. I have 110 employees. And I created my company in order to do research. I have no partners. So I can now dedicate the resources to be able to do novel research. And we love going up against conventional wisdom because you have to challenge conventional wisdom to see if it's indeed meets the muster. For instance, beta-glucans. How big is a beta-glucan? 10,000 dollars? A million dollars? I have no idea what any of those words are just said. Beta-glucans are big polymers of sugars. And so the big myth out there is beta-glucans are the golden compound that used to standardize products to. But there is not a certified method for beta-glucan analysis. We have an article coming out also on a 17 species plan using the same, it's called the Megazarm test, the same Megazarm test with one with going at the same exact test to the same samples. One sample got less than 1%, and the other sample got more than 30%. That is a disparate range of data that does not give you any confidence. And so the beta-glucan method, how big is the beta-glucans? Well, the beta-glucans are a giant scaffolding. It's like the structure of this building. And inside that scaffolding is all these other compounds that are adornments that are embedded in this giant scaffolding. And so we did a clinical study with turkey tail mushrooms and breast cancer that was published in peer-reviewed journal and the scientists that I worked with Ken Quail at Al, like in 19, 2016, I think published an article where they use lip paces, which is an enzyme that dissolves lipids. Because I was arguing, the beta-glucans are huge scaffolding. These other components inside the beta-glucans that are immunologically active. And they have been reading literatures all predominantly beta-glucans. I said, well, let's do an experiment. And they did. They took the bond random with it. And then they put this fat dissolving enzyme lip paces. And they strip the lipids, the fats, from the beta-glucan and scaffolding. And then they took that product without the lipids and it reduced immune response by 83%. Thus proving that the lipids that were inside the beta-glucans were pharmacologically active. And now the why that's important is if you do hot water extracts, you don't get fats. You know, fats is not missable and water. And so that's why fats separate. So having these fats and we're made of fat, cholesterol is good for you. Fats are good for you. Wait, what are you saying? That leaves. Whether you're a paleo guy, right? So you know this. From the fats or your. Yeah, I don't prefer. I don't like that word, paleo. OK. Because I think it's a little inaccurate, what people eat during the paleo-lific. I like calling it primordial. Yeah. That's a good one. Primal. Some people call it the primo. Primal diet. Yeah. But this speaks the fact that every mushroom species is like a miniature pharmaceutical factory. And what makes a species is the accumulation of those compounds that are different mixtures. There's around 1.5 million species of fungi, 150,000 species are mushroom-formiform fungi. We've identified around 15,000 species. Of those 15,000 species, we have about 20 to 40 species that we know are beneficial for human health. Well, that's a pretty good selection criteria. Because I'm 14,000 identified species are potentially 150,000 out there. We haven't identified most of them. But our ancestors, through trial and error, have narrowed the field of candidates down to about 20 to 40 species that we know because of their molecular arrangements and complexity benefit human health. Now, it's when people pick mushrooms, and they go out and pick mushrooms, the real issue seems to be that there's some mushrooms that are edible that look very close to mushrooms, very similar to mushrooms that are very poisonous. True to the uninitiated. And the people who have not learned. But when you learn to chantrel, you will not mistake it. Nothing looks like a lion's main mushroom. Once you learn lion's main mushroom, it's hard to mistake it. So there are some lookalikes. And with the amideto-feloidies, the destroying angel, and with the paddy-strum mushroom, which is commonly cultivated and collected in Asia, many of the mushroom deaths in North America have come from, not displaced, but people's, but people who've come from Asia, and because they're secretive in the language barrier and the culture of being wild collectors, they then mistake the destroying angel for a paddy-strum mushroom. That's a real common mistake. There are other people who said, well, it just looked edible. That's a really dangerous thing that's saying. So you have to know species individually. There's edible species of amideto, and there's poisonous ones. And there's deadly poisonous ones. Amideto seems to have a lot of controversy, as far as its efficacy, as far as like a psychedelic efficacy. What's that? I don't know anybody that's ever really tripped off of it. Mascaria or amideas? Yeah. Oh, man, do I have a story? Please. Oh my God. Because everybody that I know, like, and that was something that McKenna talked about, as well, Terrence talked about while he was alive. He said that it seems that it's genetically variable, seasonally variable, perhaps even environmentally variable. All those things are partially true. I have eaten the amidemystaria four or five times. I mean, Ms. Gary is the red mushroom with the white dots, as the rare tell mushroom. It's perfectly legal, Santa Claus mushroom. It contains muslimal, muskarin, and ebotenic acid. Actually, very little small amounts of muskarin, but the muskarin exemptums cause salivation and sweating. And I tripped with my friend on amidemystaria, and I looked at him and he was foaming at the mouth. And I had all these bubbles coming out of his mouth. I got, man, dude, you look like they have rabies, because you should see what you look like. So, but then amidemystaria, I've eaten out a few times, and people do boil it in water, throw away the water twice, and they can make it into edible mushroom, but it's not that great of an edible. But there's another mushroom called amidea pantherina. It's a kick-ass mushroom. It has five times or more. The amounts of emusimal and ebotenic acid almost no muskarin. So, the salivation effect of amidemystaria. So, I have had a very good friend. We have not friends anymore, unfortunately. But I was in charge of the Herbarium at the Evergans State College, and I freeze-tried amidepantherina. They're called panther caps. They're brown in color, and they have dots. Very good. The panther cap, perfectly legal mushroom, an extraordinarily powerful. So, I was living up in Darrington, Washington, and I was cabined. I was a logger hippie for a few years, and so my friend Dave came up, and I had these freeze-tried mushrooms from the Herbarium, and I said, let's go ahead and eat these. And I had read in the literature, and almost no one had eaten them. So, I made an omelet, and we cooked it up, and he was much lighter than me, so I thought, well, I should have two thirds of the omelet, right? Because he's lighter than me, and so we ate the mushrooms run 10 o'clock, and we're living in this cabin, but across the creek was a square-square-queed camp run, and it was the Winnebago people, back then in the 70s, I hitchhiked across country 13 times. Winnebago never picked me up. So, they were always in the enemy. And so, we were long-haired hippies, we did eight these mushrooms, and we thought for entertainment, let's go look at the Winnebago people. So, it was so close. I don't know why we drove our car, but we drove the car out of my cabin, we went down like a half a mile, and we turned left into the square-queed camp run. And we parked the car, and we wanted to go up to a beautiful view spot. And so, we walked through the Winnebago people, and their families, and everything else, and we got up onto a ridge, and I'm like, this is a great view spot. But we're waiting, no, like an hour, no effect. You know, and I was talking to Dave, so, wow, maybe these aren't that potent. And then right after we said that, well, I looked out Dave and I said, David, do you see that? I go, yeah, and we waited a few more seconds, and then, just big distortion field. I mean, a beautiful view of the volcanoes, and the valleys, a big viewscape, but we could see the airway that had become that sort of this liquid, and then it started coming on, stronger, and stronger, and stronger. And we go, oh my God, this is getting intense. We better get the heck out of here, and go, go home, we're safe, because this is coming on so strong. So, we come down off this little plateau, and we had to come down through the Winnebago people, and then, oh my God, and here, we're walking, and a thing about aminitas, and Muscaria, and Pantherina, you have dull yellows and browns, but you feel like this giant, and you're moving a slow motion, every step you're taking, you feel like this giant but moving really slow, and then I came to Winnebago's of no end. There were hundreds of feet long. I'm trying to walk past this Winnebago, and like, Winnebago's just Winnebago, and I keep on walking further and further, and then, oh my God, and so, then we're really, just really, really high. It was ridiculous, and I had a really flex camera, and we came up to the car, and so for some friggin' reason, I locked the car, and so I had my key, and I looked at my key, and I looked at the lock, I went, pam, missed, oh shit, okay, pull the key back, missed. But Dave goes, you okay? I go, I'm fine, and he goes, you want me to drive, and I go, no way, dude, if I'm in this high, there's no way I want you to drive, right? And so I did it over and over again, then magically, just for repetition, it just made it into the lock, so I unlocked the door, and I get into the car, and I drop my camera, and then I'm in the car, and I'm trying to get my key, and I thank God I didn't get my key, and I was not safe to drive. And then Dave was going like, oh my God, Paul, we're so friggin' high right now, and I go, and I say, well, let's go home, and I said, did I drop my camera? And I went over, and I looked like we're on, there was my camera, I picked it up, and going, well, Dave, I dropped my camera, dropped my camera again, oh, well, Dave, did I drop my camera? I picked up my camera, go, whoa, I dropped my camera. I did this over and over and over again, a repetitive motion syndrome kicked in. It was a very common symptom, they am in a pantherina, I dropped my camera dozens and dozens of times. How did it look at the end? Well, it was shattered, but Dave goes, Paul, you should look up, and a whole bunch of people from the Winnebago community had lined up, holding their children in close proximity, watching this repetitive motion syndrome, where I'm just constantly picking my camera. So they're watching you for entertainment where you went to watch them, right? They're for entertainment, and now they're freaking out, because I have this repetitive motion syndrome, and I take one step, I dropped my camera, I want Dave, I dropped my camera, and I pick up my camera again, I go, did I just drop my camera? Whoa, I dropped my camera again. Now this speaks to the berserkers, and the berserkers, the word berserk, came for the berserkers in Scandinavia, where the legend has it, that these Scandinavians, the Vikings were surrounded, and outnumbered, and they were gonna be killed the next day, and they ate a whole bunch of MD to mascara, and a big soup, and legend has it, and it's not been confirmed, but this is the legend that's very commonly reiterated, is that they drank a whole bunch of MD in mascara soup, and then they went, and the next day, even though they're massively outnumbered, they took off all their clothes, and they attacked the enemy, naked with swords, and that's where the word berserk came from, the berserkers, so I'm having this berserker experience of repetitive motion syndrome, and I dropped my camera over and over and over again, and I looked up and these parents were holding their children to leave freaking out, I said, we gotta get out of here, so we left the doors open in the car, and I'm taking one or two steps, dropping my camera, picking it up, dropping my camera, we finally made a pack, he disappeared, I didn't know, it's a day of your on your own, and dude, I have enough to worry about, you know, I made it back to my cabin, and I get from my cabin and there's a combination lock, oh no, I don't need a combination lock right now, I can barely, you know, I'm spinning lock back and forth, spinning my collection, and then, eventually the lock just spontaneously opened, and then I fell on the ground and I started convulsing, and the cool thing about convulsing is it felt good, every time I convulsed, I actually went, oh, that feels so good, so convuls some more, and I was just convulsing constantly, like epileptic convulsions, very, very intense, but they felt good, this is the weird thing about it, I needed to convulse, because every time I convulsed, I kinda got a reset of my neurology, you know, and I'm a baseline, and then it would spin out of control, and then I had this cascade of, I stinny and thought, I'm like, oh my God, I can save the world, I know how to do this, and then I would have a prepositional or an verbal phrase, and just before I came to the object of my thought, that was like, stinny and insight out of have attention, and then I would come to the course of the end of that sentence, and then I have another tangent, and I saw death as a perpetual series of alternatives that never gave me the satisfaction of a conclusive thought, and it was just last for about this. 12 hours, you know, I fainted, I went into a coma-like state, so you recommended it, you know, I do not recommend it, and the biggest concern besides the repetitive motion syndrome is hypothermia, because if you're out in the woods or something, and you're exposed, you're not getting up, so you go, it's called soma for a reason, it's the soma mushroom, it's some nifurous, it causes, that's the- That's what soma is? Because isn't there some debate as to what soma actually is? That's what art Gordon Watson proposed, soma and the pedic literature, there's a big debate about that, but the other story I like to tell is my friend, Dr. Andrew Wyle, was at the Cougar Hot Springs in Oregon, and Andy's medical doctor from Harvard, and he was walking the trail, and people came running down to, oh my God, this guy's trying to kill himself, you know, gotta come up, and Andy went up this guy, he had to eat in a whole bunch of Andy and Mascario, big biker dude, and it covered with blood, and he was up on a bridge, and he was swinging his legs back and forth, and above the rocks, he threw himself off the bridge. Now it's only about six or eight feet, but it's enough onto the boulders down below. Smash himself on the rocks, and then he climbed back up on the bridge, and he swung his feet and threw himself off the bridge. So this causes repetitive motion syndrome, both of my cameras, et cetera. It's a much on this perfectly legal, as probably one of the most dangerous mushrooms that anyone could eat. I definitely advise not doing this, because I always thought, if I was ever called as an expert witness, having these experiences, and someone who was watching tails from the crypt on TV, and then they saw a knife. It causes temporary insanity. I mean, it's still inside mushrooms. They're wonderful, they're peaceful, they're loving. It's an apotheco, right? But the amindeed of mushrooms caused this strange, strange sort of behavior that is really potentially dangerous. And that is the mushroom that was documented in the sacred mushroom in the cross, where John Marco Allegro de Legend, that he alleged that the entire Christian religion. And that is the mushroom that was documented in the Sacred Mushroom in the Cross, where John Marco Allegro de Leggard that he alleged that the entire Christian religion was essentially misunderstanding. And it was really all about the consumption of these psychedelic mushrooms and fertility rituals. And these were all sort of captured in stories and tales and parables. Yeah, it was an academic suicide for him now with that statement and still very controversial. Have you read his work? Yes, I have. What do you think? Well, linguistically, the guy's way over my head. If you read his book, it's all about linguistics and the one that translators are the Dead Sea Scrolls. Way beyond my kind of knowledge. It's so far beyond my kind of knowledge I can't make rhyme or reason out of it. That seems to be the problem with it most people can't. Yeah, so, but I never threads of truth in all of this, but I don't buy it on its face on the grandi always conclusions that he made, but clearly mushrooms have inspired religion. Yes. And I teach these workshops on gourmet and medicinal mushrooms and one of these workshops is very spiritual guy, very quiet, but very definitely walked, it looked like the real deal. He waited until everyone was gone. And he said, Paul, I've been sent here. I said, really? It says, I am a devout Christian. I'm in Billy Graham's inner circle and a bunch of us take suicide mushrooms as sacraments. And as brought us, as brought us closer to Jesus, closer to our religion. Now, I don't care if you're Muslim or Christian or Hindu, the idea of these mushrooms making you feel the spiritual universe more spiritually connected, give you a cultural heritage in your reference points. But he said, these are extremely important. Now, my mother was a charismatic Christian. I met some people in her group who came to their religious beliefs through psychedelics. Don't do psychedelics now, but that was their portal. They had their big revelation through psychedelics. So the connection between souls have been in magic mushrooms in religion. I think has a lot of credibility and there's lots of examples of that. The specificity of some of the arguments people make, I have great doubts about. That's interesting. What about in the ancient Hindu religions, the ancient Hinduism and some of of the ancient books speak of various sacraments that have never been defined, right? Yeah. And why is that Brahmin cows are sacred? When the philosophy of events grows out of Kalpoo, in India, and yet they won't eat cows and Buddhists supposedly died from a mushroom. He was given a mushroom by a peasant and just the mushroom and died. There is that connection. I've always thought curious that the philosophy of events is such a religious provoking mushroom and yet cows are highly revered as being sacred. I would think you would keep the mother of the mushroom sacred. You want to protect the resource. But again, these are at times when fables and parables and religious rights were controlled by the cognizantae and they were the gatekeepers of knowledge that was too powerful for the general population to understand or appreciate and so they protected that knowledge. And that's the rule of most religions is that the inner circle holds the keys to the kingdom and what's happened with orthodox religions is they create institutions where you have to pay titheings in order to have a gatekeeper to have a contact with God. And that I think is the problem with monotheism versus polytheism. Jack Harrer before he died was working on a book about psychedelic drugs, specifically mushrooms and religious experiences. And he had some really crazy old paintings that he had found that showed people that were naked, seemingly dancing and ecstasy with a translucent mushroom around them. And the idea being that this is supposed to, this image was supposed to represent someone who is tripping. There's a lot of really interesting books that have been published that show art, you know, going back hundreds of years even, you know, into the late 1300s, showing, you know, Christian art where mushrooms are pretty easily seen. So there's a lot of history to that. But it becomes the unfathomable. I mean, maybe you can imagine it to be true, but how can you prove it to be true? Right. How can you? Yeah. So a lot of that is like, it's great historical information. Probably a lot of it's true, hard to say, which is which is true, which is not. But in modern times now, Johns Hopkins, these clinical studies are on mysticism, spirituality, showing that these are some of the most spiritually significant experiences of people's lives. The interesting thing about Johns Hopkins studies is that 70% of the people have positive experiences. And 14 months later, they still described as experiences of being significantly positive. They're friends, they're colleagues, they're fellow workers also say that materially change these people's personality. But the 30, depending on the people who had negative experiences, the negativity of experience did not extend more than experience itself. So this is speaks to re-remembering and what's been determined is when you have these really profound spiritual experiences, it sits with you. And when you re-remember it, you rekindle that thought. And this may be a way of overlaying PTSD. Rather than having the reference standard, this associated with PTSD, you supplanted with a positive experience. But the people who had negative experiences during tripping did not have a negative that negative consequences to the next 10 more than experience itself. So this was, this was a profound insight. And so Johns Hopkins ruling Griffiths just emailed me recently, they have other clinical studies that are ongoing, looking at one which has got published on meditators, given placebos, versus getting high doses of cello-sibin. And then measuring the consequences of those experiences months or a year or two later. And again, the same thing is reinforced. These cello-sibin mushroom experiences create a positive reference point that you can capitalize on by re-remembering them subsequent from this experience by not even having to take the mushrooms again. That is profound. When you have a happy memory that you can anchor your personality on, it's a game changer. Yeah. I just, I wonder if we're ever going to see in our lifetime centers where you can go and train professional, can guide you through something like this. That's happening now. Is it? Yes. The California Institute of Integrative Studies and the Basins and Eversisco are this training therapists and Canada. They're therapists in Europe, they're therapists. There are training programs now in psychedelic therapy. This is something that has a tremendous momentum. Indigenous peoples have a really nice structure, many of them do, not all, but many have a really good structure for the responsible use of these substances. Us, there are displaced peoples and I would call us European-based people and many other people displaced. We don't have the same constructs historically that we can operate within. And so the psychedelic therapist movement is huge right now. Canada is leading the way. The Canadian government is very, very positive towards psychedelic therapy because the opioid crisis and because significant results is in the movie, this has come out called Dost. And it tracks heroin addict, the young lady and Vancouver. It is a heroic movie. It is not one of these, you kind of feel good at the end of the movie, but it is intense. And she's doing a bogeh. And she also does high doses of mushrooms. But the opioid crisis is so pervasive. There are so poor treatments available that through the psychedelic therapies in several days, they're seeing a tremendous success in people breaking decades-long opioid addiction within a week. And so the psychedelic therapists are integral to that success. And so there are clinics now arising all over the world for this. In Portugal and Mexico and Spain, in Jamaica, they're the clinics are arising specifically to meet the needs of people who are trying to get these legally so they don't get in trouble with the law. So in Portugal and Spain and Jamaica, for instance, these are legal. Many of these substances are. Well, what gives me a lot of hope is that everything seems to be trending in a positive direction. Like all these things that you're saying, your own personal experiences from Ted from 2008 versus 2019, all these different treatment patterns or pathways that are available now to people that were never before and that we're starting to see an acceptance overall, just the general population. People understand what this is and that this might literally be the cure to what else is. I am, for people out there who have not gone on a deep, sole-side of an experience, this is very important for me to emphasize. And after you do a heroic journey of sole-side the next day when you look at those mushrooms, you say, no way, dude, I'm not touching those for a long time. Give me six months. I'll come back to them. They're anti-addicted by their nature. Because it's so powerful. So powerful and profound and you've gone through the gauntlet and back. You're not ready to do it again. And so how many drugs that can have such a dramatic impact that are non-addictive that can break addictive cycles with other drugs? I think this is a gateway, a gateway opportunity for solving many of the ills of our society. I couldn't agree more. Anything else for a good idea? No, I just want to thank you and your audience for having the courage to bring these subjects to the table in a coherent fashion. We don't have all the answers. We will make mistakes. I think it's really important that we take where the adults in the room. We see somebody spinning off the rails rather than being judgmental. Go up and put your arm around them saying, hey, there's better benefits from this. I fully understand why people want to party with them, especially when they're younger and they're going to the coming of age. But as you mature, these are really important for your own sanity and for the health of your community and your family. So else I have mushrooms make nicer people. I think that's a great way to say it. I agree. I think it should be on a t-shirt. Maybe a bumper sticker. I want to thank you, man. Without your knowledge and information, the way you're able to so eloquently express all these ideas, a lot of people would know a whole lot less. It's a team effort. It's just not me. It's a whole uprising. It's a mycelio underground that's reaching up and telling people and sharing with their friends. Check out the movie, Fantastic Fundjai. It's really good and dosed. Two good movies that speak to this. And your website once again. Fundjai.com. Fundjai.com. Paul Stamets, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you, Paul. All right. Thank you, brother. Bye.