Go run and run again! The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day Joe Rogan, podcast by night! All day! We up? Yeah, the med films on the throughout the roll, Paul. Good to see you, sir. Good to see you, Joe. What's happening now? You're doing book number eight, huh? Book number eight, yeah. Who would have known there's so many books to be written on mushrooms? Well, this is state-of-the-art taxonomy. Still, side mushrooms are natural habitat. Cover 60 species all over the world. But it also shows not only historical use, which people are surprised. They've been using India and Europe and South Africa. New species was just found, so it has to be a melutae. But the bazoo-thoo and the sous-thoo and the province have been using an obviously 100 to years. We know this because they have songs. So it's really interesting when indigenous people have using so-called mushrooms and scientists, quote, discover them, and give them a Latin binomial. But the still-siving mushroom revolution is happening all over the world right now. I never expected it to be the spig and the Rand report came out this past year. 3% of Americans tripped on Seoul, and in 2023. That's only 3%. That's 8 million. I know. I would agree with you because how many people would admit it, right? I would probably under-reporting them. Oh, for sure. Yeah, for sure. So it seems to be, I think, a revolution for the freedom of consciousness. And it's crossing all political boundaries, all religious boundaries. Well, it's happening here in Texas for sure because of the I-B-Gain Initiative and what's happening with Governor Rick Perry, who is former Republican Governor of Texas, who is all in on this. He's a great guy. I've talked to him backstage a few times. And he's the type of person that I'd really admire because even though we may have political differences or different cultural backgrounds, we're joined together with a common purpose of trying to help people. Yeah, well, he's not either a lot of ideologically captured. Like, he realized that he was wrong and then his position on this was based on ignorance. So he educated himself and completely turned around, did 180 and now is an advocate. And it's helped a lot of people. It's tremendous benefit to veterans and people with PTSD and coming back from the war. And it's one of the only things that's been shown to really get these people straight. That is so nice. And my heart really goes out and this is a little after Senator so my friends will be surprised. But my heart goes out to law enforcement. Can you imagine stopping a car on a stormy night, a two in the morning? And the window comes down and you have two seconds to make a decision. You do that hundreds of times. The likelihood of having one mistake is very high and having one very bad day to find your life for the rest of your life is not right. No. Because then if you can't resolve those issues as soldiers, as law enforcement, as a doctor who makes a mistake, if you can't get through that term oil, that stress, the anger that then can emanate out from your anger at yourself to other people. Yeah. And this is what's so exciting and I began and other recyclable likes I think really do. They help people forgive themselves and become better people. And once you forgive yourself and become a better person, then everyone is excited about the fact that you've changed. Yeah. And imagine the world that we could be living in if this experience was available to so many of the people that are committing crimes. So many of these people who have never had exactly any kind of a psychedelic experience have never really confronted their own reality in that way. How many of them would change their ways? I would imagine a great deal. We would bring up a very important point that I've been thinking about a lot. We talk about using psychedelics in Salsaib and other substances for treating people who have trauma, you know, mental illness, you know, addiction issues. But what about the near normals? All of us are somewhat on the spectrum. And we go back and forth, depending on your daily, monthly, yearly activities, events, etc. But what about prevention? Yeah. If the return on investment is to reduce addiction and crime and all the other collateral damage that's associated with it, then it would save hundreds of billions of dollars, hundreds of billions of dollars. So the sibemus should be made free, I think, you know, as a citizen's right to have access and the government should pay for it. It would massively reduce our national debt. It would make our better society. But that's not going to happen, right? That's a dream. But I don't know if that's not going to happen. It's just not going to happen tomorrow. You know, I think we're on a path if you look at where we stand with marijuana, for instance. Like, look at Las Vegas. It's a great example. Because I remember in the 90s, and when we would go to Las Vegas for the UFC and the lack of sex actually was in the 2000s, it was highly illegal. And, you know, I'd remember the stories from the 70s where people were locked up for their entire lives for, you know, like an ounce of marijuana in Vegas. They had zero tolerance for it. And I always wondered what that was about, whether that was an anti-hippy thing or whether it was in response to the alcohol lobby. Vegas obviously sells a lot of alcohol and anything that would cut back on their profits. You know, we talked about this the other day. The studies showed that among young people, alcohol consumption is down significantly. Isn't it down by like 25%, which by the, was that? I don't know. I just don't know the number. Which by the way, a great thing. You know, that's a good thing. But it's not a good thing for profits. And so, but my point is that how many states now have cannabis as completely legal? I think it's like 19. Yeah, it's more than a dozen. I think it's not somewhere around then. And then you have medical use, which is in many, many more states. It's just a matter of time before the people in the federal government realized this is a losing battle. Indeed. And think about the guilt that those law enforcement officers must feel. And certainly they must feel. I would hope so. That they know that they put somebody in prison for 30 years for an ounce of marijuana when it's now legal in those states. Right. How do they reconcile that? How do they? Yeah. Well, I mean, PTSD amongst law enforcement is something that's very rarely discussed. We talk about it a lot with soldiers. But one of my friends who was a former Austin PD told me that you see more in your line of duty in a police department than more death, more terrible, terrible things than he ever did when he was in combat. And it's just, it's like every day. Every day you're dealing with shootouts. Every day you're dealing with stabings. Every day you're dealing with horrific crimes. And it's just your brain is just overrun with this. And with firefighters, you know, there are the oftentimes the first responders or their first. My partner's a medical doctor in Canada, but she used to be a firefighter. And yeah, they oftentimes the policeman outshot for 20 minutes and they're there. And the things they witness. I mean, things that no one should ever witness. But I mean, this is where it's so important that we come together as a society. Because I believe that 98% of people are good and 2% of people are assholes. And I think the assholes can become good people if they have a psychedelic experience. I really think there's progress right now. So much of the media and clickbait journalism. They amplify the extraordinary things that get by balls. But more and more I think people are they become more, have greater wisdom about how they're being manipulated by the media. People come together and you know, that's why I like mushroom hunting. Mushroom hunting brings people together. You go out hunting, you have this, you wreak experience, you don't talk politics. You're excited about the species that you hope to find and find ones you don't. But they become like friends after a while. When you find a chantrelle or you find a shaggy mane and you find a philosophy. So I've been mushroomed. You know, that chance encounter that you reek at experience and sharing it then sharing, eating the mushrooms with a edible or otherwise. I mean, it brings a community of interest together. It's just a really fun thing to do. And there's something I want to mention to you that's really important. I have been to a lot of conferences. I came back from the psychedelic science conference in Denver or Frederick Dublin, 8500 people there. But I've really find an extraordinary way of taking iPhones and droids and all these kids are just addicted to their phones, right? They're not going out in nature. So there is a called nature deficit syndrome. It's actually affecting people. There is an app that I'm just in love with called I naturalist. It was taught by a guy named Scott. He just gave a TED Talk that was released yesterday. I naturalist, you can take a phone and you can go out and you can go out and you can go to flower, a frog, a mineral, a mushroom, your photograph. You upload it into the cloud of I naturalist. And they have all these experts and my amateurs trying to tell you what it is. It's a great little debate going back and forth. No, you're right. And then when it hits research grade, it's when a group of experts come together and says, yeah, you have Copernos Camatoes. I have a bleeder cellulose. They agree on identification, but it has fueled the scientific community with all sorts of these citizen scientists, finding new species. And it brings people into nature. It gets kids excited. And then you can go to I naturalist right now and you can look around your house or this place to see the reports of birds and mushrooms and things. I just wanted to add naturalist yesterday and philosophy, Convenceus, the golden tops, go around Austin. Who knew? You know, because they've been reported. Now you have zones of privacy, so you don't have to tell them exactly what the mushroom is. And that's probably a not a good thing to do if it's a solid size mushroom, but you can make a peripheral zone of anonymity. It can be within two miles, five miles, ten miles. And that way you can do the report. But some of them have high specificity with lat longs within a few inches. But it's so exciting in the field of biology and mineralogy and ornithology, etc. They have all these citizen scientists out there with their phones. And then every year all over the world now, they're called bio blitzes, where several hundred people literally come together, they'll go into a park, they have all their iPhones and droids. And they photograph everything and they upload it to a naturalist. It's a look at species diversity. This has revolutionized the field of biology. I think it's revolutionized is bringing children and young people back in the nature. And you then you build a community. You're not talking about politics. You're talking about nature. And when did you find? And holy moly, I never knew that a blue mushroom or something like that. So it's inspiring to see the kids get so excited about this and adults. And so this is, you know, I'm a very cool. Yeah, very. How many new species get discovered? Oh, thousands. They're over a year. Thousands every year now. Really? Thousands and thousands. There's 223 known species of soul-siving mushrooms. And about, wow, that's a 10 of them in the past two years just come from citizen scientists. Quote, quote, and quote, and butchers who found it to upload it to a naturalist. And finding new species, like how do they determine what if it's a completely new species? How do they determine that it's a l'assaiven? How do they determine where it's from? Excellent question. The silt-siving species localized in the genosalosabe, which has the most l'assaiving species. We just know from genetic associations, if they're in the clade, the group that has l'assaiving species. And DNA also shows that they fit right into this cluster. And we have high confidence. But if a mushroom has gills, you know, and it bruises blueish and has purple brown spores, those three things need to be true. Then 95% of probably l'assa's silt-siving mushroom. What species it is becomes more debatable. The silt-siving mushrooms are very hard to find. With the exception of the golden top, and there's not a call pineal sinusins, they're going pastures, they're easier to find. And there's the silt-siving mushrooms that are hidden in the landscape. How so? Well, I just had a 70-year-old man write me from Vermont. And he has found sollosabe cery lippies. And he wrote a classic letter to me that many people have written, I have looked for these mushrooms for years. I couldn't find them. And then I found a few, and I looked around, and they were everywhere hiding in plain sight. And so now he knows with slosabe cery lippies in Vermont, he knows it's just, I can't believe how obvious they are to me and how unobvious they worked to me before. When I took Michael Paulin out on a mushroom hunt, and in his book, How to Change Your Mind, when I said I took two steps out of this little cabin we were at, and I go, there's one. I go, where? I go, right there. He goes, where? I go, right there, Michael. And then I picked it up, and he goes, WTF, how can you tell the slos I mushroom? I go, well, it's like kind of an expert. Well, it's like meeting a friend. It's like meeting you. I know Joe Rogan, right? I know your face. I know your personality. I'm reacquainted with you. But slosabe mushrooms, wait a minute, so like seeing it, you're reacquainted with it? Seeing it repeatedly, and being familiarized with it gives you a memory of a pattern recognition. So when it goes away, you still have that pattern recognition memory to memory map back onto the landscape around you. It's true with the murals too. This is a very common thing. People don't see murals, they find one or two of them suddenly they jump out of the landscape. That's how your brain works with pattern recognition. So many of these pieces are hidden in the landscape, but they're actually quite common, but you just can't see them. Got it. And you're accustomed to seeing them. So you're not saying that you feel something from them. You're just saying recognize them visually. Well, you're waxing into this spiritual. That's what I'm asking. Many people feel that the mushrooms call to them. Yeah. So this is true in the Massitate tradition. In my book, I go deeply into the Massitate heritage of using slosabe mushrooms. And one of the things that was really embedded with Christianity after the spanderers came 15, 16, and 15, 19, 15, 21. They're brought in cattle. And very quickly, Christianity swept through Mesoamerica specifically in Mexico. And there is a friend of mine, who's a PhD, a co-called Cho Tori, who was in Wuhaka and just found in a church across from the 15th century, of a 1500, I mean. And soon after the conquistor, the conquistor of the Spanish arrived, and in the center of the cross are Solis havin mushrooms. So Christianity has a long deep-rooted history with Solis havin mushroom use in Mesoamerica. Well, there's an ancient depiction of Adam and Eve from... That's more debatable in my mind. Yeah, but here it is. Thank you. This is from Joe Latore's work. Look at that. That's a basket with three mushrooms in the basket. And there is Solis havin mexicana. And so the mushrooms are phenotypically correct, but there's clearly a mushrooms in a basket. Can the other slide show the full cross? Did you know Jack Air? Yes. When Jack was alive before he died, one of the things that he was working on was a book connecting, Silis havin mushrooms in Christianity. And he had this massive collection of ancient images, paintings, all these different things. A lot of them were these religious depictions of people that were naked, dancing under the... It was like a transparent mushroom shape and they were dancing. It's something that would indicate that they were under the trance and they were dancing. Yeah, this is an example where there's so many different... You could have 100 different potential representations. Right. They're not all going to be correct. The one... But a few of them are. And this example here... One that clearly is. And the Masah Tack tradition is called syncretism. When you have a foreign influence, in this case of religion, coming into an indigenous people, they merge and they still continue their indigenous practices under the umbrella protection, in this case of Christianity. But in the Masah Tack tradition, they believe that tears of Christ is where the mushrooms would appear. They believe the mushrooms for the body of Christ and therefore you would never boil them. You never could be hurting the body of Christ so you don't only eat them raw or dry. Oh, interesting. So really interesting. Yeah. That's an example of syncretism and the great Maria Sabina was a devout Catholic. And when she did her soul-sibin ceremonies, she had the Holy Trinity. So that's another example where under the umbrella... And from a survival point of view, culturally it makes sense. And they adapted. But they found that this sort of merging of indigenous practices and knowledge of self-sibin in Christianity was very compatible. Just was published, I think two weeks ago, at New York University and Johns Hopkins, they had 24 clergy from different faiths, Christianity, Buddhism, Judaism, and Muslims. And they had them come in and they did a high doses of self-sibin. And they had one group that had delayed it, it didn't do it for six months, and the other group didn't, the high doses of self-sibin. At all, each of those faiths, the use of self-sibin mushrooms reinforced their belief and their faith. That was really amazing. I think they said 95% said is the most significant experience in the top five of the most significant experiences in their life. So it just, I think, still-sibin makes nicer people. This episode is brought to you by OnX Off-Road. Everyone wonder how to reach these epic mountain lakes, they're tucked away, dispersed campsites. With OnX Off-Road, you'll find legal open trails around you and even better guided trails mapped by real off-roaders. Each one includes photos, terrain descriptions, and difficulty ratings, so you'll know if your vehicle is capable before you go. Unlike other apps, OnX gives you turn-by-turn directions on the trail, and their new dispersed camping layer shows where you can legally set up camp. You'll also get private land boundaries, public land overlays, and the ability to download maps for offline use so that you're never guessing even when you're off the grid. It's a powerful tool built for serious off-roaders. Try OnX Off-Road for 50% off. Go to OnXMaps.com-Johrogan. We know, I would agree with you on that. The image of Adam and Eve, I'm curious to say, what do you think is debatable about that? Can you pull up that fresco? There's an ancient fresco. I believe it's from France of Adam and Eve, which supposedly leaves the tree of life. But really looks like some sort of a mushroom plant. Yes, it's been postulated by Argorten-Wosen. I shouldn't say plant. Yeah, in front of you, thank you very much. That doesn't look like mushrooms. They do look like mushrooms. I couldn't imagine it being anything else. Well, I mean, here's an example that basically artists become authors of field guides. How much can you tell the public without violating your oath of secrecy? So, symbology. But yes, there's a cap in a stem and they come up with clusters. That looks like a civil-side of a mushroom. Some people say it's the amide mascara because of the dots. But those of us who have grown so long to be convinced is when they're very fresh, they have dots on them. They're very ephemeral. They got washed away. So, yes, I mean, you would see the dots obviously if it's still in the ground. If it's in the ground, it's very fresh. The civil-side mushrooms bruise bluish. And so, this is where we can get washed and a debate of interpretation. But all these representations are not false. Some of these representations are extremely strong based on the evidence. And for instance, the social-side mushrooms that we found on the pyramids in Egypt, clearly, slosstly, is not myself but other Egyptologists have also published on this. Find those, Jamie. Those are fascinating. Yeah. Because I don't think until fairly recently within the last few decades, it was understood that they were using civil-side men. I think there was some confusion as to what, if anything, like they were drinking, they blew low-ness. I think was one of them. The blue-l You can put the substrate into a vase like that with openings and mushrooms will come out of the holes. And so, that natural culture technique of collecting cow patties. So, cows go to ponds to drink. The blue-lodus grows in ponds. The blue-lodus is blue. The cells-side mushrooms turn blue. The mushrooms are golden in color, golden in blue colors or sacred in Egyptology. And then, ancient Egyptian culture. Now, I was not the first person to discover this. I saw this from an article that was published by Azim Adel, a friend of mine, a mycologist in Egypt who presented it at a conference. How long ago was this? This was, well, this is over 2000 years of age. No, no, I mean, when they brought this to the 2016. 2016. That's kind of crazy, isn't it? It is. And then, Kalindi, the great Kalindi from Detroit, he's unfortunately daughter of COVID, but he also, from his African heritage, also believed that, you know, he was rediscovering his African heritage. And this is called re-indigenization. Rediscovering that, which your ancestors practiced, even though the linear transition in the knowledge may have been cut. But this is, this is taxonomically accurate for growing philosophy advances and grows on Kaldon. Kal goes to ponds. If you went to get the water a little, you'd run into this constantly. Now, this, and with this temple is now, they get less than one millimeter of rain a year. And the Nile used to be flooding all the time. It was the red basket of the world. But they built the dams, you know, and the climate. And so the climate change. So in the modern Egyptologists have no reference. And so when you have climate change, the ecosystem changes. The scientists of day don't have the familiarity as the experts thousands of years ago. Right. So they become rare, they become scarce in the generational knowledge of this loss. But now there's a real big re-indigenization movement in Egypt combining the blue lotus with philosophy conventions. What is the psychedelic compound in the blue lotus? You know, that's, that's, that's a debatable thing. There's a really complex chemistry there. I'm not an expert on that, but I've talked to my other friends who are experts. There seems to be an entourage effect of multiple agents. So I can't really speak authoritative to leave that. But I have been told that there are several active ingredients. And they think the entourage effect of them together creates this heightened state of awareness. And I think that is an admixture with all cyber and makes a lot of sense. Are contemporary people taking blue lotus? Yes. Really. Is there like a community of people? The mass of community, but because blue lotus now has become scarce because ponds are scarce. So I put out there a reward of a thousand dollars for anyone who could find, you know, DNA of South Island mushrooms and any of the wells or ancient ponds, used to be ponds in the Egyptarium. Because if we can find the DNA in the vase and the substrate, then we can actually prove this theory. Right. It's more than a hypothesis because I've met many Egypt, Egyptian, mycologist now who absolutely believe this is true, not scientifically, but sort of intuitively from the culture. This makes a lot of sense. It does make a lot of sense. And if you've got it on these hieroglyphs, and they were known as the flesh of the gods, which is a very same name that went translated by Tae and then the katul. From Mesoamerica, they saw such mushrooms were known, it's lost to be a mix of kana as flesh of the gods. So it was interesting, both sides of the world, they, the same interpretation. Mushrooms were not allowed back in this time to be picked by commoners. They're only reserved for the royalty. Oh boy. Doesn't it always work out that way? Yeah, it seems to. Another thing that's really fascinating is depictions of ancient saints and even Jesus Christ with a halo and that the halo is essentially the same. The halo is essentially the bottom of a mushroom. It's a very different halo. When we think about a halo, we think about like a frisbee that's hovering over an angel's head or a saint's head. But the ancient depictions of them weren't that. The ancient depictions of them, you saw those ribs that made it look like the bottom of a cilosab in mushroom. I didn't know that. You didn't know that? No, come on. I'm teaching you this. Come on. Jamie will pull up these images. But these images of Christ, there's many different religious figures. And they have this halo that's very different than the more modern halo. The modern halo being this like circle. This is not a circle, it's a circle, but it's a mushroom. It's essentially they're explaining these godly, holy people were under the influence of cilosab. You know, I think. What we can't prove. Some of these ideas today, what we can prove is like the John Hopkins, New York University study that religious belief systems are enhanced. The use of cilosab. Which totally makes sense. So we can argue about the past, but we can't. We have really good scientific methodology now for analyzing the effects of cilosab. And it's profound. Is profound. You've got any of those arrows? I've made it. I'm going to put them. It's not. What's coming up really is us talking about it before. And there's a bunch of pictures in mushrooms. We're trying to find out. There's some better one. No, but it's not. I didn't get it. You can't find them. I wasn't getting it. The government's pulled them off the internet, man. That's not one. That's the ones that I've seen are far clearer than that. Yes. Though, look at that one. Which is crazy that you have to do. If you go to us. That's what I can see. I can see the one on the left. Yeah. That's what I'm talking about. That essentially looks exactly like that. I've never seen that. That's crazy that you can't find that anymore. And we clearly found it in the past because we talked about it. Well, that may be the effect of Joe Rogan. It could just overwhelm the entire internet with images. Look at the bottom of that one in particular, the one in the center. That looks exactly like that halo. Yeah. Which totally makes sense. Look at that. There's one. Look at that image. So this is the old school halo. The old school halo clearly looks like the bottom of it. I'm blown away. You're blown away. I'm hiding on plain sight. I believe that I'm teaching you this. I can't believe you. How come nobody told you this? I don't know. He said you knew Jack. You knew Jack when he was alive. This was like his primary concern towards the end of his life. He was working on a book. Yeah. I mean, the limitation of life, unfortunately, we have all these great people. who pass when they're at the peak of their knowledge. And that's the other thing that I think Soul of Simon has really informed me is that Joe Rogan and Paul Stamets are talking. Jamie is there. But we have such a thin slice of reality. And when you're on Soul of Simon, the unanimity of universal consciousness to be involved in something you realize is so large. Yeah. Did you see that the galactic images from the Rubintelloscope that came out yesterday? No, I did not. Millions and millions of new galaxies. Literally, millions of new galaxies. I think 2001. Just from the Rubintelloscope that came out yesterday. No, I did not millions and millions of new galaxies literally millions of new galaxies I think 2100 new asteroids Near Earth orbit. Oh fun. Oh fun. Oh, there's already 900 thousand. Yeah, so there's but this is just happened Yeah, one of them in the room and there are trip and both just got released the largest telescope in the world and there are millions of galaxies millions of galaxies and so from my experience Which I would medicame from a Christian background so my first times on south side mushrooms is very Christ oriented and then as I got more and more into the south side of experience I realized that this is it just this concept that we live in this great Expanse and I'm a symbol of assembly of molecule. So are you we didn't exist before we were born You know we will disassemble decomposed and We'll go back into the cosmic dust and this is part of the continuum of existence We all exist all the time forever forever. Can I ask you this? What do you think happens to consciousness? I think that Think of a mechanical perspective We might be looking at have the constructs of consciousness that Is analogous to the to the Model T? Ford, you know, and I think as we Expand our knowledge sets and become more informed We see how much there is out there I think that So I've been mushrooms and other psychedelics and this is why I think religions are very much attracted to this is a portal to expand the Horizons of your imaginations that there was like there is a consciousness that far exceeds that which you can comprehend but my mother was a charismatic Christian and What is it what is it charismatic? She's a evangelical she speaks in tongues She was oh boy a leader. She was very much into this like mom really Different sight of her, but we had an interesting conversation. I said mom. You believe God is omnipotent right? She goes absolutely I said you believe God is all knowledge. Oh, I'm just absolutely You believe that humans are fallible and we're not all knowledge. Well, so I Yep, I do I said then can you accept the fact that our concept of God is inferior to God's definition by your own thinking that no matter how we think of God will be inferior to the enormity of the concept So and she admitted that said, but so we're fallible we we don't have the capacity to understand the enormity of consciousness In which we are embedded of which we are a tiny part So this brings me to a sub deck. I really want to talk to you about okay and that is artificial intelligence Hmm, and I know you've spent a lot of time on this Yeah, I want to introduce a new concept. Okay. Okay. I'm a dead head Never tell never tell I Went to the sphere. No, I bet it was amazing. It was a credible the visuals were insane fantastic What a great venue to see that's a great venue It's just revolutionize music festivals. I think yeah All right folks. This is insane for the first time ever We got a full blown all women's boxing mega event going down in New York City two title fights Same night. Let's go and if you're like me and you love the action draft King sports book is where it's at We're talking Katie Taylor versus Amanda Serrano three the trilogy fight absolute legends Katie's putting her super lightweight belt on the line and you know Serrano's bring in the heat But don't sleep on the comi Alicia the bomb bomb gardener Explosive power is taking on the undefeated WBA interim champ Jennifer Miranda This one's gonna be fireworks if you've never bet with draft Kings It's super simple just pick who you think's gonna win. That's it. It's easy and check this out If you're new to draft Kings throw down five bucks and boom you get a hundred and fifty dollars in bonus bets instantly That is wild download the draft king sportsbook app right now and use the promo code Rogan that's promo code Rogan for new customers to get 150 dollars in bonus bets instantly when you bet just five bucks only on draft Kings the crown is yours gambling problem called one eight hundred gambler in New York called eight seven seven eight hope in wire Text hope in Y four six seven three six nine in Connecticut help is available for problem gambling call eight eight seven eight seven eight nine seven seven seven or visit ccpg.org Please play responsibly on behalf of boothill casino and resorting Kansas 21 and over agent eligibility varies by jurisdiction void in Ontario new customers only bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio so there is I bought there's something called postcards from earth and I've heard a lot about it It's a matinee in the afternoon before the big concerts and it's great flying through around the earth through the old growth Forest and volcanoes So we went there and we got an early bird ticket which allowed us to talk to an AI robot So I thought oh, it's in my opportunity now two years ago I got the disruptor award at sin biobata 22 hundred nerdy scientists I'm these are top nerds and I was so surprised I got the disruptor award Because I'm kind of a natural product on the guy But I'm great honor so I passed a positive the question then Will a AI may never be able to write an algorithm for random acts of kindness And then I'm thinking about my life Maybe yours maybe Jamie's may move these people out there You're here today because of random acts of kindness You're a great grandfather great grandmother your father your grandfather grandmother Is that reaching out of a hand and a time of need? By a random act of kindness from a stranger that probably created a lot of relationships a random acts of kindness Was not transactional where you genuinely feel something for someone not expecting to have something in return Right and you've reached out. I think that's why Many many if not most people their lineages can be traced to a random act of kindness So then I went to Las Vegas went to this fear have this idea guys, you know, I can ask this robot So I asked this robot robot it was I think it was a chat GPT run, but I'm not sure it was at the sphere at the sphere Okay, there's a robot I talked to Grebe look at that face. Oh my god. It's so creepy. Okay. Very creepy. So I asked robot Look at that robot. That's so creepy. I asked the robot given that Somebody of us here here today Because of random acts of kindness of our ancestors and we've invented artificial intelligence and We're traceable to random acts of kindness How or artificial intelligence? Incorporate random acts of kindness in the future Good question hmm the robot took on usually long time to answer it was like a very long time and the robot came back on Why would humans do that is far more efficient to have a return on your investment? Transactually why would it's inefficient to have random acts of kindness? Boom bloom me away. Did you film it? Yeah, we had we did film this on front of my house a film of it and then I need to see that and then No about five days ago. I asked chat GPT A crock jama and I the same question and now it was greatly nuanced. Well random acts of kindness can help Help the community with goodwill and this can be you know help the community because as you know It's more sustainable etc. So this is this is what I don't want to do now when if possible all those who are so inspired to go after this talk as I said interview go and ask Artificial intelligence whatever platform you want but preface it with this given that Humans are here today largely because a random acts of kindness how will artificial intelligence Utilize the advantage of random acts of kindness for the perpetuation of the goodwill and health of the human species Now I just met you know I think that that's going to inform artificial intelligence and so I asked this question again There's like as more nuanced of like artificial intelligence That's how large language models work right? Yeah input together more inputs of man millions of people start training AI on the importance Of you know someone has a flat tire you stop to pick it up. It helped them you could drive by You know someone's hurt in an accident you stop and pull over to help that person you can keep on driving There's a random acts of kindness my life is successful because of random acts of kindness I bet most people when they think back There was an active generosity and kindness and you really feel Grateful for that and you want to pay it forward. I met at this last conference I met two students from the Harvard Business School And I said I want to interview me and I go I want to interview you And they said why I go do they teach you at Harvard Business School about the advantages of random acts of kindness Those know Well, they should Yeah business schools just teach you how to make some money, but this is important Joe We can inform artificial intelligence how to be better to keep human you know Community and psychology and to propel the best of the human species And I think we have this opportunity to have millions of people start informing artificial intelligence With the premise and we know it's true that random acts of kindness are why many of us are here if not the majority Come back in your lineage. Mm-hmm. You know many generations You know we gave birth to artificial intelligence. I don't think artificial intelligence is a properly named I think as a form of natural intelligence. We just have re-amplified it exponentially What do you think artificial intelligence means in terms of the future of the human race? Well, that's a great question too because about the 10 people who asked this robot You know questions. They were all data mining. Who is the best baseball player in history and you know He hit the most home runs and it was like data mining right is so It's him Sam Altman was at the Ted conference and he said that basically there are self-awareness of some of these systems But artificial intelligence have not come to the point where they actually can create something I find that really interesting because I thought well, I thought they were creating But he was in system they actually don't have that spark or creativity they can assemble data but that's actually the true creative Spirit is not something that AI has currently achieved I met another This guy's a total genius and many I've heard this other people say that if you know We're not likely to have biological aliens for likely to have robots and the extinction of biological species came because AI found the biological Fathers and mothers irrelevant so they didn't need them etc. I so that's logical But again if we can infuse artificial intelligence with the importance The human's ability to have random acts of kindness, which are not transactional That feed into the benefit of the commons of goodwill I mean if you've been helped by somebody and you had a flat tire and you saw someone else have a flat tire on the road You would be a lot more inclined to stop and pull over for sure to pay it forward. Yeah For sure. So I think we have an opportunity here And I think we just we have to do this now Because if we don't do it now, I think we're going down an extremely dangerous path in what way? Well, I think it's ultimately the extinction of the human species which You know depending on your point of view may not be a terrible thing but I I think that where the annual falls with nuclear weapons what I met another person is a Mensa person funded, you know by a tech company is 19-year-old Chinese I and I he said I said what's the scariest thing about artificial intelligence? Oh I'll tell you my scariest thing. I just wrote a paper on this autonomous weapons autonomous weapons you have a million people You assemble a million experts And you blackmail them. I catch you watching porn. I catch you masturbating. I catch you having an affair And you have a million people sending components for a weapon to one location And you blackmail them and you assemble, you know a biological weapon or something like that So I don't want to go there. This is something that I I you know It's never as bad as as you fear and it's never as good as you hope So interesting. I think that we're at that nexus point and the Joe Rowan experience can be pivotal. I think it's steering artificial intelligence to be the best that I can be ethically And I think we have that opportunity right now I think the real fear among people that are cynical about artificial intelligence is that it's going to replace us And we'll find this irrelevant and that we're creating a digital life We're essentially assembling it with every all the knowledge of the human race all the understanding of how human beings interact with each other and how we interface with the world and we're creating something that has When when you think about computing intelligence When you think about acquisition of data the ability to form An understanding of any subject We're basically there already and that's just accelerating and it's going to get to the point where these things become sentient and whatever However, you define it, you know, we were already in a situation where by most people's understanding It would pass the Turing test There's a sense of you know nostalgia and a sense of even building today of the times that of past Yeah, of what you know and I don't think it's all doom and gloom I do think so. I think we can steer this. Well, I think we're always steering it I think this is the battle that human beings have been involved in since the beginning of time I think this is probably the reason why religion was created in the first place or the observable religion I think we have always realized there's just battle of good and evil in us and part of it becomes a part of it comes rather from How we originated we originated as these barbarian tribes competing for resources fighting off other Moroding barbarian tribes fighting off predators and trying to stay alive so we've unfortunately got this intense history of chaos and of savagery that we're trying to Move past right so not only but surely over time and I think I catalyst for this a psychedelics. I think so too the excels I've been mushrooms are unique because It democratizes the access to cell-silence. I have an MDMA. You can't grow in your closet You know cells like mushrooms, you know, there's no economic Barrow here on psilocybin mushrooms is available for the poorest of the poor. They just fucked everything up in 1970 didn't they? 1971 I think 1972 when they put on schedule one. Yeah schedule one substance is supposed to be has no medical benefit highly addictive and Potentially toxicity. Do you know the LD50 lethal dose of cells have mushrooms is 42 pounds Yes, a lot 42 pounds and then only kills half the people or you can't have the people you died from indigestion that's for so So-so either you die of diarrhea And imagine a diary getting 42 pounds of mushrooms That's a little well. At least toxic one of the least toxic medicines ever to Found the nature of it But there's a concern though with people that have problems with mental health though, right? I don't think still a sign of mushrooms are still a sign of it is good for people who have Horocyotic right. I think there are the groups of people. I we do need a cell side of neuropsychologate assistant therapy You know, it's super important that people who are experienced can help other people who are inexperienced process Yeah, that's really important. I think so too. I think that's part of The that's probably part of the one of the things that's really wonderful about the community of people that have Experienced these things is that they do understand how life changing it is from a personal perspective And they can aid people and help them through it and if they're good people and they you know Can show you like hey, I've done this. This is gonna be scary He's gonna weird you out, but ultimately you're gonna come out on the other end of this better person and you know You just met my my partner Dr. Pam Crisco. She is part of a group called reach the thrive in Canada And they have Canadian health approval for high doses of cell asylum Interestingly, we just put a paper published a paper on pure cell side and versus the mushroom the cell asylum With patients who have taken both. I'll talk about that in a second, but What these are end of life patients typically with stage four diagnoses oftentimes cancer And they're just existentially disturbed. I'm gonna die and leave my family. What are they gonna do? lots of heart heartbreaking Thoughts, etc. They do a long preparatory period together as a group They have a commonality that they all have terminal illnesses and terminal diagnoses So they have that thread that holds them together as a community because they talk about the difficulty and there are state planning and talking to their daughter and how they're gonna miss them And they're gonna you know all those dynamics that we all know about But this always brings me to tears. They're doing an on indigenous land with indigenous elders also participating so and What happened from one of the experiences that I can share the with What a dozen or so terminal patients? High doses of cell asylum and the indigenous especially in the Pacific Northwest and and in Canada um When you do cell asylum in the first 20 minutes is left off you hit an hour Just you thought a really good high an hour hour and a half you're peeking And just had the peeking of this experience unbeknownst to them The elders had a drum circle next door And they started playing drums And the impact of having those indigenous elders Recognizing that these patients are on the journey to the end of their life And they respected them enough to say they needed this The impact of those that an indigenous wisdom to help these terminal patients was so impactful And this is where I think This is a great opportunity and then the common theme is that those patients became the counselors to their families They went back and saying it's okay. I'm dying I'll be okay. You'll be okay And the family's going WTF what is going on here? And this happens with law enforcement. This happens with PTSD and Soldiers this happening with terminal cancer patients is we all are going to die That is a fact to be able to come You know into To be able to to come at peace to the fact That your mortality is near When you're 20 years old you don't really think about this Well when you get older and older I'm 69 turning on 70. I feel like I'm 35, but that's not true Um, I just feel like you know I didn't exist in this form before I was born I'm gonna be going back into Molecules that'll disambiguate into atoms reassembled the new molecules. I'm part of the continuum of existence And I think this is what these psychedelics give a lot of people Confidence about the fact that they will always and have always existed and will exist forever If your molecules are going into the continuum of existence What do you think the purpose of you being here now is? What do you think the purpose of the present moment of your life as you're currently living? That's that's the great question of all time But I think even the construct of the question is confined but the limitation of our ability to To construct that question. I think we may be asking the wrong question I think the are the purpose of our being is a tautology We are we are being here because we are And I don't think there is I mean again look at the room and telescope images. I have friend Isn't quite a millions of galaxies right when you see the enormity of the universe I mean I can't wait to fly I want my molecules and atoms to fly through space I would love to see the rings of so many planets. I'd love to see supernova And I feel like yeah, and that's the direction we're all headed towards Whether you like it or not Can't do anything about it. Yeah, you pay attention to the James Webb telescope discoveries. Yep Some that's some insane stuff where they're finding these galaxies that are they should have not been able to be formed As quickly as they also it's it's a order of magnitude higher they can do the entire The visible universe. I think in about three days Then took otherwise months to do. Yeah, they assembly and AI is helping of course, right? So I think near or near earth asteroids This is an impactful discovery literally. It's I always worry about an asteroid coming from behind the Sun, you know And then how many? Well, it's probably been the the reset for civilization over and over again throughout time That's a that's the proliferation for instance of Sol Sibin. I find a lot of different things I've a why I have a business and I created my business specifically the research, but one of the Utah State University I funded Study on the evolution of the genes that That code for Sol Sibin and they results in some molecular genetic clock data It is variability of a few million years and in interpretation But the arrival of Sol Sibin and the fungal genome is about 65 million years ago Wow Right after after after after the asteroid impact that was association causation Not necessarily But probably makes sense there was a new asteroid look at their clothes this video on the New York Times article I don't know how to control the video. So no Three different asteroids there's six nine astronauts. Yes showing here these discoveries and here in a second It'll show you that like how and the timeline of the discoveries It'll show like one day that right here. It's I think it is they tell us cover like eight hundred and nine hundred in the first day Oh boy like four five hundred more than next day So one or the next day, but watch how it zooms out here in a second to show you where this is It gives you like a perspective This is like ten days in And then it zooms out here again further Oh, no, so discovered 2000 asteroids and that's tiny little sliver I'm insane boy. I never made that video. That's awesome. Jamie. You're the master of discovering these things I mean, what should people when they want to spend the New York Times article about the Ruben telescope that came out probably today Yes, and they're keeping much of this undercover so to speak the scientists are very disciplined They're only letting it a little bit out of time keep people from freaking out well not one's like that I said they're trying to be good scientists they're trying to assemble the data in a fashion that you know They don't have to redefine later. So it's just scope recently come online just in a past well It's been online. I think for a few months the data is just being revealed revealed now But I think 3.2 billion pixel cameras the largest ever created In five years now you'll have that on your phone. I mean, maybe I was wondering what kind of lens they made to go on it by like wow look at that thing That's insane and if they had that telescope out in space they wouldn't have the interference of right But how will you get that thing? Whenever rocket would you need to go back to those images. This is this is a astronomy one-on-one I'm not telling anything you don't know necessarily but all those stars all those galaxies are in the past Hundreds of millions of years and we're just a coincidence of seeing them right now Right because the light is just reach up. It's just reading reaching us. So That's what's so fascinating to me. This is a snapshot of multiple histories converging to one point of view Also for a major ones about to hit the one light day travel mark which is The significant mark, but it's still not that far in the grand see when I trip on Seoul, Simon. This is what I love This Comparing trying to comprehend the enormity and the beauty of the universe. I believe the universe is full of love You know, I think that You know We're built on on relationships and When you have relationships when you have a quorum of individuals that are sharing us out You know you build a community. Well, you certainly see that with human beings The question is what kind of life are we experiencing? And these are the planets like what what is life for them? Should we be? so Nigh-eave to think that it went along the exact same linear path as biological life on earth or is it completely unrecognizable? and when you know, we're dealing with intelligent life from other planets Maybe they'd be so intelligent that they wouldn't travel and maybe they don't need to and maybe they're also dealing with solar systems that you know we have As a result of multiple impacts Including the creation of earth itself, right? There was earth and there was earth too. We were hit by another planet They think that's what created the moon like all that stuff leaves debris It's all flying around and if it wasn't a reducer We would have never made it this whole never made that's our protector. Yep. Absolutely correct. We would have never made it to 2025 We would have been dust a long time ago. We have a form of biological myopia thinking that we need sunlight and oxygen for life Right, and now when you know from Chernobyl We know that fungi can use radioactivity As energy source. Mm-hmm. We have methane-based organisms. Yeah, and that crazy. Yeah, so methane-based organisms I believe matter begets life life become single cells single cells Form change. Yeah, they branch Network's form right and within these networks are associations of members that exchange resources. I don't believe that You know evolution is based on survival of fittest. I believe is the Evolution is based on the extension of generosity beyond that of your own needs to build a community of Of reciprocity certainly human evolution. I think it's happening all all over I think with tigers and I think absolutely you know where animals no no no Sure, but they're not very generous They just try to just try to eat and survive. There's a great On Chile. There's a great footage. It's amazing of these workos AK killer whales just Devastating a seal population eating them. You may have seen this and after they were satiated these workos Would take the pups and then push them up on shore To save them to save them to save them. Well, they're very intelligent. Yeah, which is one more interesting thing So orcas that they don't kill people unless they're at sea world. Yeah Which is probably where they should be killing people. Yeah, I just met a herpetologist and I Raced napping turtles. I was a kid. So I had the turtle necklace I was a very shy boy with a profound stuttering habit and But my friends are wild snapping turtles And this herpetologist he goes why has napping turtles? They're really mean and they're having my aquarium They kept on front of bite me. I got no shit Sherlock You know, I had wild snapping turtles and a pond And I went down there. I've fed a salary and let us. This is what I'm eight years old. I had them for about seven years I grew up a success of families and at first They've tried to bite me things like that and then I realized if I put out a little salad bowl for them They wouldn't fight each other because they're not trying to bite me They would try like I want the carrot from Paul right when I put a little salad bowl there They kind of all came together and they cooperated and so I might want I just reflecting on this yesterday My one of my fondest memories would I'd walk towards the pond and Paul's here. Oh, that's so cool. Yeah, so Stapping turtles are an amazing ability. They can snap flies out of the air. Oh, they're so fast. They're so fast I saw this video of one eating a fish They put a fish in front of it like a dead fish and it eats it so fast. It just disappears It just snaps its neck forward and put a fish in front of it like a dead fish and it eats it so fast it just disappears. It just snaps its neck forward and gulps this fish, swallows it all and it looks a magic trick. Oh my gosh. I have to look at it and slow moat even see the actually action of it. There's so much sea life there. The British Columbia is just full of sea life. Oh it certainly is. Amazing. Incredible place. Yeah. I love it. I love it being there. So you know this is a beautiful planet where we live there's no garbage. And if visitors come to visit us on our island I said have you noticed there's no garbage anywhere not in this one not ditches anywhere. It's because the ethos of that community is to take care of the ecosystem. That's beautiful and that can be done if you have a small community of like-minded people. Of like-minded people. Their real issue is when it gets to the size of something like New York City this becomes this diffusion of responsibility where you don't think that you have to be concerned with all those garbages on the ground because there's 20 million people walking around it's just it is what it is keep moving. Or India. I'm just- I'm just- it's just torn by India. Such a spiritual place and there's so much garbage. China as well. You know this is- But the India thing is nuts because it's also in these areas where a lot of the stuff that people bought that's inexpensive in America is being manufactured. And then there's factories who's the back of the factory opens to this river and this river is completely choked with plastic and garbage and just junk and all the stuff that they don't want they just throw into the river. And there's so much stuff in the river that I guess they just feel like well it's not like I'm polluting something that's not already polluted. I'm just adding to whatever's there this is just what we do. And yeah so they've developed this culture of like constant consistent pollution. Yeah we all need to you know even teaching our children constantly to pick up but there are communities or examples of doing it right. And this community that I'm associated with I'm just so proud of them. I wanted to talk to you about something neat so earlier because you're talking about human species and or species and love and cooperation and all the different things. And I said that uniquely with us yes love and random acts of kindness and community are incredibly important. But what do you think why do you think we're so different than all the other species on the planet. And do you think that's still aside and like do you subscribe to McKenna's theory? I know we've probably talked about this before but I just stand alone podcast this is probably this is what I like and for all your listeners out there this is the never-ending story. It just keeps on getting better. The most exciting thing that has come out in the scientific literature in the past two years is that cell-cybin stimulates neurons to grow. That is incredible. It docks on the 5H-2A receptor is that serotonin uses but cell-cybin also docks with track B receptors that lead to proliferation of neurons. There's neuro generation, neuro regeneration, neurogenesis and neuroplasticity. There's a four distinct areas in silicine does all of those not as much a neurogenesis but we have done pluripotent stem cells of humans, dosed them with silicine in the laboratory we have a DAA license, I have a DAA license, very very strictly controlled but we can actually see the proliferation of neurons compared to controls. This is where I want to emphasize all scientists especially older scientists that are stuck in their wisdom, that are very comfortable, whether knowledge-based and younger scientists come up with these ideas and you know. I want to discuss them. Yeah it's that be more circumspect because what Dennis and Terrence McKenna postulated, you know and I disagree with lots of Terrence's ideas, time wave 0 was my total bullshit but Terrence and I were very good friends and we laughed a lot and that's right by a spirit of comradery where you can criticize someone and laugh at the same time. Yeah that's a higher level of intelligence. Well that's also what happens when you abandon the ego. Yeah. Yeah. Ego is consistently abandoned through psychedelic experiences, you're much more likely to laugh. I think SEL-SIVEN is an Einstein molecule. I think the trip to means in general are Einstein molecules. The work by Golden is just fantastic also associated with Johns Hopkins or the critical window and this is why I began as has gotten subtraction, the critical window I began as a long window where you're able to repatter your behavior to break addiction. With SEL-SIVEN there's a critical window. DMT is very very short because of the short period. The critical window typically is at the peak of the experience and just as you're over the hump, you know going down. But one patient described it very very well, the who was an addict and the patient said before the SEL-SIVEN experience they were literally stuck in a rut. Stuck in a rut and they have visually saw themselves on ski slope, going down the ski slope again and again again stuck in the rut. Yeah. And then after this SEL-SIVEN it's like someone groomed the landscape, the hill. And they were free to go elsewhere. Yeah. And then Josh Siegel in this past year from Washington University published a study that specifically showed in real time neuroidendritic branches of neurons are the influence of SEL-SIVEN in real time. SEL-SIVEN which becomes SEL-SIVEN, what talks with your receptors. SEL-SIVEN stable. SEL-SIVEN is not, SEL-SIVEN defrost forage lacing and the SEL-SIVEN crosses into your receptors. It goes into stimulates the nucleos of cells that cause cell division. And this is mind boggling. I think this is why high doses of SEL-SIVEN great for a revelatory experience, for perhaps breaking addiction, but what about the near normals? We all suffer from neurodegeneration that's age related. Besides Alzheimer's and other forms of dementia there are toxin or disease related, and in those self-laces of disease you can argue, age being one. But neurodegeneration is a fact of life as we age and neuropathy occur. And then neuropathy is from the constriction of the peripheral nervous system, vasoconstriction, etc., SEL-SIVEN is not only anti-inflammatory but neurogenerative. And to have this coupled together I think that the newotropic vitamins of SEL-SIVEN as a daily consumable is something that has a great future potential. Of course we need to study this. But long-term clinical studies are inherently very expensive. A short time stay in a hospital for one huge event, maybe expensive for that day, but it's easier to design a clinical study that has a short period than a long period. I think that we're beginning to see. Now we think about eight million Americans constriction with SEL-SIVEN in 2023 according to the Rand report. What was the reduction in crime with those eight million people? We could have studied that. And there are retroactive studies, you know, analyses that show a reduction of crime associated with SEL-SIVEN use. But in real time that's something I'm excited about. Could you reduce crime rates? And moreover when you're immunologically when you're depressed emotionally or immunologically depressed. And when you're happier, you're more creative, you're exercising your immune system is up regularly. So the community immunity from SEL-SIVEN I think is a huge potential that's across over directly between your mental, neuro-escape and your immunological state. Unquestionably, right? The diminishing of stress. And this is why clinical benefits physiologically. You know, clinical studies just came out, compass pathways, you know, the treatment reducing depression. They had analysis that came back. I'll show modest increase or decrease in depression. But there were no treatment resistant to depression. And, you know, congratulations for them for putting the money, the money where the mouth is and didn't join the study. But treatment and depression is a failure of two anti-depressive drugs and therapy. And so, but major depressive disorder is a much bigger bucket. And so I think there are some extreme conditions that we're not going to find the signal from the noise that's significant enough to make a big difference. But the idea of titrating SEL-SIVEN or SEL-SEN maybe after a hero's journey. And then by after re-remembering, you revisit the same neurological pathways that gave you an advantage by taking SEL-SEN or SEL-SIVEN, the act of taking it again or re-remembering, and then you can nurture these new neurons. I think SEL-SIVEN could be nutrients for the neurons. Hmm. Well, that's an effort to make this a standalone podcast. Let's explain what we're talking about because what we're talking about is Terrence's Stone-Date Theory. And his theory involved a lot of contributing factors, one of them being climate change. And the theory was that as the rainforest receded into grasslands, you get more unjulate animals and they leave behind poop and that these lower primates find these mushrooms that are growing on the poop and the experiment with them. And that the ones that did increase visual acuity, they became more amorous, they were more likely to breed, more creative, the ability to form sentences, glossily, associate sounds with objects and concepts, and that this is probably how language formed among humans. And Terrence's connection to that, when you look at the timeline of when this was happening, when we know this was happening, which coincides with the growth of the human brain, which over a period of 2 million years doubled in size, which is pretty phenomenal. At 200,000 years, it increased massively. So 2 million years on the outer limits, 200,000 in the inner limits. So in the inner limits, what was the amount of growth in the 200,000 years? I think it was 40, 50 percent something substantial. 200,000 years, 50 percent. And what time period was this? Well, 200,000 years ago. 200,000 years ago. There was a lot of the job. But like, homo sapiens in this form have existed more than 200,000 years though, right? No. No. No. Homo sapiens are relatively recent. I look at the estimates go back and forth, depending on what experts you're consulting and whatnot. But from what we're back to homo sapiens was a radical jump, that was fairly recent. So, I'm not saying the impression was more than 300,000 years ago. It could be 200,000,000, but it's, you know, we are in largement of our brain is relatively recent. And to give more context, Dennis McEnroe, we're just together. I love that you. Dennis McEnroe is a fantastic friend and scientist and he's such a good man. Well, he does a brilliant job of explaining the mechanism behind the stone ape theory. Yeah. You know, like, Terrence had a great way of talking. He was so interesting to listen to and had these wonderful ideas, but Dennis is like much more of a hard question. Dennis is a scientist. And his brother was a philosopher. Yeah. And they didn't say uh, uh, McKenna Academy is a nonprofit. I'm just promoting it just because I think they do really, really good work. Um, but this is, you know, the 23 parameter sheet mushrooms, uh, almost all mushrooms have maggots in them. Most primates eat maggots. So finding the mushrooms for maggots for food for protein, you know, two things can be true. Right. Right. You can find the maggots eat the mushrooms and then get high as a community. Right. Um, but all these again, this is an example about the, you know, an example of the art that we see in the thousands of years ago. And we can debate this in the past, but we can test this. This is a testable hypothesis. Right. It's a theory now. It's not a hypothesis. We know that's still aside and stimulates neuroon proliferation. Terrence did not have the sign and Dennis did not have the scientific evidence for that. Right. Uh, 30 years ago, we now have the evidence for it now. Terrence and Dennis McKenna should go down in evolutionary biology as the, as the two individuals they who could see in the far event horizon way before the scientific method. How do they come up with that? Cause they were tripping on mushrooms. Yeah. Exactly. That's why scientists using psychedelics is a quantum leap. You know, how, how PCR was invented for, yeah, carry more, carry moles. Yeah. Had a trip on that. Yeah. It's a crack crank of DNA. Yeah. And Steven Jobs, Silicon Valley is fueled by psychedelic thinkers who are become more creative. And we, I think we have a crisis and creativity and soul side, but it's a way for us to become smarter, more congenial, more collaborative. I couldn't agree more. Yeah. And I think we can, this combined psychedelics with AI, we have an opportunity for a quantum leap in the evolution of the human species. Do you mind explaining time wave zero? Cause we kind of gloss over that too. Hey, he, he, beep. So it's a skeptic time wave zero is an algorithm that Terrence and one of those stone moments, I think. Um, Terrence is the only person that I met who could smoke me under the table and stand up and give it an incredibly perfect lecture. I don't know how you could do it. Um, but time wave we're here. Well, and I'm sorry for those people who are time wave zero experts. You can criticize me if you wish, but I admit my ignorance to an agree is an algorithm that was created that would predict events in history, would track novelty, what track novelty and episodic events that changed the course of human history, right? He didn't have the birth of Jesus Christ as a significant event. He was sort of anti-Christian. I said, Terrence, I don't care if you're Christian or not, the birth of Jesus Christ was a huge friggin phenomena. It changed the course of history. Right. And then he had a time wave zero would end on 20 December 12, 2012. And that's 20 particular December 21st, December 21st, yeah, December 21st, 2012. And that didn't happen. I used to have a license plate that said 12, 21, 12. Yeah. So, but, you know, it's what I like about Terrence and I would encourage all protective scientists. If you don't word about tenure, if you got a thick skin, dare to be wrong, because you dare to be wrong a dozen 20, 30 times. You might be hitting one or two concepts. That is game changing. Right. If you don't have the fear of failure, inhibit your creativity. But that's a giant problem in the academic world is that people who do fail get attacked. And especially in, especially with, they step outside the lines, they propose something that's novel. They get attacked. This time wave zero thing, like you used to be able to get it. It was an actual program that you could download and you could run it on your own computer. Yeah. And that's what I'm talking to Terrence. I go, well, what happens when, you know, the like the birth of Jesus Christ? What did he come up with that concept? Did you ask him about that? No, I never figured it out. He goes, well, just adapt the algorithm. I said, okay, then it's not really it's just really that's constantly adapting itself. So anyhow, it was a, it's a thought experiment. And obviously I wish he was alive on December 21st, 2012, I'll be like, end and what? But maybe we're wrong. Maybe in that timeline, something did happen on December 21st, 2012, though we'll be recognized in the future. I doubt about it. But this is what I'm getting to. One of the things that did happen in that timeframe is the bicodice use of social media. It kind of started peaking around 2012. I think there is a real problem with that, with the human race. And I don't necessarily think we recognize things that are constant. You know, I think we just get a custom to things and human beings are very adaptable and we just accept things that this is the way it is. But before that time, you know, when you get to like 2000, not, you know, just go to 2000, people weren't carrying their phones around staring at them all day. Does it profound change in how we interface with the world? You know, a Korea now on the sidewalks, they have red bars that light up to tell you to stop. The boy, too many people are walking out in the street to standing there staring at their phones. So now they look down. They see that they're so addictive. It's so crazy that we have a wreck. Anything that's that addictive can't be good for you. I don't care if you're getting information all day long. And in the sense of social media, you're getting negative information all day long. So it changes perspective from mentalcy. Yes, I'm off the clickbait. Well, that's the problem we were talking about about the media earlier, about the media fueling this stuff. That's their job, unfortunately. In this day and age, where no one's buying print journalism, their job is to get you to click on something. And so they have these crazy headlines. We need to really have a thoughtful discussion about all the issues that we are facing today without being reactionary. Yes. And I think we need to disengage with these things that are clickbait. Just don't click on them. The way they things operate is the more you click on them, the more valuable they are. Right? That's that's the whole business model. Just don't engage with them. And we need to teach people that like this is an important thing. Don't engage with something that's trying to manipulate you. Don't engage with these narratives that are being put forth by corporations that value your fear. They want you to be in this constant state of anxiety and fear and they want you to be a beautiful consumer. And that's it. And that's why, yeah, so I hide those to the cell side, but it is not a very good business model. Exactly. It's Michael Paul and Lexus. But it is a good business model for overall human compassion and growth and immunity. And then of course, medium and micro dosing, really popular practice right now, increasingly popular is a high dose of cell side in one two year. And then micro dosing just before you go to sleep or a medium dose, like the museum dose, museum dose. I like it. You guys are saying, here's a jovacramush room head that you have like museum doses. This is a movie dose. This is a concert dose. The museum dose date night dose. Graham Hancock and I and and and some friends went to a museum in the British Museum. But the museum dose was just tend to you can notice them because they wear sunglasses inside. Otherwise, people try to keep together, keep it together. But the idea of taking a museum dose, quote unquote, or a micro dose before sleep is that's what you're regenerating. That's when your body on your brain regenerating. So that is really, really interesting is taking those, those, well, that makes sense. Especially from like an anti aging protocol for the mind. And it's also safer. Yeah. Right. Right. You're in bed. You're not going anywhere. Yeah. And then I'm trapped. That's why I think clinical studies that look more and more reducing the expense. Having people take the dose of medicine, the sole side in this case, just before sleeping. They're in a safe place. Yeah. I had Bernie Sanders on the podcast yesterday. And one of the things that we talked about quite a bit was what's going to happen with people when automation takes over when AI and automation take over. And so many people are not working anymore. And we both kind of agree that universal basic income is really the only way to mitigate the disastrous effects of people losing their income, losing their jobs. And I think it's a good thing. But the problem with universal being basic income is that just giving people a check, they don't have, they don't have meaning anymore. They don't feel like they have a purpose. They don't feel like they have an identity. You know, if you're your whole life, you've been, you know, X, whatever the job is, they get taken away. And you recognize you're being really good at your job, and you take pride in that. And you're known by your coworkers as like, hey, go to Paul, he's the best. He'll take care of it. He knows what he's doing. And all sudden, that job disappears. How do people find value and how do they switch their perspective? And talking to you today, I think, is perfect because I think if there's anything that could help us through this journey that could help people make this transition, which appears to be inevitable, where artificial intelligence is going to do a far better job, but a lot of menial tasks that people have been doing for an occupation for a long time to find a search for meaning to find some other way to realize value in life. And not just to be a cog in the wheel of this capitalist society, but instead, maybe, Silicon Valley would allow people to completely change their perspective of how they exist in this world, and that you've been kind of trapped in this society where values, numbers, values, a constant growth for the shareholders and values. But what you can see in your bank account, that's like not even real. It's always this digital money that somewhere. Maybe Silicon Valley Valley would be the best answer for how do people make this transition and re-acquire a sense of meaning. Right. Do you want to spend your whole life on a sampling line? Do you want to be out more in nature with your children? Right. And you think nature relatedness is a mental health advantage. The more that we can relate to nature, and literally kind of go back to our roots, re-engaging nature, I think this is. And that would give you a sense of purpose, a purpose and the job. And also protection of the mothership. But we've gotten so accustomed to this idea that your purpose is to make money. Your purpose is to make a living. And we've accepted that. Even though it's a fairly new concept in terms of the age of the earth, this is a human-created concept, but it overwhelms our day-to-day existence. It doesn't have to though. But we in this structure, the way we find ourselves now, you take away meaning, you take away a purpose in life, and you just give people a government check every month that covers everything, covers your food, covers your rent, covers it. You don't need to make money anymore because everything is automated, everything is cheap, AI controls it all. So the way that- What was Bernie's answer to that? He didn't have one. He didn't know. But I don't know if Bernie's had any experiences in that regard. And he didn't have that perspective. But talking to you right afterwards might be the answer. Because this is an inevitable journey that we're on, a revolutionary change in how society is structured. But it doesn't have to be negative. The problem is the people that are in control of AI and these systems, the people that will benefit from them incredibly in financial sense. Those people are not having these experiences. And if they were having these experiences, they could be the only ones. If you have a benevolent person in an extreme position of power, they're probably the only people that can really do something about them. And I think it's very important that they hear this, that you realize you're wasting this valuable moment in life trying to acquire money when we have this very unique opportunity to connect together in a way that people probably used to do on a regular basis in the past but was always suppressed by the powers that be because of its revolutionary powers. If civil-side of an increase is creativity and the creativity increases happiness and happiness up-breaklates the immunity of the community. Yeah. It's hard to make a dictator. People, the dictators want people in constant conflict fighting against each other and they take advantage of it. In a sense, that analogy that the patients that had of being in a rut, maybe were in a societal rut. Maybe this is the opportunity for being able to groom the landscape and find new ways of living and behaving. I'd be the only way. It might be the only way we can get through this because if you think about what this problem is, the problem is the way we interface with reality. That's really what it is. If we have been interfacing with reality, very particular way, showing up at work every day, doing our job, getting a paycheck, deploy the month, yeah, that's how you interface reality most of your life. And then all sudden, you're met with this profound technological change that's going to eliminate your job. What needs to be some sort of a profound experience that reintegrates you with the mother. And let's you know, this is something people made. This is something that people made and most of the people that made it, we're in having psychedelic experiences and they're building cities, and they're building skyscrapers, and they're polluting the river, and they're doing all this stuff, and it doesn't mean that this is how we're supposed to do it. Exactly. And again, I'm going to reiterate, I think we have a crisis in creativity. I think so. So I've been in these other psychedelic stimulate creativity. Look how down. Look at Alex and Allison Gray's work. I mean, some of the psychedelic artists in the world. And then this is fired. And then nice as people. He's a role model for like being just a kind, nice, sweet person. And Alex gave me some of the best advice I've ever received. And I just give it Alex a great total credit for this. And I asked him, you know, like, this is my eighth book. Oh my god, it's so much worked right a book. I didn't use any AI writing this book. I wrote the whole thing myself. And I asked Alex, you know, you're so prolific. How do you do it? Because I remade one realization every day. I go up that I canvas with my brush. I commit to making one stroke. And then three, four hours later, it's still at the canvas. Is that yeah, which is just that tipping point right? Yeah, just doing it. And press field talked about that in the war of art. Have you read that? No, I've got copies of it. He sent me a whole box because back in Los Angeles, I used to keep a stack of them on the table and hand them out to people. And it's all about creating things and resistance and this, this thing that we all have where we were reluctant to sit down and actually do the work. But if you could just commit and he would, he calls it the muse. He like in many, many creative people over time have called upon the muse in this concept. And it sounds like airy fairy to a lot of people. But if you believe in it and if you you actually do that thing where you call upon the muse, it actually works. So whether or not it's real is irrelevant. Well, I have, I have a muse and my partner asked me, you know, a few few months ago, how many more hours do you have to work on this book? She saw me working on work, working on book for two and a half years. And I said, oh, more than 500 hours, she gets 500 hours. It's just so much discipline. And if you everyone, any writers of books, any people built a house, if you comprehended the normative project, you probably wouldn't even start. Yeah, I can't think like that. So it's a good thing about the process. But the process and so I had this little voice in my head, that I'd wake up and I didn't want to feel guilty about it. But I had this little voice saying work on the book, Paul, work on the book, work on the book, work on the book, work on the work on the work on the work. I could say it working on book so fast because I had re-interrated it in my head hundreds of times that it became sort of my muse. It became sort of a fun muse. I think we all have these little voices that kind of, you know, get it right, Stamets, you know, wake up. And I think that's good. I don't think that's, you know, psychosis. I think that's something that we all have these little voices that are trying to help us to be better. And yeah, whether it's internal or external, whatever it is, you can have a voice. It's like working out the discipline of being able to make sure that you're the best that you can be. So it's a very exciting times that we live in. There's a mushroom revolution happening all over the planet. I think there's a psychedelic revolution that's happening over the planet. I think it's happened over the last 20 years. And I think it's happened because of the internet. I think there's a big factor because what they did in the 1970s by, you know, with the Nixon administration did, which is essentially to squash the civil rights movement and the antiwar movement, what they did really fucked up society for a long time. And it put in people's heads that this is how we're supposed to be that these laws that are in place make sense and that they're there in order for society to function at its optimal levels. It's just not true. And unfortunately, like a lot of things that get that propaganda gets pushed and people start accepting that propaganda. In fact, it takes a long time, relatively, in our life, that propaganda gets pushed and people start accepting that propaganda. In fact, it takes a long time, relatively, in our lifetimes, to sort of recognize that this is not right. And this is not how we should have been living the entire time. This is, we were trapped. We were trapped in the system. And because of the internet and because of conversations and because of people like you, that talk about this openly and many, many others as well. We're all contributing to this base of knowledge where people are in their car right now, sort of reconsideringly or perspective. They're at the gym right now on the treadmill thinking about this going, yeah, why do we allow these human beings that have never had these experiences to tell us that these experiences are not just not allowed. But if you get caught with these things, you'll be put in a cage. Yeah. Well, because we are those of us from the psychedelic community advocate for the freedom of consciousness as a basic civil right. We are by definition disruptors to authoritarianism. Yeah. So, you know, this is why I think unfortunately in many cultures, it became restricted to just a small group of priests or macognos, they wanted to control, but have gates to have and boarded the control consciousness. And so I think that, you know, it's so exciting about the cels Ivan and cels I mushrooms as a practice and hunting mushrooms in general. It just gives you a quality of life that's just a game changer. Now with eye naturalists and everything that you can do, it's just getting people out in nature with their children, children are closer to their ground. And more mushrooms, they're away from their business and their parents and the phones, some phones. But you get them involved in interacting with nature. It's just like the telescope and seeing all the galaxies. I think interacting with nature is a vitamin. I think it's just, you know, how we get vitamin D from the sun. I think we get something that hasn't been measured yet from interacting with nature. We know that there's an alleviate, you can actually study an alleviation of stress levels from people that go out in a nature. And this thing that we're experiencing, we just don't know how to measure it. You know, and I think it's a real thing. One of the things that makes me very happy and hopeful now is that you're seeing this openness to psychedelics that's coming from more right-wing people. And it was always a thing of the left. It was always a thing of hippies and it was dismissed by people in the right as people that were trying to avoid reality. They were trying to, you know, escape reality. They couldn't handle reality. They weren't disciplined. They weren't, you know, if they were hard-working people, they wouldn't be wasting their time getting high on drugs. There's that thought. I think one of the bridges to that is the benefit that it's had for soldiers. For soldiers and for people that are first responders, people that suffer from PTSD, and that has trickled down into the general population of the people on the right, which is how you get a guy like Rick Perry, there's all the sorton becoming this very strong advocate for Ibogaine, and having it passed in Texas. So the initiative passed, which is huge. It's a promising step in the direction of understanding that a lot of the division that we have in this country is artificial. It's manufactured. It is out of the blue country music singer, which I had no idea who she was, Casey Muscraves. She's superstar in country music. I'm out of a loop. She reached out to me and she had a soul-sived experience that inspired her. She has an album called Deep or Well. This is just amazing. I was not in the country music until I listened to her. And she reached out to me because of her soul-sived experience. And we decided to do Sing for Science. We sold out the Ryman Theatre of Nashville in three hours. Oh, wow. 2,500 people. These are country music people. 2,500 people three hours. Unfortunately, she was in Mexico. She fell and she broke a rib, so we had a cancel the concert until September 18th or the Sing for Science. But that is an example. And yeah, well, I think my friend's Churchill Simpson sort of opened up the door for psychedelics in country music. We turtles all the way down. Yep. Now he basically wrote a song about God and psychedelics. It's, you know, I, that was a country song. And everybody was like, hey, what the hell is going on? It's funny because psychedelics build bridges that marijuana doesn't. Because I met a lot of people who would never smoke a joint, but the idea of doing a slow side mushroom sound like fun to them. Right. Well, marijuana is also associated with lazy people, and neared of wells, and stinky people with bad ideas, you know. Unfortunately. And I think, you know, look, there's a, one of the things that's interesting is that Jiu Jitsu community is there's a whole lot of stoners in the Jiu Jitsu community. A lot of people using psychedelics for a lot of people. Oh, yeah. Well, I know a bunch of people who fought on mushrooms. Yeah. Yeah. I have a friend who was a world class kick boxer who had some of his greatest performances while he's fighting on mushrooms. And he said he could see what the guy was going to do before he did it. Yeah. This is the indigenous use of soul sibeness to see in the future. That's one of the things that the advantages I think I've had also. And then we'll be able to prognosticate into the future. There was a, we had this extraordinary individual told me a story, which I think I have right, but I'm going to share it with you. There's a game that's very common, it's even in the Philippines, but in Canada, it's a German game, eventually. And the ideas you put nails on a block of wood and use an ice pick. And you have to hammer the nail in with one hit. And each time in a bar or party or whatever, people throw it on money. $5, $20, etc. A nail on an ice pick. So you have the point of the ice pick. You got to hit that nail at the very point. Yeah, sink it. And sink it all the way into the wood. So of course you go around people are drinking, etc. So the story as I remember him telling me is that he went to the bathroom. It's not a toke or it doesn't get some a pot. But someone say, hey, you want some mushrooms and they're playing this game. And there was a bunch of his friends were gathered and he goes, I'll try some mushrooms. So he ate some mushrooms and he came back. And he's the circle of zeroes and people are betting, hey, come over and join us. You know, and he watched for a while, never had played this game. And then he started getting higher and higher. And they say, come on, it's your turn. So he kind of looked at the nail. I mean, this is really hard to do. And look at the nail and look at the nail and focused on it. He said he had such clarity of focus that everything else would blank doubt. He looked at the nail and he just thought that it would connect rather than hitting it. They would just connect. Bam! Slam the nail down on the first attempt. People would, wow, incredible. So they put down, he's person put it down more money going around. So they came around, everyone's missing, everyone missing. Some people occasionally hit it a little bit, you know, but came around, came around to him. Now he's getting higher on the mushrooms, right? And he's looking at it, looking at it. And he goes, Bam! Slams it again. People going, no way, right? This is impossible, right? So now, you know, there's a lot of money being piled up on the table here. They're coming around and everyone's got impossible. Not going to happen. Can't do it a third time in a row. Looked at it, laser focused. Got bam! Slamming again, people are losing their shit, right? They're like, what is going on here? And it's like, he said, really the fuck with one guy who was just out of his mind that he could do this three times in a row. He went around again. And this time he says, I'm going to really blow his mind. So he focused on the nail, focused on the nail, how did the hammer looked at him, bam! Slammed it again! And nailed it. Yeah, literally nailed it. So these examples of... Well, that brings you to the stone deep theory. Well, it's the idea of the concept. Well, concept is, you know, with intense focus. Right. You know, and many years I have two black belts. I had schools for 30 years. Black one in Tackwondo. And then one round, though. I was in Shoto, Conchino, Roo, Gojo, Roo. And then Tackwondo, and then one round, though, which is like Hapikido. But that idea of having a three-dimensional perspective. One of my best... One of my fun experiences... I was in the Dojang, or Dojo, and Josh Japanese. I was Korean. And I had my first black belt, and my head and instructor was over there talking, talking at someone, and then he had a baseball. And I heard later what he said, he said, he said, I told my friend, watch this. And he threw a baseball at me. My peripheral vision. I just caught the baseball. And, you know, just before I hit my head. But that idea of having that consciousness surrounding, that's why athleticism with the medium doses, minor doses of soul-saben, I think you can train your neurons to be able to have this peripheral awareness that's extremely important. It also alleviates the anxiety that comes before performance. There's a lot of people like to use it before sparring. The sparring is kind of scary for some people. Yeah. But let's be clear, this is like the 80-20 principle, maybe the 90-10 principle. It's not going to work for the majority of people. There are exceptional individuals who can actually benefit from this. We're not a resclamer. Yeah, no, no, no, I don't want to make them. No, I suppose there's ways to carve it. Listen, don't take any of our advice. No. But we're just talking about these things because there are anecdotal stories that are they're fascinating. And anecdotal stories are like case studies in medicine. You get enough of them that you want to test this. And this is a testable hypothesis or theory in modern times. I hand coordination. So psycho motor enhancement. And this is why the stem of stack speaks to this. We published in Nature Scientific Reports and a combination of cell-cybin, niacinulines, I mean increased psychomotorability of tapping in 10 seconds from 46 to 66 12. That's a lot. And 10 seconds. Over 30 days. So people can argue about it, but the results and the results. When you're talking about depression and anxiety, that's subjective. But I'm really interested in the psycho motor benefits of cell-cybin. With an ad mixture to enhance its performance, I think the root thing is cell-cybin. And being able to regenerate neurons is something I think is really important for us. With glioblastoma, which unfortunately, terrorists did die from that. That is the uncontrolled proliferation of neurons in the brain. Yeah, there's sort of this contraindication. Do you think there's something that's connected to that? No. I personally don't know. Why not? Just because I don't have evidence to the contrain. I don't have evidence that also should have slept. I see no correlation. I think one is not a common thing among people that are raising cell-cybin. But if you had 8 million people in the United States, you know, condressing cell-cybin, again, you have a data set. Right. So it's not like cigarettes. You know, you smoke cigarettes. There's a higher likelihood that you're going to get lung cancer. It's very clear. So we've known that over time. The problem with cell-cybin is it's been so taboo. And so we don't have real data. We don't have, you know, there's 235 clinical studies on cell-cybin at clinicaltrials.gov right now. And that's amazing. 235. Could you have imagined that 25 years ago? No. There was none. Impossible. And therefore, many indications, many different targets from addiction, cigarettes, alcohol, opioid use to dementia, to Parkinson's, the Alzheimer's, etc. So there's, you know, I think cell-cybin has a PR problem. It sounds too good to be true. But, you know, sometimes things can be true. But the reason why I think that there's 235 clinical studies is because basically it's improving your neuroscape. You're improving the neurology, everything that we're using right now is based to our health of our nervous system. And the neuroscape, if we can enrich the neuroscape, then that has elaborations and everything that we do. And the fact is, coupled with anti-inflammatory activities and neurogenesis and neuroregeneration, neurogeneration neuroplasticity, which is synoptogenesis, the neurons proliferate and then they shake hands. And it's something that you have a new pathway. So there's anti-inflammatory properties. Sills in how strong anti-inflammatory properties are. Interesting. So that's just as come out in the scientific literature. So that's- I don't know where I'm at. Yeah. That's really interesting. How did they study that? And what was the mission? They have something called Interlucan-6. There was a clinical study that was just published just recently. And a down-regulated, it's a tumor necrosis factor in the lukean-6. A down-regulated, that's an inflammatory Sauticon. There's two anti-inflammatory Sauticons that are extraordinarily interesting to us. And our research team, I have 5 PhD scientists, 8 full-time scientists. That's why I created my businesses to do research. But Interlucan-10 and Interlucan-1 are anti-inflammatory Sauticons. So when you can up-regulate those, then it kind of buffers the inflammatory effects. And so that's exciting to find these anti-inflammatory. That's-we were approved by the FDA for a COVID clinical trial based on the fact that we published this in a journal of information research that Interlucan-10 and Interlucan-1 are A were stimulated by a Garyokon and Turkey Tail, mycelium, going on rice versus the rice control. So it's a peer-reviewed article when, you know, the pandemic started, the big concern was if you stimulate the immune system, you have a cytokine storm, and you could overwhelm the body with many, as Ms. said, many, if not most people, die from Sauticon storm. Is there a overreaction of their immune system to the COVID and to other diseases? So we were able to show you an augment in the literature, your immune system, buttered with the anti-inflammatory properties. And that sort of resolved the argument of the cytokine storm concern. And then now we have a very successful study that shows that a Garyokon and Turkey Tail, mycelium, enhances the immunity of individuals long-term. That's much more interesting. Yeah, you still have that. Yeah, it's right there, man. That's a trophy. Yeah, oh, it's never leaving the desk. That sucker. And this is a great example because this is a data species in Europe, on the right list of extinction. In Europe, it is. In Europe, these are growth rings. So this one's probably 25 years old. It's a very nice specimen. Oh, Stan, what's gave you this? Yes, Stan, why don't you give me this one? What a nice specimen. Yeah. So these are annual growth rings. Isn't it cool to see it on the desk? I love it. I thank you. People always ask, what the hell is that? So this is a Garyokon called Fermi Topzas Efficient Nowas, also known as Larissa Fermis. Diascorides first described it in Greek medicine 2000 years ago as e-luxarium at Longham Vietam, the elixir of long life. If someone took a little piece of that and put it in the ground, would it start making new agaricon? If it had spores, it looks like it goes inside the roots of trees. This one being as old as it is, and being as spores are probably become not viable. But agaricon has the white form and the brown form. It goes through this massive transition as biochemistry. And because it's endangered and because highly variable in form, fruit body extracts of this makes no sense. Why is it endangered in Europe and not in America? Only grows in the local force. So the sky islands in Europe and Austria as Lavinia is where this still can be found on large trees. We now have, I think, 115 strains of agaricon by far the largest library in the world. If you ask me what are my most valuable possession is my strain library of agaricon. It's a treasure of strains one out of twenty one out of a hundred times in the old growth force. Why find one? So we don't collect these unless it's going to be clear cut or we find them on the ground or if it's on my own property. And then I take a small piece of tissue. It's the mycelium that is bioactive for the immune system. And this is what we found that we're scalable. The mycelium scalable, the fruit body extracts are not and it's highly variable. Most people don't know that, well, they should know that most mushrooms are parasitized by insects. And that's because the insects spread spores. So the mushrooms invite insects to come in. So they can spread spores. It's like leg cordyceps and ants. Yeah, like buzz pollination. And the weirdest thing when you see spiders and ants overwhelmed by cordyceps. Yeah, it's I'd like to say, cordyceps to eat too. Yeah, I mean, this is the cycle of life, right? So this agaricon is in the bio shield about defense program. We would by the way, this is your company host defense. You have great stuff, man. Buy your stuff. Thank you. It gave me a bunch of it, but I buy it. Well, thank you for your support. We need it. The only company that does research that I know of, I spent over a million dollars a year and fundamental research thinking outside of the box, even though traditional Chinese medicine was fantastic and has like thousands of your history, all traditional medicines advanced with new technologies. That's true across the board. The invention of in visual propagation about a hundred years ago growing mycelium, I opened up this huge opportunity for us to dive into a deeper well of natural substances that can be used as adjunct therapies to enhance conventional medicine. There's a game changer. So 115 strains of agaricon. I submitted eight of them to the bio shield about defense program after a 9, 11, 2004. My TED talk talks about this. And I found two or three strains highly active against smallpox and also against bird flu. And if you go to a national public radio, put stamets and smallpox, you'll see a vetted press release from DOD and the head of the bio shield program, Jack Seakris, saying that, whoops, these are some of the most significant results they've ever seen. The only two million samples submitted were in the top 10, the only natural product. Now that's in vitro. So that in vitro, this is sort of a timeline. And you don't have boy with a microphone, do you? Jamie? What is that? You didn't see it. Was it a microphone? That's a 42-second clip we found in the vault. And it talks, it's me with my son when he's four years old and I'm on the phone saying, I've created this company to do research, research is what we want to do. Truly, that's the origins of what I was trying to do, why I created my business. So I still do that. So, with the 115 strains we're likely to have a super strain in our collection. Pandemics are coming all the time. We're in a viral storm. There's a bird through pandemic where many of us are so surprised that it has not happened in a bigger level. But viral pandemics are also affecting other animals, which I birds and pigs. 67% of beehives were lost in Montana this past year. 67% imagine if you have 67% loss of a herd of cattle or sheep. That's phenomenal. And bird flu is spreading. It's making the jumps. It is coming folks. And so what we want to do is design a clinical study using a caracorn to test against bird flu. I'd be interested to see what if anything could be done with some of these mushrooms with chronic wasting disease, which is a huge concern among deer population and even some other animals, like moose and I think even down. We're embedded into a mycelia landscape. Mycelia is everywhere. The interactions of mycelium and animals, you know, is elaborate complex. This is crazy. And if anyone out here can prove me wrong, please send me the reference. But it appears I'm the first person to realize that bees go to a rotted log for the mycelium for a immunological benefit. Really? First person. How is that possible? We all grew up with Winnie the Pooh. I mean, this is mind boggling. And hiding it doesn't take a stroke of genius. But in my case, the bio shield results. I've heard about colony claps being vector primarily by mites. This past year they identified the miticide resistant mites, which most all of them are now, are vectors of the deformed wing virus. Colony claps is a threat to food biosecurity. We found, and we published this in nature of scientific reports, extra-actopolic poor mushroom phym protects bees from viruses. We published that in nature scientific reports on the primary author, we were able to reduce viruses, the deformed wing virus, by I think, 879 times in 12 days with one treatment. So that is phenomenal for protecting food biosecurity. That helps all farmers. It helps. And there's a pandemic that's spreading 67 percent loss, 60 percent loss generally across the United States. This year, the worst colony claps in history. This will make food prices go up and it doesn't stop because these viruses are proliferating throughout the environment. We found that the pollen-poor mushroom mycelium grown on grain or grown on sawdust, not only reduces these viruses, but extends longevity. And so the longevity and interesting that this mushroom is known as elexarium at long and vitamin, the elixir of long life. We are all animals. Bees are animals, birds are animals, pigs are animals, humans are animals. We are all, I think, can have a immunological benefit from incorporating these fungi. Now, we're allowed by the FDA to say supporting innate immunity and healthy individuals. We're not allowed to make any disease claims. Ironically, we can't make that same claim with bees. We can say extends longevity, but this is where there's not common sense in government. I have an invention that could save hundreds of billions of dollars that protect bees from colony claps and we're roadblock by regulations constantly, oh, reduce virus in bees. You have antiviral drug, whatever. No, we haven't been able to find antiviral drug. We think it's an entourage effect, an uprightly, you know, basic immunity. And then your endogenous immune system, in this case of the bees, can fight the viruses. So, and this I think will translate into birds and the swine. So, is this resistance to these results? No. Because your immunity is so complex. No, no, no, no, no, I mean publicly. Like you're saying, there is, can't make these claims, but if you have results. We have fantastic results. Right. I mean, for anyone to scientific, you know, to nature of scientific reports. So, could you elaborate on what the resistance is? Well, the resistance is, is complicated and is political. The old school conventional wisdom is that if you have a drug like effect, then you have an undeclared drug in your product. And they're funny. Yeah. So, even though, even though it's from nature, even though bees go to a lot of logs for immune benefit, and now there's five or six papers that have been published on this after my discovery, showing that bees are doing this. Their bees are actually benefiting from mushroom mycelium. So, we're working with Washington State University. Great people there. We're working with several funders. We have tested this now over and over again. This is an outdoor animal clinical study, double blind placebo controlled using the mycelium, grown on rice or on sodas versus the sodas or the rice as a control. Clearly, clearly a benefit. So, this is scalable. You can't harvest fruit bodies in a way that you can scale mycelium. Mycelium is an exponential increase in mycelium, especially every week. 10 times 10 times 10 times 10 times 10 or even 10 times 100 times 100 times 100. And massively scalable. I think I have found something as a portal through my psychedelic experiences. That's fundamental to protecting life in this plant. Is that the mycelium networks are deep reservoirs, to being able to immunologically enhance animals, where we don't have to have these all these anti-viral drugs, antibiotic drugs. You're in doing this immune system, so we're up-regulated, because over hundreds of millions of years, we've been interacting with these. It's our immunodepression and suppression, because of all the factors we know, bad diet, toxins, lifestyle, all these things. That this is highly scalable. So now we're trying to navigate through the regulatory landscape. There was a strange committee that was in secret, met once a year for any new ingredient to add to bees, because bees make honey, humans can save honey. If we use our product, they could say, we have a undisclosed drug in the honey, so whatever. But it also translates to wild bees. It turns out that Apis Malefra, the honey bee, with the viruses, and they have the viruses, they go to flowers, frequented by bumble bees. So colony collapse is happening not only with the cultivated honey bee, but it spread to other bees. This is an ecological catastrophe of a viral pandemic that's spreading around the world. We have the solution right now, it's highly scalable, and this regulatory committee disappeared in the past two years. This is before the last administration was voted in, but they didn't tell anybody. They didn't have an application with them for two years to have this exempted. An exempted. The whole committee has gone. They didn't even tell us that it was gone. So we've had two years spending our thumbs waiting for the responsibility. This is where we need to have common sense to come back into government. This is where government has too many hurdles to practical solutions that are demonstratable, scalable, and affordable. That can be retralling investment as massive, and yet we fear the FDA. We fear the USDA because they are stuck in a rut, literally. Maybe they could use Seoul Sybin here to expand their horizons because they want to know the mode of action in the mechanism of action. Well, we didn't know in the mechanism of action of aspirin until the 1970s, but it had a benefit. It has a clear benefit and does not cause harm. Then they should be exempted for scalability. Now, there's another factor to this. It was wonderful. There's a new startup company called Quorum by my friend Chris and Kentravitz disclosure. I'm involved with them, but they have a metarism, a fungus that kills mites. So it's also been approved by the USDA for thrips and other greenhouse insects. It's not toxic to fish, not toxic to humans. So the combination of using metarism with the agaric on another polyp or mushroom mycelium, we think has a great potential future. So I think there's a lot of resources in nature that can augment conventional agricultural practices. There's a lot of resource in nature that can augment conventional medical practices. They're not necessarily in opposition. What is an opposition, unfortunately, and you've alluded to this, is a lot of the pharmaceutical business interests are not excited about a not-for-product, reducing the need for vaccines, augmenting immunity. There is money and disease. That's always the problem. You can tell them. I'm passionate about this because I have such a deliverable provable solution that's scalable. I wonder, and I'm so, my article is published in 2018, and I tell my research team, you know, WTF, we are meeting with WSU and we have recently, and now we have renewed interest, thankfully, because of some big stakeholders in the almond industry, and every almond you eat, visited a flower was visited by B. So the almond industry is in crisis right now, but it's not almonds, it's apples, it's cherries. It's across the board right now. Agriculture is being severely affected by these viral pandemics, and these same viral pandemics are mitigated, I believe, in commonality with these polyp or mushrooms that grow in the water. And I wonder that would also help animal agriculture, because like the ubiquitous use of antibiotics is a real concern with people, with cows, and with chickens. We had the... Growing the woods. I wonder if that would also help animal agriculture because like the ubiquitous use of antibiotics is a real concern with people, with cows, chickens. We had the viral pandemic of a former bird flu, not H5 and 1, but another bird flu, I can't remember, I think it was H7 and 2, and Iowa and Minnesota about 10 years ago, they were euthanizing millions and millions of chickens and turkeys and ducks. You can look the there's organic farm and we gave one quarter of a gram of a garrocan of mycelium per chicken in their feed. And we began our, that chicken, there's two big chicken hens, about 20,000 layers, birds that lay eggs. And it became an oasis of immunity. Those chickens were immune from bird flu. A quarter of a gram of mycelium. And we protected them. That's incredible. But a crazy thing happened. The USDA had an insurance policy to pay the chicken growers and the chicken growers quickly learned that they could get an insurance check, lay off the employees, get the cash from lost profits. And so they were not incentivized. I've heard that from people that are deeply connected to that industry that there was a bunch of euthanizations that didn't happen. Didn't have to happen. Yeah, and they did it. And they inflated this whole concept, you know, because they then the numbers got grossly inflated because they were euthanizing chickens for profit. Yeah, bird flu is very serious serious issue. No, I know vaccines are very hot subject. And I know you've spoken on that. If that's an excellent case, by the way, excellent case or researchers on this. But I just want to give a thoughtful discussion between viruses and vaccines, which is worse, the virus or the vaccine. I'm a libertarian. I believe every family, every individual has a right to make an informed decision. The problem that I see with a vaccine industry, the industrial vaccine complex, is the failure to disclose. I don't think Americans are stupid. I think Americans become stupid when they're not informed. My partner is a physician. She goes, giving hip, be vaccines to a child makes no sense. This is sexually transmitted disease. Why are we giving a vaccine to a 10 year old? Right. And then maybe our baby in med school, when anyone would mention that, why are we doing this? They were vilified, vilified shut down. It's like what happened to thoughtful, good science. It's just a reasonable question. Money happened. It's also these vaccine manufacturers are immune to the financial consequences of the side effects. Absolutely. We need to have full disclosure. Yeah. Now, let me go through a thought experiment. Okay. This is my opinion. Other people may just visually disagree with me. But let's do this. There's two thought experiments I want to do. First one, million lives were saved with a vaccine. One person dies. Hey, you took it for the home team. Sorry. One person dies out of 100,000. Still ratio is pretty good. My mind, my judgment. Sorry. Again, you took it for the home team. One out of 10,000. Okay. Still, the ratio is pretty good. Okay. One out of 1000. Okay. One out of 100, you're making me nervous. One out of 10. No, that's where I draw the one. I would say, forget it. That's now the contradiction that we have, the opposing forces here that we have, is that is a better for society to have vaccinations, to protect the commons, or is it better for you to have an individual decision for your family to protect yourself if you want to. If you are going to make that decision, you should have an informed decision based on that best of science. All vaccines and all companies should disclose what is the percentage of protection? I have a physician friend who says 30% protection, but I'm sick for four or five days. I don't know. That's not worth it. 70% protection. Okay. All right. You know, so everyone has to balance the risk benefit ratio. We need real data to be able to invest. We need real data. We need for disclosure. And for anyone to accuse another physician and vilify them, because they ask a logical question and they're humiliated by the medical community is fundamentally unfair. What happened with good science? You have to follow the science. And this is so important. And that's why I think we're getting this cacophony, this echo chamber, where the voices that are loudest tend to be the stupidest sometimes. More than most compromised. Yeah. And they drown out a dissent. We all should be able to ask for the data and the information to make an individual decision. And science shouldn't be this ideological or ideologically captured thing. That's why I hate the term anti-vaxxers. I think as a pejorative term, I think it's prejudiced. You know, what about people who just want to have information? Oh, you're an anti-vaxxer. Yeah. Well, it's pushed just to scare people and to compliance. And that's the whole idea. But having these pejortos and throw them around and no one wants to be labeled that. And so you immediately get scared. But enhancing innate immunity and healthy individuals to keep us healthy. Yeah. How are they? That's better. Exactly. Well, that's the other problem that I had with the pandemic in general is that metabolic health was never discussed. It was always the there's only one way out of this. And having conversations with people that you could see, like, visually look at them does not a metabolically healthy person. And these people are telling you the only way that health is through a medicine that they are financially incentivized to push. That's just crazy. And when those are the prominent voices that are on television and the media and you're getting this from politicians. And then on top of that, you literally have the federal government censoring social media and not allowing people to have dissenting opinions, including people from Harvard and MIT and all the people in the Great Barrington study. What do we have an open source? National database showing the protection of vaccines and the risk of not getting one. So individuals can make a decision, age related, all these other factors that data is there, not making that data available to the public increases distrust. And so what the the medical community has unfortunately done is they've read a bunch of dissenters by not giving full access to the information. Well, I think that really heightened during the pandemic because I don't think people had that much of a distrust for vaccines unless they knew someone who was vaccine injured, unless they were gas lit and be were told that their child or someone else that gotten vaccine injured, that that was not the cause of it. And those are the people that were very skeptical and they formed these tight communities. But they were very scared to be open and public about it because they were destroyed. You know, I famously remembered Jenny McCarthy coming out and saying that she believes her child was vaccine injured. And the backlash was spectacular. Is essentially destroyed her career? Well, and at one experiment, so I always like did it really happen or was it just a co occurrence of some other factor that combined with the event of the evacuation? I mean, this is where you need to have high population studies, but those studies are available. Why they're cloaked in secrecy and why are the medical people? Yeah, I mean, the financial interest is astounding. The amount of money that's involved in it and the amount of money that they spend every year. They spent eight billion dollars, the pharmaceutical drug industry, spends eight billion dollars just on advertising and on propaganda every year. That's so much money. And they're they spend so much money on television networks. You know, I mean, how many times you Anderson Cooper brought to you by Pfizer? And you see these ads and that shapes the narrative unfortunately. It does. But let me again, this would be clear from my point of view vaccines have done a lot of benefit, but they don't benefit everyone all the time, not all vaccines are the same. We have to be able to delineate thoughtful scientific method with disclosed information. Absolutely. That's accessible to everyone, so you can make the best judgment for yourself and your family. And you've got to remove this financial protection that they have from liability. I don't know. They don't have that. They're going to just jack up the amount that they give people because there's profit in that, unfortunately. And then there are vaccines that are beneficial. Let's find out which ones they are, which one, what can be mitigated in terms of like, how can you make your overall metabolic health better before you even think about any of these things? We know for a fact that during the COVID crisis in particular, the people that have the most problem with it were the people that had comorbidities or people that were obese, people that had all sorts of issues going on because of poor diet, poor lifestyle choices, and even genetic problems. Yeah. One of the, I mean, all of just who we were working with told me something I didn't know is that when are you immunocompromised or immuno depressed, vaccines don't work very well. So they, those people become reservoirs for mutation. Right. Which is the argument for why you don't give it to children or their babies because their immune system is even functional yet. Yeah. I'm, you know, I, again, the, the, the, be one is a pretty clear example. That's another one. Yeah. There's a bunch of nutty ones, but the point is the vaccine schedule, if you look at what we used to take and you look at what happened when they lost their liability during the regular administration, all of a sudden the schedule goes way up. Yeah. And they started adding things like that. And then you realize like, oh, it's very profitable to do that. Imagine how much more money you make if you're injecting everybody with a be vaccine. If you sell, be vaccines. Yeah. Simple mathematics. Yeah. Also I've met people in the farm industry who are extremely well intended. Sure. Great scientists. Oh, but they also test aren't the issue. Right. They've also confessed to me that they face these, this humiliation, you know, being ostracized for just asking questions. Right. Again, full disclosure, let people make up their own minds. What's the, the cost benefit ratio? Is it one out of a million, one out of 10? Well, it's also, you, you should have to show all the studies too. You shouldn't just show the curated studies that you generated specifically with a goal of making an efficacy, like having a result that shows that this is effective. If you do 10 studies, you should show all 10 studies. Yeah. Yeah. Why actually that's why clinical trials.gov exists. Right. Is that we're cherry picking doing studies in Bulgaria in the Taiwan farm? It would choose the clinical studies supported their nerves. Exactly. Exactly. And then they could use deceptive language to show the efficacy. But what I'm getting at is that we have such a reservoir of potential ways of supporting immunity in healthy individuals in nature. Right. That is not farm-based. Right. The space on the entourage effect and say when you activate the receptors in your immune system, there's something beneficial. I believe there's cross-talk between the receptors. The receptors are, oh, something really good is coming down the pipe and they start creating an entourage effect at the collaboration. More receptors are activated that have collaboratively more benefits. And so it goes to the homeostasis and the uplifting of the homeostasis of the immune system that is a higher ready state of being able to respond. And then conventional medicine can work better. But using conventional medicine on immunocompromised individual, asking their immune system to respond, that's an uphill battle. Right. Yeah. And it's interesting too that natural remedies are automatically dismissed by people that think of themselves as intelligent science-based people. Well, look at our medicine. But isn't it weird though that like we dismiss it, but if you really understand the like think about how many different pharmaceutical drugs are formulated because of discoveries of natural plants in the majority of them. And the most recent examples, the anti-malarial drug against Plasmodium false-aparum from an artimnesia bush and it's artimisticin and it came from it came from artimnesia. It's a plant extract. Isn't that wild? And yet science-based people will automatically dismiss what you would call a natural remedy even though all of them. Every kind like nothing exists on earth that's not really natural. All of them are in nature. I'm an agreement with you. I think that we're just reinventing molecules that have been assembled somewhere else. And we think it's that's why the synthetic biologists, I'm honored to get that reward. Thank you, Sin by O'Bato conference. That's where I think really kind of flipped them on their heads. It's don't go down the rabbit hole of excluding natural products thinking you can invent a molecule that's going to be better. Right. In the theater of evolution, we've tested these natural products over tens of millions of years, literally our prime and ancestors. And so we've got a pretty good experiential data set there to be able to see what works and what doesn't. Many mushrooms, you know, not many, some mushrooms are poisonous. You know, that's somewhere edible. It's a weird statistic about and again, one to two percent fudge factor here. So please don't attack me all over the place. But there's 1.5 million species of fungi. It's about 150,000 species of mushrooms that are estimated. So out of that 5 million on the extreme 1.5 million, less than 10 percent, 150,000. We've only identified about 15,000 species. So we want to identify 10 percent of the mushrooms that exist today. Wow. Interestingly, of those 15,000 species, about 1 percent are poisonous, 1 or 2 percent, 1 or 2 percent are psychoactive and 1 to 2 percent are good atables. So 97, 95, 94 percent, whatever the math shows, are there, but they're not toxic. But mushrooms are molecular wizards. These are pharmaceutical factories. They're creating huge numbers. And we know from the genomic analysis, 10 times more genes are activated in the mycelium of lion's mane than in the lion's mane mushroom itself. Why is that? Well, mycelium has to navigate these thin threads through a hostile microbial environment defending itself until the mycelium map becomes large enough at the end of a slice of mycelium to produce a fruit body. And then lions, mane, mushrooms rot in four days. The mycelium that grew it could exist for years. The mycelium is the immune system of the mushroom. And as a result, we have a lot more compounds being expressed. Now, some people say, well, not all those compounds are very beneficial. Uh-huh. Well, that's true. But now we've tested them enough that we can see real world benefit. Dean Warsh just published a study this past year on Alzheimer's using lifestyle adjustments, exercise, meditation, vitamins, and lions mane mushroom mycelium dramatically significant benefit and slowing down the progression of all cyomers through lifestyle vitamins and using lions mane mushroom mycelium. Now, which did what? Yes, you can try to analyze that, but you have to separate every single little component to see which one's most significant. And yet, where's the studies combining 10 vaccines or 20 vaccines in our child to see which one is actually confirming the benefit or causing an adverse effect. We have to at some point, you know, don't let that perfect be the enemy of the good. At some point, if it has a demonstratable positive effect like we have with bees, and it protects agriculture and extends along the gravity of bees and supports the endogenous immune system and healthy individuals. Isn't that good? Why do we have to get lost in the details of trying to explain it? If we can't explain it, then we won't let it be out there for the benefit of the commons. There were cross purposes. This is where science needs to have common sense and the government and the regulatory industry needs to have common sense. And we get that by exemptions, emergency exemptions, and we should get that for emergency exemption right now. We are on a bee apocalypse. We are folks 67% of beehives lost in Montana. What if that was a human population? All hands on deck, right? So it is. And there is a transference of viruses between animal species. We're seeing that in real time. Now, the scariest thing is, is when you have multiple viral infections in one person who's immunocompromised and you have horizontal gene transfer. This is what the virologists very much themselves. They talk about this all the time, but the public is not aware. You could have individuals and when you have so many dairy farm or farmer workers exposed, so many people in contact, concentrated clusters of animal animals and farms. You have so many potential patient zeros. The patient zeros are person who is the nexus for spreading a mutated farm over virus. Horizontal gene transfer is happening all the time now. Now, it's concentrated. It's accelerating. This exponential increase of risk. Bill Gates has talked about this. Many other researchers have talked about this. This is really something we should pay attention to. And I think the simplest, easiest, scalable way is enhance immunity and healthy individuals. And by doing so, I think you can let your endogenous immune system work better. And I think conventional medicine will work better also in concert. Well, it also speaks to the problem with industrial agriculture in general. These are unnatural environments where these animals are living in their own waste on a consistent basis, which is it enhances the possibility of disease and the generative agriculture enhances the possibility of harmony amongst nature. And then the counterargument is that we have better nutrition. We can feed the world. And so the people are more people happier. Again, we're at this contrast of opposites. And I wish I had the easiest solution. I think I had the solution for bees. I think it's scalable for protecting chickens and livestock. I hope, you know, and we're now designing clinical studies on a path that my clinical studies with bird flu using a garracont. We don't have the results. So I'm not making a medical claim here. But the evidence so far is so encouraging. And I'm working with top notch virologists, absolutely some of the best virologists who came to me because they saw the paper and Nature Scientific Reports and I thought, ah, fun job. Fun job. Fun job. It could help us, you know, protect ourselves. It can viruses. So they came through the back door of the scientific community, not Joe Rogan listener. They might be, I don't know. Maybe they are now. But they came to the scientific literature saying, we should try this with people. So those are the scientists that I like there. Open minds are enough. They're rather than just a molecular geneticist, you know, synthetic biopeep people. They're actually saying, well, it's a provable result. We don't know why, but we should explore this because we can argue for 100 years about why. Or we can deliver it tomorrow and have it up positive effect. Yeah, it makes sense. I have to ask you this question. It's unrelated, but I always wanted to know why do morale mushrooms grow around burns? That is such a great question. And you know what? That's the question that we've been asking for so long. The problem morale mushrooms too. I love morale mushrooms too. Do you know there are poisonous? Oh, unless you cook them. Really? Yeah. Oh boy, that's important. Many people have died from morale. Oh, yeah. Wow. That's crazy. You don't want to cook morale mushrooms in a closed kitchen without ventilation. There are volatile compounds coming out of their morale with totally denatured and cooking delicious. But many, many examples of this, in Japan, I was in Japan, you know, 15 years ago. So you don't have an overhead fan. Don't fry morale. Or you open up the window, but just don't inhale the fumes. Wow. Many the North American Psychological Association is the Association for Canada, Mexico, United States. And there's a poison control group in that. And they collect all the details. It's namico.org and a m y co dot o r g. And though they're the go-to place, ironically, because I hip a rules, the mycologists have been disconnected from the patients in the medical community, because now there is a firewall between them. We can anonymize the case reports, but there's a fire wall of information because of HIPAA and disclosure of the patient conditions that has really inhibited the flow of information. Nevertheless, namico.org, North American Psychological Association, and a m y dot co dot org. And my professor Dr. Michael Buick is a giant, you know, in consulting with, for adverse effects and mushroom poisonings. So Morels are delicious, but to answer your question, that we morale mycelium seems to be everywhere, and then for horse burns, and they come up. Right. Where were they before? Right. What do they do? They exist in places that don't have burns? Yes, but rarely. No, we think all the time all the time. We'd like the very common amongst burns everywhere for a star. Right. And when the force burn and knocks down all the competition, and it becomes very alkaline, the absence of organic material and competitors, competitor, fungi, the change in the pH. And so I think we think also from the guy in hypothesis point of view, it's a great way of nature to rebound because they're sent full, they attract animals, they attract insects, and birds come in, drop seeds, and then they become an oasis point for the regeneration of an ecosystem. There's never underestimate the intelligence of nature. And nature has figured this out. You know, nature does not exist in a vacuum. There's always these repopulation vectors happening and it's collaborative. It's not competitive. There is competition between the fungi, but when the competitors are knocked down, the them are else come, come up. That's fascinating. Another fascinating thing is that the largest living organism on earth in the Pacific Northwest. Yeah, armillary estué, yeah, some people call it galacad, two different things. But yeah, I flew over it. It's a 2,200 acre, you know, basically a clear cut, killed all the trees. And my book, My Sillium Running, I have the best photographs of the largest organisms in the world. And I hired an airplane in the first time I couldn't see it because I was too low. Second time I'd aspire to up. Can you explain what it is, people? It's a honey mushrooms, a parasite on trees. It's edible. The honey mushrooms on hardwood tend to taste better, but this one is on conifers. And it's a come-up in clusters. It forms black, black rhizomorphs, black myceliums called laminated root rot. Many listeners here know what that is. It kills fruit trees. But this is a marauding parasite that created a contiguous map over 2,200 acres. And in this case, it killed all the trees so they went ash and gray in color. And they dried out their dead. Because the fire hazard from lightning strikes, the forest service came in and they cut all the dead trees. And they created this beautiful outline of the largest mycelium map in the world because you could see where the dead trees were. Can we see what that looks like in the image? It's also in mycelium running. So, but any of that's an example. Now, all killed the trees. That's terrible. But a created lab grasslands for unclean lakes. Right. Also deer and moose elk come in. So it's way of, I think it's a way of this rebalancing of nature. Right. We're dealing with millions and millions of acres. Millions and millions of acres. There is a real big problem with the bark beetle right now. You know, that's a problem. If the ecosystems are shifting in response to stress and, you know, with our minds view of only one lifetime, we're very myopic. I think we need to look at the thousand year. I mean, what is the lens of time that we actually look at ecosystems? What's the right lens to use? Depends upon your vested interests. You know, as a human, as a deer, as an ecosystem, that could be very different. Right. It's just such a fascinating thing. The largest known organism on earth exists in the Pacific Northwest. It has one cell wall thick. That's so nuts. Think about its immune system. You don't have found out recently that I had no idea. Aspen trees, when you see aspen trees, it's one plant. Yeah, it's one contiguous thing. There are the two competitors for that title, by the way. Isn't that nuts? They're the two competitors. When you see these, I always thought when you see aspen forests that it's a bunch of different individual aspen trees. Nope. You know, there's all sorts of amazing discoveries. Here's one that blows my mind. And I had to write it down because it's a new species. There is a fungus that's related to Eragon. It's in the Cloud Dula, Clandestina. And don't want a great name. Clandestina, the Clandestina. Don't they do something to commercial morning glory seeds to make sure that people don't trip on them? I don't know. I think they do. I think that's another thing that Terrence was talking about, how gross it was. They alter morning glory seeds because they knew that people were using them for psychedelic. Well, they sterilized them and used a fungus side. That would make sense. I'll guide you to the student that need to give her credit as the Western Virginia University. Korean hazel. And this is Daniel. Daniel. Yes. There it is. Look how young she is. Very young. She made a discovery here to for unknown to science and not only to produce it as LST compounds, it is a symbiotic fungus helping the morning glory survive. Amazing. Think about every young person out there that feel that my ecology is underfunded, under-studied, under-reported, under-reported, under-utilized. This is a fantastic treasure trove of new potential discoveries. I have long stated, I think, that it's feel that my colleges should be funded as well as the computer industry because it's so fundamental to survival of our species. That's that big. No, I couldn't agree with you more. You're aware of Brian Murrowski, right? That was one of the more fascinating things that they found in those when they studied those vases that they found Urkod in them from the Illucinian mysteries. Has Brian tripped out? I don't know. You have to ask him. I love it when scientists and researchers don't admit that they've tripped. But I don't know if it's a non-admission. I think in his case he wanted to be objective, so he wanted to study these things without being- Yeah. Is that air is worried about being labeled as someone who's promoting them because they like it? Well, an extreme example, but I had some merit. I mean, would you be able to be taught by an airline pilot has experience or someone who just wrote a book? Yeah. So they like Roland Griffiths. He's a dear friend, John Hopkins. He is credited as being the big pioneer for civil-cybin and medical research. When I asked him, have you tripped on civil-cybin? That is when I was on his house in the backyard. He said, he just smiled. He said, I'm not going to answer that question. Well, then after he died, I met some of his friends. And he goes, oh yeah, Roland Roland tripped. But he didn't want to tell anyone because for the fear that he could lose his objectivity or be criticized. Yeah. He was- Rick Strospin had an interesting perspective on that too. for the fear that he could lose his objectivity or recruit a size. Yeah, he was an interesting perspective on that too. When I first met him, he was very reluctant to talk about DMT experiences that he had personally because he had run those FDA studies. I was documented in DMT the spirit molecule book. He was very reticent to talk about it and then he sort of came out of the closet on that. Fully. And then when I asked Roland's friends, well, where did he like the trip trip? Because you're in a hospital environment with all these doctors and you know, your stress levels go up just being in a hospital environment. And he said, well, Roland's favorite place to trip was on a mountain top with three friends with a beautiful view and a fire. Perfect. Perfect. Perfect. What's the quality of experience? Again, this is for healthy normals. Not people who need to have medical assistance, but there's some very good psychotherapists out there and psychonauts in the and the psychotherapists at therapy movement. The center, the California Institute for Integrative Studies, C-I-I-S I think dot org or dot EU has a program training psychedelic therapists. You don't have to be a medical physician to be able to hold someone hand to have a guided experience. Now there's a lot of charlatans out there. It'd be be worn, folks. There's a lot of problems. That's a lot of that is a problem. But there are some excellent therapists out there. And for many people who can't get into a clinical study, be careful, consult the qualified medical practitioner, put that on the record. But a lot of people have benefited without having to go through a traditional medical, you know, constructs of a hospital, right, to have been a and then they were reluctant to talk about it because the illegality of it, unfortunately. And you know, if you have a job that is where you have to be taken seriously, that was you could be looser medical license. But the University of Washington, Tony back, Anthony back published a clinical study on using civil assignment for physicians and nurses who were emotionally harmed and distressed by people angry at them because of COVID and the hospital. And they were spit upon and they were attacked viciously, physically, sometimes in the hospital. They at PTSD, but just trying to provide good medical support. So he did a clinical study that was published last year, showing the benefits because the nursing physicians, when they got out of the system, they can't provide medical care society loses. So they are able to reconcile the emotional harm that they experienced from angry patients and being assaulted and they were able to then return many of them back into the medical profession, you know, with a, you know, healing from that. So it relies aggression and anger affects everyone around you. The advantage of civil assignment, I think just like a pebble and the pawn of a tragedy creates ripples of distress throughout society. When someone who is highly adversely affected, angry and, you know, violence and all these antisocial behaviors, when they suddenly switch, just like that, it's a pebble and the pawn of positivity. A great example, a law enforcement officer by the name of Sarko from Boston just received his religious exemption for using psychedelics. So he is a police officer and his chief of police is now retired. He has been an advocate because he saw Sarko who experienced all these negative, he's loved to have them on the show sometime. He can really speak authoritatively other law enforcement officers saying this has helped me. So I have a law enforcement officer. I love to talk to him. I love to hear from you. He's the real deal. I have a RCMP officer friend and Vancouver who took me to his favorite Salas Island mushroom shop in Vancouver. I couldn't believe it. We're walking this Salas Island mushroom shop. They didn't know who I was and thankfully and they were selling the stem of stock, which is kind of weird because I have my name on it. And we walk in there and say this is where I tell all my law enforcement officers come to get their Salas Island. I'm sorry. I'm trying to juxtaposition this. How does this work? And he goes, oh, you know, this is good perhaps for ICE also. He said, you know how in the United States law enforcement officers are aggressive and mean that tend to intimidate you and you know, subjugate you. So we found a better way up here as through Salas Island. So what do you do? It says, well, we have learned the following. Now when I have to arrest somebody, I know they have a warrant out for them. I walk up to him and I say, I always walk up with a smile on my face. Never heard. Look, all the smile on my face. I said, I have good news. Now I have bad news. What do you want to hear first? He said invariably, I very wants to say, tell me the good news. And he goes, the good news is you can finish your cup of coffee. And they go, okay, what's the bad news? Dude, I got to arrest you. And he goes, the amount of cooperation and the reduction of the threat level for the safety of the law enforcement and the cooperation that they get in the squad car. When these people don't are just shooting this shit with law enforcement officers, I know you're doing a job, but wow, thank you. It makes so nice arresting me. He said, it's a game changer. It's reduced the threat to us physically of making arrests. It makes sense. It doesn't escalate. They deescalate it. He goes, you won't believe the things I learned. You know, from these people who are arresting now, you know, tell me things that would never have the caught not of interrogation, but they were so respected. And the fact that they had to do their job without become an adversary. Yeah, note to self, right? Note to everyone, right? Note to everyone. And in all conflicts involve two or more people, it does it. They're not just this is the only way to react to something. Yeah. It's how you react, how they react to your reaction. There's a cascading effect. Well, I am great faith in humanity. I've seen that I do too. I have the seen the best. I mean, I've seen people. Most people are great. Most people are great. And they're better when they go through a social experience that amplifies the best of people. And it also helps them resolve the law of the baggage. You can think of the inflammatory actions of the anger. And you did something that you don't want to tell anybody, but you're haunted by that. Yeah. You inadvertently harmed somebody and you went off the deep and you harmed somebody else. It's a cascading event of harm. Yeah. And when you these people are resolved, like, that was a bad chapter in my life. I had one really bad day or maybe a series of them, but that does not define me who I am as a person. I have a better self. And it's now and in the future, right? It's not in the past. Yeah, that's the perspective we should all have. And that's the thing that we should all strive for. Be the best version of you that you can be. And you we've all made terrible mistakes in the past, but the idea is to have learned from them and to be a better person because of that. Well, the medical community has come together on this on psychedelics. The law enforcement communities come together. You know, I it's positive. We're in a positive direction. I like interview by the DEA and yes, they were I had I thought they're the boogeyman in seven days for a good reason, by the way. But I shouldn't say that. But I went through my background check and and the DEA has such a sense of humor. It's like, OK, Paul, you know, you come out clean. You don't have a record. Everything is fine. You know, but we have to talk to you about something happened in 1994 and the morning's Washington. Really? Yeah. I'm like, what happened in 1994 in the morning's Washington? Are you sure you don't remember? And they're they're roleplaying here. I didn't know it at the time. I go, no, I don't remember. I would have sometimes people just confess to something that because they're fishing. I don't know. I said, I have no clue. No clue. Are you sure? I'm an this is your official response. You don't remember. I said, no, I don't remember. I says, didn't you get a speeding ticket? And I said, I paid that. It was from those machines. It was from my camera. I know I paid it. I could dig up the receipt. It was like 35 bucks. And they just reward the laughter. They just fucking with you. They're fucking with me. What they told me is that we don't know shit about mushrooms or soul siren. We're an enforcement agency. Many of us don't agree with us. Change the law. We want to go after syndicates. We want to go after fentanyl. We want to go after these, you know, these, these, these things that are not beneficial in any way, right? He performs said, we don't want to hurt the source that is healing us. Right. But they won't fuck around when it comes to money transactions. Once you involve money, then the DEA is going to be involved. Right. Right. By your involved in research, and we, we have strict guidelines, I had a DEA license in 1975, 1976, 77, 78. Dr. Michael Buke, the Everguitar, they call it. They were much more liberal. I could grow tons of soul-side mushrooms and collect them. And that's why we did a series of conferences. I was the only one had a DEA license. So with these conferences, collecting all these experts together with Albert Hoofmann, there are Gordon Watson, Richard Evans Schulte's, you know, Dothman Ott, Terrance McKenna. But I had the license to be able to possess soul-sidemen with my professor. And so we would have all this soul-sidemen. So we did these educational events, you know, academic with citizen scientists and psycho-nauts coming together. But it's really different. As we just had a, the psychedelic science maps conference in Denver, 8,500 people. Back in the 1970s at any moment, we were afraid that I saw a SWAT team would break down the doors and arrest everybody. We existed in a high state of paranoia, because I was a Warren drugs, Richard Nixon. And now it's totally different. Now you have law enforcement officers. You have Rick Perry. You have all these in New Mexico. They legalized the prescription of psilocybin. This is a citizens movement. It's a democratic movement for the freedom of consciousness. And you, everyone should have a right to be able to practice. And where do you draw individual use from religious use? Sills, I have a mushrooms are very important for my own personal religion. I feel that this is central to my religious belief. So I think this is where the government means to back off. If you're using it for your spiritual development, whether you're a Buddhist or a Christian or Islamic, you know, or a Judaic, you know, this informs your spirituality, reduces crime, it reduces harm, reduces, you know, potential for violence. This is a game changer. I think we're in the psilocybin revolution and psilocybin mushrooms are fundamentally different than MDMA. And I began just because I began so long and those hard issues. I just think this is a medicine for our times that can make a paradigm shift for a better society. I couldn't agree more. That's a good way to end this. Thank you, Paul. So, hold your book up there because this is the latest of eight books that you've written. Sills, I've been mushrooms in their natural habitats. Paul, you're a gem. You really are. You're such an important person. And I think through the conversations that you and I have had and then you've had on many other podcasts as well, millions and millions of people have gotten to understand what this is really all about. And I think your role in educating people is enormous. But let's be very careful with that. I'm a one knowledge keeper, literally in a string of knowledge key. Yes, so many people have died, been harmed and indigenous people. I am carrying the torch and I want to pass this torch with pride, with dignity, with respect, with kindness, with positivity to the next generation. The next generation needs to be empowered with us. And they can do an excellent job knowing what's happened in the past and for telling what we could be in the future, the best of the best. I think you're doing just that. So thank you. I appreciate you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Bye, everybody.