Hello world. Brad Abrahams is a documentary filmmaker from Canada who's currently based in the USA. Brad's documentaries feature some of the world's most odd and interesting characters. For example, he spent 3 years documenting David Huggins, a 72-year-old man who claims he lost his virginity to an extraterrestrial alien woman hybrid, and also claims he had multiple children with her. Brad also focuses a considerable amount of his work on conspiracy theory culture, dissecting the minds of people who believe in the most outlandish theories and ideas. This was a super fun episode. We got to jump down many different rabbit holes. Without further ado, please enjoy this episode with Brad Abrahams. Brad, you are an interesting dude. You have some great work. Thank you. I've been I've been watching all of your documentaries for the past few days. Again, I've already watched them once. I watched them for the second time. Appreciate it. What the hell draws you to these types of characters? Yeah, so it's it's two things. One is um really the the biggest draw is Scoot this thing a little bit closer. Sure. The biggest draw is um a fascination with belief and wanting to understand uh why these people believe in these things. But um smaller a smaller draw uh maybe it's about, you know, a quarter compared to the the 75% of that is uh I also want to believe. You know, there's like a part of me that that holds out that, you know, UFO abductions are maybe real or Bigfoot is maybe real or some of these conspiracy theories are real. And I think that's what draws all of us to the subject matter, really. Even if even if we're just watching and laughing, we still sort of want to believe that that it could be real. Yeah. Yeah. Like I was telling you right before we started, the guy Mike Clelland Mhm. who wrote the Messenger books about the owls and synchronicities. Uh like I was telling you, I had him on here for a couple hours and we and we were talking and it's just as for me, as far as like my experience talking to um people who claim to have been abducted by UFOs, Mhm. I just started to I just started to question him so much the more and more we started talking. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like I started to lose sort of like I I wanted to believe him at first and then sort of as as we started going down the rabbit hole and he started talking more about these synchronicities and how he believes he was like some chosen one and he had been abducted so many times and it was sort of like his calling in life was to tell this story. Yeah. Personally, I sort of lost my personal grip on it. Did you get the same feeling with with uh First of all, let's introduce this guy David Huggins. Tell me about that documentary that you did. Yeah, so David David is a a mild-mannered, nearly 80-year-old man in uh Hoboken, New Jersey and he claims that he has been having extraterrestrial experiences since he was I think like nine and once he hit 17, these experiences turned sexual. Um he says he lost his virginity to one of these extraterrestrials at 17. I'm glad they waited till he was somewhat age-appropriate. Uh and and up until probably like the you know, this was happening in this in the maybe the '50s or '60s up until the '80s or '90s, he kept having these experiences and and decided to chronicle them all through these amazing surrealistic oil paintings. Which he then he would finish a painting and just like put it against the wall. It wasn't for anyone to see except for himself until basically I came into his life and and saw his studio with which had like 200 something of these paintings and knew that I had to put his life to film. How did you discover him again? It was I don't actually really remember. It was it was maybe back in like 2000 10 or 11 or something listening to some paranormal radio show and they mentioned him offhand as as too crazy for them to even talk about. So I was like, "Well, this is the guy that I I need to try and and find." And and realized he had no internet presence. He's never, you know, used the internet and doesn't have email or anything like that. And I tracked down his neighbor who had done a little book of his paintings which not many people had seen and she gave me his home phone number and I called him like a cold call and immediately he was just like, "Yeah, I think it's time for me to tell my story." And yeah, we had we had maybe about like 10 two-hour long phone calls where I got every single detail to try and figure out is this going to be worth, you know, me spending cuz years to make a documentary, you know. Is this going to be worth my time? Eventually I spent a weekend with him as an experiment. I slept in his ex-wife's bedroom whom he still lives with but she was away on vacation and it was just like a a weird wild weekend and I was like, "Yes, this is this is going to work." Wow. Uh-huh. Oh my god, dude. That's [ __ ] wild. I've had a couple Yeah, okay. Yeah, that's So but he's told his story he has told his story before, right? Like with that guy Bud Hopkins. Well, he know Bud Was he in one of his books or no? He wasn't. So no, but the Bud Hopkins book, I think it was called Intruders. That was what David David basically like a lot of alien abductees didn't have access to all all memories and he he randomly found this book in the bookstore, started reading it, and there was a chapter called Other Women, Other Men that was about kind of sexual abduction experiences. And as soon as he started reading it, he said, "All of the memories started to crystallize again. They all came clear, and that's when he started to paint them from memory." Pardon the interruption, but this episode of the podcast is brought to you by our friends at Geology. This award-winning men's skin care company will formulate a customized skin care routine just for you using a handful of powerful, proven ingredients that have been trusted by dermatologists for decades. In fact, Geology is one of the only men's skin care companies to have retinol as an active ingredient in their products. If you suffer from acne, dark circles under your eyes, sensitive or wrinkly skin, you have to look no further. All you got to do to get started is take their 30-second diagnostic quiz, and their team of dermatologists will design and ship a customized regimen directly to your door. That's what I did. They gave me all this amazing stuff. I got the everyday face wash. I got the uh the dark circle wash cuz I got [ __ ] bags under my eyes. The repair night cream is amazing, too. It feels so good and smells so good. Their face wash is incredible. It smells amazing. I love the way it makes my skin feel after using it, and with over 4,000 five-star reviews, why not give it a try? Head to geology.com, take their free skin care quiz, and save up to 50% off your 30-day trial. Or just click the link below and use the code concrete50 at checkout. That's promo code k o n c r e t e 50 at checkout. Back to the show. And he claims that he had multiple children with these alien beings Yes. and held the children and wanted to go It's a [ __ ] It's bananas, the story. I mean, never and more bananas. Yeah, the children part was you know, cuz there's you know, I've been abducted. You've heard a lot of people say say that and may and maybe that's true. And then there's you know, I had sex with aliens. That's another level of of sort of credulity like will I believe that? But then there's I've had lots of hybrid babies with aliens that I've seen and held and played hide-and-seek with on the spaceship. And it's like, "Wow, uh you know, I can't really I can't say I believe anymore." Um but I still I want to believe him in that something happened to him. But that detail and those details is just like too much. That's too much for me in my brain Yeah. to imagine. Maybe that's just be you know, I can't think outside the box enough for that. What what was your first take dealing with this guy? Like the first weekend you spent with him. Like what was your first reaction? Just totally disarmed by so down-to-earth, so nice, normal, uh like plugged into the world, you know, like into politics and everything. Um I would walk his street and and meet all of his neighbors. And they all loved him. They all just thought of him as like the grandpa on the street. He'd been there 30 years. Go into his place of work like David's the best. Um most people just didn't even know that he had had these experiences. He doesn't talk about them to with most people. So, I was getting this impression that that you know, I maybe was going to go there thinking he's going to be unhinged in some way. But that's not the impression you get at all. And anyone that meets David is is just like, "Wow." And then that cognitive dissonance starts to happen. You're like, "Well, someone that seems so normal, um you you you don't you're not going to write off as just crazy and he's making it up or he has paranoid delusions because that doesn't seem like what's going on." And so then you you start thinking like, "Well, what could that be? And then that's you know, what I'm most interested in. Yeah. Yeah. Now, his massive collection of supernatural sci-fi movies on VHS. Did Did his obsession with these paranormal sci-fi movies start before he these these things happened to him before he started telling the stories or at what point? Because I in the documentary you make the connection or one of the guys you're interviewing makes the connection saying that these experience these real-life experiences people have directly affect these science fiction stories and then it's like a it's a cycle and then the science fiction stories affect the more real-life situations people say they encounter. Yeah. So, do you know do you have like a timeline of when he became started collecting all these movies and becoming obsessed with them? Yeah, so so what's interesting is that seemed to happen later, you know, just like in the '80s when he started collecting them, but he early on was that movie Did you ever see John Carpenter's The Thing, the '80s one? Where it's like Kurt Russell and it's like just these horribly disgusting like alien monsters. Well, the the first version of that, the original version of that came out the year that he had his first encounter. And so or he watched it around that time, you know, probably in the theater or something. Mhm. Um and so there's these things that you know, I'll hear things like that and it and it and it's like, well, maybe then that's in your brain and and maybe you still had an experience, but you're like mapping on things that you're seeing. But but still back in, you know, in the I guess in the '50s and the '60s that was kind of a UFO mania too. Like there was like reports of UFOs over the White House and you know, um he probably cuz there was no internet he's probably had very little exposure to this stuff, but it was still there and around. And especially when he started remembering most of it, that's in the '80s and that's like, you know, prime UFO time. Yeah, a lot a lot of his story a lot of his drawings are very similar to a lot of other really popular events. And he doesn't have access to the internet, so how would he know? Right, yeah. Uh, I don't know how much of of that imagery he I get the gray definitely I think everyone had seen, but insectoid beings um the praying mantis yeah, yeah and and the tall people, the alien women, those seem pretty unique. He did see like a he had mentioned like in a Doctor Who episode that he saw that that he had mentioned he saw and he was like, oh, that's weird. I'm it's like I'm having a memory and I watched it and it's like these giant ants, like these ant people that sort of look like his praying mantis. And so again, it might be that that he had these experiences and then he saw these these mantoid beings and they reminded him of him or he saw those and he's like, oh, I had, you know, Yeah. mapping that onto in his own brain. Yeah, it's it also reminds me of the Travis the whole Travis Walton story as well. Like with the human slash alien hybrids, you know? Yeah. Which was very odd. Uh-huh, and more terrifying like David the Travis Walton story is like truly terrifying and David is just like, oh, I had a good time. Yeah. Yeah. So, overall, your experience with him and doc How long did you film with him? It was it was uh, it happened over years, like maybe 3 years or something, but I would only go like a couple weekends per year to shoot with him cuz it was all self-funded. Uh, I got a little money from a production company, but it it just takes docs take forever and then it took like 2 years to, you know, edit it and put it together, but I I'd basically the first time I went and saw him was like 9 years ago. Wow. Yeah. Uh-huh. And he still calls me like every other day. Does he really? Yeah, he just checks in. He'll tell me if he had a weird dream, if someone buys one of his paintings, he just wants to know what's going on with me. Yeah. to buy one of his paintings. Those things are amazing. Uh-huh. You got to do it in person. Yeah. Okay, you got to fly there and get it buy it from him. Pretty much or if you have a friend in New York. So, is this guy is this guy full of [ __ ] Did this happen to him? What do you what's your take? My take is knowing him, he he didn't make it up. He experienced something. Mhm. Uh and it's hard for me to believe that it's exactly as he described it, but so he might be he might be like in in the movie the the professor of religious studies says, you know, we experience something um but then popular culture is is how we filter it and see it um because we can't even comprehend what that reality really is. So, maybe I mean that's what I more lean to that David had was having what classically would be called mystical experiences um which are similar to psychedelic experiences mhm without the drugs. Right. Uh and yeah, they're like almost like religious experiences that David was having and um maybe it's like some kind of epilepsy. Like there's I talked to some neuro some neurologist or neuroentheologist uh and there's like there are types of up waking hour epilepsy that they're very vivid hallucinations. Um maybe you know, everyone's wrong and he has some kind of paranoid delusional uh personality disorder. Uh maybe he is making it up or maybe something really happened to him. Like all these things it could be, but I I I would just say that I think that he's just not lying. That's all I can say is that he's not lying that strange things happen to him or he experienced strange things. Um and and he's telling it as he remembers it. But I if I were like with David when one of these things were happening, I don't think I would have seen what he was seeing. I don't think they were really happening in our like objective reality as we see it. Mhm. Yeah. Sort of it was like it like in an almost in another dimension, like a dream-like state. Who knows? Yeah. And and and and I also, you know, I'm not I want to clarify I'm not saying that like all UFO sightings are this either Okay. because I think that those can be different things like UFOs, which now we have, you know, footage of from the the military. Um that's a big leap still from being abducted and from being from having sex with whoever's on these UFOs, you know? They don't have to be the same thing and I think a lot of people get caught up in that. Well, the funny thing is about the whole like I mean it's a fun it's such a fun subject. The funny the the interesting thing about it is is not that long ago, just like talking about UFOs was like had the stigma of modern-day talking about abduction. Like right like now talking about UFOs is like, okay, yeah, it's been in the New York Times, it's been like like Navy pilots talk about it and it's like, yeah, we accept it. And but abduction is kind of like, okay, now you're crossing the line. But not that long ago it was like just talking about seeing UFOs being real talking about UFOs being real. That was crossing the line. So how much down the line farther down, you know, the timeline we go when you know, maybe abduction will be proven right and Maybe. Yeah. And then like, okay, we'll wait for a sex with aliens for We'll wait another 10 years until we accept that. And then we'll all be looking back at David and be like, damn, he was right. Yeah, but I mean going back in in uh like the Greek and Hindu mythology uh they're sex with their gods, right? Who kind of look like aliens and come from the sky. and so it could you know it could just be a a different form of that. Yeah. He seems just like such a like a such a nice person such a like a genuine guy. He doesn't seem like the kind of guy that's looking for attention he's not publishing books or anything he seems like the like even the art show seems like something that you guys kind of like or not maybe you but other people around him pushed him to do like encouraged him to do it. Yeah. Oh no I did it like I I set up the whole Oh you did? show for him yeah because otherwise there no one would see his work in person so we just rented a gallery in filled it with his paintings and then and people just came it was like in Manhattan so people just walked in um and it was one of it was like his basically his first show or solo show and and he got to interact with people and everyone that talked to him were like wow like you know I look at the images then they look bonkers but then I talked to him and now I really have to think about it. Yeah. Uh-huh. This is [ __ ] fascinating man. What other types of people similar to him have you talked to or or interviewed? Right so he's sort of the most the person who's who's most experienced the supernatural. So there's you know I've had I've done a a short and working on a feature about cryptozoologists those who study animals that most likely don't exist or or you know that they are Cryptozoologists. Yeah. Yeah it just stands for it's the study of unknown or hidden animals and so Bigfoot falls into that. Mhm. The Loch Ness Monster falls into that and then animals that were once extinct and maybe could still be alive so like the the Tasmanian tiger or there's have you heard of the coelacanth? No. That was that was a fish that they thought Coelacanth? Coelacanth. Coelacanth. Yeah. Okay. It was a fish that they thought went extinct millions of years ago and then just you know decades ago actually found it still alive and still, you know, thriving populations of it. Looks wild, like this wild prehistoric fish. So, that would be considered like a cryptid what they study. And then it goes as far as there's like one called the Mongolian death worm, which is sort of in between Did you ever see that movie Tremors? Yeah, so it's it's sort of like mini or like sand worms from Dune. It's like these these mini versions of that that spit acid and of the most terrifying animals in all movies. and so these Mongolian like you know, yak herders and desert nomads claim that they see these death worms. They're not that They're like maybe like that big. And but they they can like paralyze you, spit acid, electrocute you, Wow. do psychic things. So, that's like far on the on the hard to believe end and then there's there's some that like, you know, we do find creatures that we didn't think existed. Yeah. I find it I I love the the whole I love the UFO subject. But when I talk to people this about UFOs, I I I often find that they also believe in Bigfoot. Yes. And then it kind of just ruins it for me. You know. There's there's factions though. There's some There's some that believe they're connected that Bigfoot is an interdimensional being. Yeah, and then there's the real cryptozoologists. They're they treat it like zoology, you know, like it's a it's a science. And some of them are actually like primatologists and they would they hate when people connect like UFOs and Bigfoot cuz to them UFOs are the crazy stupid thing. And Bigfoot's the real thing. Right. Yeah. Yeah, there is there's I've heard of that. Like like flying saucers and UFO sightings being directly correlated with Bigfoot. Yep. Yeah. It's odd. It is. Yeah, and then I also did a short doc about a a theorist and now working on a feature doc about, you know, a group of conspiracy theorists. And and that's another kind of That's another guy that was really really really nice guy, seemed like. Def- Another guy named David. His name David and an artist. Yeah. Synchronicities, man. Exactly. And he um so he that's you know, I I I I'm not like really interested with the I unraveling the conspiracies that he was interested in. It was more unraveling him and his beliefs and his psychology. Cuz you know, his the conspiracies and that they were like so out of this world, right? Like, you know, no children died at Sandy Hook school shootings and you know, everything is a false flag and um you know, like mind control stuff. Um which a lot of it you when you when you break it down, a lot of that stuff has precedent. A lot of it's come true. Yeah. Like MK Ultra. Right. Um there have been false flag events like Gulf of Tonkin start the Vietnam, you know, war. And and so and like Edward Snowden with all the surveillance. So it it's easier to understand why people fall down those rabbit holes because you know, the government's always been lying to us in in the most outrageous ways. Um but then it's taken to a level where you know, it's like, oh yeah, the the Jews are injecting us with microchips and drinking baby's blood and all that. It's like, oh well, yeah. What what what what do you think it is a- about people that draws them to those crazy conspiracies? Is there a commonality that you found that Yeah. part between all those people? Yeah. Um I think one one is that we we all there's a lot of chaos in the world. More and more so it feels that way cuz we're aware of everything that's going on and that's scary. And it helps to try and bring order to that chaos. So, if you if all this horrible [ __ ] is happening like, you know, the Travis Scott concert um and it and you're like, why? Why is that happening? It it's more scary for some people to think that that just happened. You know, that it was a mistake and it was random versus um this was a planned event. You know, and people are controlling all of this. And so, everything that bad that's happening, these are people that are controlling it. Um and and so uh there might be a way to break free of that control or I know the secret knowledge and and I won't be affected by this. And so, I think that helps especially when it's a little different in this country because it it you could you could say like conspiracy theories um uh rose when religion fell in a lot of places. But, cuz religion was another thing that that sort of brought order out of chaos. Mhm. Um but in the in the United States, you know, belief in religion hasn't fallen. It's seems to be increasing. Uh not in Florida. I don't know where you live. Not in Florida. Uh not on the coast. Uh inland, it's probably bigger. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Um But yeah, and Our god is Donald Trump down here. Right. It seems like it. Um And then on and then the people that that So, I think anyone can fall into that belief, but the the people that um go really deep into it, I think then there's something psychologically that's going on and it could it could come from, you know, there's studies that that um certain people have had trauma and then that leads them to be suspicious of authority figures because maybe that trauma was caused by a parent or teacher and then it leads you to have distrust for any authority or authority figure and usually that the largest form of that is the government. And so that trauma makes you suspicious and suspicious suspicious for the rest of your life. And then there's um this this thing called apophenia, which is uh it's our faculty to it's related to our faculty to see patterns in the world. And so that's a good thing, you know, especially when you're like a hunter-gatherer, um and you you're you're figuring out like is that a a deer or is that just leaves, or a saber-toothed tiger trying to kill me. exactly. Um but when it goes into overdrive and especially in in our culture where it's not as important, you can start seeing patterns in places that it doesn't that don't exist and and that spectrum goes into paranoia if you go to the extreme end cuz you're you know, everything has meaning and there's no randomness. Um but interestingly, that's also the spectrum towards like creativity because like for example, apparently like DaVinci was had big-time apophenia. He would see, you know, in in the grains of wood, he would see like whole scenes and then Really? to him, yeah, and that could be like a painting. Um but if you take that too far, then you know, it's like face in Mars or Jesus in the toast. Yeah, that goes into overdrive and and it seems like a lot of these people have that as well. And and sim- similar with like the numerology, you know, like like gematria, it's it's like where where everything has numerolo- numerological significance and can be broken down via numbers. Mhm. Yeah. It's similar. Hm. Do you Do you notice any commonalities with like people who were just lonely? Yeah, that too. Yeah. That because what I've noticed I just interviewed this guy who did a documentary about QAnon. Okay. Who Who's the guy? Uh Cullen Hoback. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And uh from what he gathered or what I gathered we we talked about it from like the people that are like balls deep into this um deep state satanic pedophile ring. Yeah. Um is that it's just people that just lack a sense of community. Yeah. You know. Yeah, and and that I would say that is a big part of it. And it's also where I think a lot more of the like hateful conspiracies come into play because if you take David as an example from from my doc, he David Dee's or David Dee's? Um Deez nuts? Yeah, Deez nuts. He he had no IRL interactions. He was basically a hermit. He'd maybe go to the grocery store once every 2 weeks or something, and he had one friend in town who was also a conspiracy theorist. And and so all of his interactions were just like online, on Facebook, and in YouTube comments. Mhm. Um and and as you know, it's it's a lot easier to to start to marginalize people, to think people are idiots, um and to be mean when it's only online. And and your world gets really small. Even though the internet is big, your world gets smaller and smaller and smaller cuz you're only interacting with the screen. And and just your group, your like ever-shrinking group. And so when when people like like me and my, you know, cameraman went out there to meet him, it sort of like blows his world open. He's like, cuz I'm Jewish and and and he's just like, "Oh, you're nice Jewish person. Like you're you're not trying to, you know, control me." Yeah, he had a like a lot of anti-Semitic imagery in his artwork, right? He did, yeah. And Why was that? So, he would just say he's not anti-Semitic, he's like anti-Zionist, um which he didn't know even know what Zionism was. Uh but it's, you know, it's it I think he's just influenced by everything that comes before him and and beyond behind every conspiracy theory online it's like pretty much the Jews once you you know keep Is it? It's for most of them yeah even even if it's not like expressly stated it it goes back to the whole like that protocols of the elders of Zion which is this like famous forgery from Europe in like the I don't know like the 1900s or 1800s maybe even goes before that that was this fake document that was basically saying written as if it were the Jews that they want to control the world. Mhm. And and so it was taken as being real. And they all wasn't there also something the whole like Satanist baby eaters started back then too. They tried to libel yeah. Right. Yeah and so I think that stuff and it and that was always just because the Jews were the other they were the other in Europe you know the marginalized group that would never assimilate and had strange rituals and they were from a far-off place and they looked a little different but they looked just you know the same enough that they could you know sneak into our society and and so that's where it seemed to to start and never have been able to shake that especially in the conspiracy world. But you know meeting David and and and him meeting us it was just like oh wow you know you know nice normal guys are in my life now and and I can talk about things that aren't conspiracies and he just sort of like lit up and wanted to talk about his bunnies and cats and you know art and and not talk about conspiracies and yeah he seemed like a completely different person. Yeah. Mhm. How long does it take you to do something like that? That documentary you did on him. That was like a 15 minute short. that um so that was another like self-funded thing so it's like you just go there and you try and shoot as much as you can and so we only really had a couple days to shoot with him. We wanted to go back but he he died while I was editing. god. Yeah, and he didn't he didn't hint that he was sick. So, I I had no idea. If I had known I would have like shown him stuff and and tried to go out and film with him again. So, the editing part took like a year just cuz like I didn't know what to do with it How do you find out that he died? I just saw his obituary online. Yeah, I was just searching him to get some like image reference of his work and then it showed up in the obituary. And um yeah, he had died 2 months after we filmed with him. And he alluded to like very offhand that he might have had some cancer but that he cured it with by drinking baking soda. As he had read on YouTube or watched a YouTube video that was like you can cure your cancer by if you make your body alkaline enough. And so, he just he never went to the doctor. And he also had like a like a like an e-meter, like a Scientology machine. Yeah, it was called it looks just like one, but it's different. It's called the rife machine and it basically works on the principle that every like virus and bacteria and parasite um operates on a certain frequency and if you like tune another frequency into that frequency, then it kills it all in your body if you hold on to these tubes. And so, and I mean he got hoodwinked into buying Oh, this is it. They're thousands of dollars. Really? That and and the person who sold it to him um hoodwinked him into buying like 10 of them so that he could resell them, which he was never able to sell any and David was poor. So, he just went into debt. It's super sad. Did you Are these things What are they used for? Are they Nothing. They're just [ __ ] machines? Uh I mean, I would say so. Maybe maybe I'm wrong. Rife's world. Yeah, but it's it doesn't seem like there's anything to it. And in it he's like he's using it and he's like, "And I don't even feel a thing. Yeah. do think he learned about something like Is this something like he found on YouTube or like Reddit? Likely. Yeah. Not I he he didn't really go on Reddit except to look at his own There was a subreddit about him called These Nuts. Oh oh yeah yeah yeah. I remember you showing that. So he would go on that subreddit. So basically they would It was really popular. It was like Now there's like 15,000 people in the subreddit and um Wow. They would just post his art and make fun of it, you know? Um and but it was super active. Like there'd be like, you know, 30 50 comments on on these paintings and he would go on to read them because it was the only place he could see people like talking about his work. And so even though they were calling him like schizophrenic and crazy on there, he still like got a kick out of it. And he would um he would make like burner accounts on Reddit and like argue with the people. What was the he you asked him about um like marriage or relationships? He said he got poisoned by something. Yeah. So he you know, he he had never apparently had a steady relationship um or in his adult life. And and his reason was uh that he he had been doing airbrushing as his job. You know, he would do like big billboards and, you know, movie posters and stuff, which was all a lot of it was done through airbrushing then. And he never wore a mask. And it's super It's like heavy metals, you know, aerosolized that you're breathing in that go, you know, that gets into your brain tissue. And cadmium was the major Cadmium. That's what it was. And so when he told me that, he said he said I got poisoned and like I had neurological damage from the cadmium. And he was sick for like years from that and never really fully recovered. Um and that was like the prime of his life and it [ __ ] him up enough that he his career never recovered and he never was able to you know, have these have lasting relations. Didn't like make total sense, but I started looking up cadmium poisoning and the effect on the brain and there was a lot of links to schizophrenia of it causing schizophrenic like symptoms and when you got poisoned, that was also around the same time that he fell into these conspiracies and getting really deep into them. And before that, it didn't seem like he was like, "No, I never even had any I never thought about conspiracies or any of this stuff." Like he was into UFOs and and that sort of thing, but it seemed to to coincide and so maybe, you know, I drew like a a thin link to maybe this neurological damage thrust him into like the deep world of conspiracies. But, you know, I shouldn't make even be making that link cuz I'm not have any kind of qualifications to do that, but it's like it's what I saw. Uh-huh. Now, did you notice any of like personality traits that were similar with him and people like um Hug David Hug the other David? No. No similarities. Not really Oh, yeah. No, not not really. Um I mean, they're both I guess one thing like the cryptozoologists and and and these people, um they are tend to be more introverted and a little more hermit-like and spend a lot of time with themselves and self-reflecting as well. But then again, those are also like you know, people in history who that have had like mystical experiences um are often times, you know, people are self-reflect reflective and they go on these journeys alone and yeah. And you just find like ever since you started talking to these people and filming them, you're just you're you're constantly drawn to these types of characters. Yeah. Yeah, with beliefs that make other people want to write them off immediately. Like if there's someone that that someone else or most people would just say "Don't waste your time talking to this person. They're crazy." I want to really dig in and be like, "Are they? Or is what they believe really crazy? Why do they believe it? Maybe if we figure that out, we can understand more about ourselves." Um especially with conspiracies because we have to learn how to have a dialogue about this stuff and with these people. Now, in our country more than any other country is just like it's just such a split and people are digging in on both sides and there's there's like no cross talk at all. And even in in the same families, you know? Yeah, well, it's the problem with with algorithms, right? When you start talking about one thing, it kind of just like they hood they hoodwink you into one little group of people and there's no outside perspective on like sites like YouTube and Twitter. It just kind of like feeds you all the same [ __ ] you know? curious if Facebook didn't exist, where we would be at right now. right? And then and then, you know, on top of that, which was something I talked to Colin about, is the whole censorship thing, how YouTube and Google especially and Twitter, they censor a lot of the conversations around the conspiratorial stuff. And it pushes those people to the chans, like 8chan and and 8kun. Pushes them to Reddit and then and then BitChute. Yeah. And then once they get banned off these big websites like Twitter, it just makes them more emboldened to stand by their whatever they whatever it is they believe. And they push it even harder because they feel like they're the one that's, you know, got the boot on their neck. Right. Which is fascinating how all these, you know, the whole Q thing blew up from that, you know? It was when is when the whole Q thing got banned from Reddit and it pushed it to the chans, which is which is essentially, if you follow the timeline, what blew it up. You know, into this massive mainstream thing that everyone thinking that Donald Trump was some superhero that was going to take down this evil cabal. And still do. Yeah, and still do. And they're still waiting for JFK Jr. to to come back from the dead and in Dallas, you know. And his yeah, his his memorial is the shape of a the letter Q. Yeah. And and oh man, it is weird. for him still in like there was some they were waiting for him I think like a week ago. And Really? In Dallas? It's yeah, they're waiting for him. go there and film it? I didn't. No, I I did not but the that QAnon you know QAnon Anonymous podcast they they had someone there I think. Yeah. They did? Oh my gosh. I bet that I bet you would have caught some interesting characters there. Yeah. Yeah. I feel like the whole I've stayed away from the the Q verse and even the like the Q verse and the the sort of more political conspiracies because everyone else is covering that like Vice and and other you know TV channels and websites and stuff so I'm less interested in the more current affairs Have you seen the HBO documentary? I you know I haven't. I really should. Yeah. It reminds me so much of your work. It's like it's it's so it's it reminds me of the same type of people, you know, these outcasts. Yeah. The outcasts, the people that you know, the lone you know, have no sense of community, don't have a lot of you know, It's it's sad but it's so fascinating at the same time. You know, the and and here like in this area it's like you're I'm right in the middle of it. There's so many people like that in Florida. It's just I'm in Texas. So I've never been to Texas. I've been to Texas. I've like I've been to the airport but I've never been outside the airport. Yeah, I mean I'm in the Austin bubble. Okay, so you're in like the like the Silicon Valley of Texas. Yeah, it just seems like like you know, other cities I've lived like I used to live in like Miami and Fort Lauderdale. Did you really? I did. Yeah, and and Seattle and you know, Toronto and You've been all over the place. Yeah, like liberal cities, and and um Austin's like that, but like when you s- leave Alex Jones lives there, doesn't he? Yeah, exactly. Which is funny, yeah. And he likes it, you know. Well, yeah, of course. He loves it, you know, he loves being on all those podcasts that are in Austin. Exactly, yeah. And he just got didn't I saw on the news today that he he got charged, or he got pled g- or he got Doesn't look good. He's guilty for the Sandy Hook thing, right? Doesn't look good. I know a filmmaker who um she just she's she's wrapping her movie on him, her doc. Oh, really? Yeah, Alex's War. She was embedded with him for like a year. What? Yeah. Mhm. Like working like doing her documentary with his permission? Yeah. Really? Yeah. She did that doc um that feel when no GF, I don't know, TFW no GF, about incels. I haven't seen that. Yeah. Um and so she's kind of was in that community, and um got access to Alex. And he was cool with it? Yeah. I don't know the whole story, but yeah, he Is it Have you seen the the final No. You haven't seen cuz they just wrapped it, right? Yeah. Okay. It's like it's going to be in between. It's not it's going to be sort of like both sympathetic and uh showing him for how he Not just not just like a hit piece trying to make him look like a piece of [ __ ] the only reason why you know He's human didn't Yeah, yeah, after filming Have you ever met him? No. I've seen him. Yeah? Just going crazy at at a uh like Barton Spri- Barton Springs, or sorry, the the green belt, which is just like like walking trail, Mhm. and at the start of COVID, you had to have like a reservation to use the trail, so it wouldn't get too crowded, and Alex just showed up to go walking there, and he didn't have a reservation, and he just like lost his mind on the like poor park person, just this kid who was like, "I'm sorry. I can't let you in." Yeah, he was just you know, ranting about saw him just Yeah. berating some kid? Wow. It's on YouTube, too. Wow. Yeah. Have you Have you followed the Bohemian Grove thing? Yeah. I mean, that was kind of great. I thought I thought that was fun. Um, that was, you know, before Alex Jones was like had sort of picked a side politically. He hated all politicians, it seemed like. Um, and you know, Seems like he's back there now. Oh, really? Okay. Just from like lately, I've seen him on a couple podcasts. And he seems like he's changed his tune on on You know, he used to be like hardcore like Trump guy. Now he's like anti-Trump again. Okay. He changes with the wind, I guess. Yeah. I mean, and everyone seemed to hate Bush back then, so. Yeah. Yeah. No, that documentary that he did was pretty [ __ ] cool back that that he did way back in the day. It's on YouTube. Yeah. Huh. So, uh are you working on anything right now? Yeah. So, the David Dee's piece got me hired to co-direct uh a feature-length doc where there's going to be maybe like let's say like 10 like conspiracy theorists that we're just going to sort of live with um and do these intimate portraits of like conspiracy theorists, people who are ex-conspiracy theorists, family members of conspiracy theorists, and then intertwine that with um with like experts, you know, like historians, um psychologists, neurologists, um who who will give context to why basically like why we believe, why are conspiracy theories um on the rise, etc. Um, then working on a feature-length doc about cryptozoologists, so the people that study Bigfoot Yeah. and the Loch Ness Monster and all of those. I had done a short doc that that helped to inspire this and then um a working on a docu-series that's about folklore, like bizarre folklore, and Tellus or Bust, the one about Mount Shasta, that's that sort of like our pilot in progress for that one. Okay. Yeah. Tellus or Bust. Yeah. Explain that one for people who aren't familiar. Yeah, so so um there's a town in northern California called Mount Shasta. It's a really small town, like 3,000 people, but it's known for this majestic mountain that that rises um up into the sky that you see from, you know, miles and miles away, and you see it and it's just like, "Wow, that is this mountain is striking and it sort of calls you to it." Um but you most people just drive right by and and don't realize that that in the town at the foot of the mountains a large percentage of the people that live there believe that that there's a hidden city underneath the mountain called Tellus, and it's inhabited by what they call the ascended masters um which are sort of these these perfect beings, immortal beings that maybe were once human um and they live in this amazing crystalline interdimensional castle city. Yeah, and and they're, you know, they escaped you know, Lemuria and Atlantis when they sank a handful of them had escaped to Tellus through the inner earth network of tunnels that exists so they say um and and they ended up in underneath Mount Shasta. And so there's a whole there's a whole spectrum of beliefs there, like there's a a religion that popped up called the I Am Activity um that is based out of there, that has their own set of beliefs. There's the people that that kind of somewhat worship the ascended masters um and then there's those that just they want to like get into Tellus and like think it's a physical city and they look for the door on the mountain. And some claim that they found the door and that you can access the city. Others, it's it's more like a spiritual place, so they'll lead you into it through meditation Mhm. or chanting. And so it's this whole But imagine like it's a whole little town of people that that all sort of believe that that this thing exists, this sort of metaphysical thing exists under under the mountain. Yeah. And so it's a wild place and there's and and there's for a town that size there's like 10 crystal shops. And they're all like totally busy inside of people just buying crystals and other other things. Um and everyone you meet is like or almost everyone you meet is is super fascinating, interesting character, has their own story about how they got there and why. It's funny when you go to those like weird little like like remote towns in these random places around the country, you'll find these types of characters. Sedona is another. I haven't been there, but Sedona? Yeah. And in in um Florida, there's Cassadaga. And that's a whole that's a city that's that's all um like spiritualists and mediums. Really? Yeah, yeah, and psychics. And so it's like it's a tiny town um inside another town, but it it's the like highest percentage of of spiritualists and mediums. And so if you really want to get a reading or like talk to a dead loved one, you know, like you want to talk to your great-grandma, you go to Cassadaga and you can talk to your great-grandma. Really? Yeah. Do you know what part of Florida it is? Yeah, it's um it's central little north-ish. I think it's near My my geography's not 100%, but it's nearer to like Orlando. So it's not that far from here, probably. Okay. Yeah. I'll have to look it up. that's we want to do one of our episodes there. Okay. Yeah. Have you ever talked to a medium or anything like that? I'm not not really. I haven't had a serious conversation with with psychics, yes, but not someone who channels the dead. Right. Yeah. You have talked to psychics though. Yes. What is your experience with psychics? I talked to um this man who's known as as the great greatest living psychic or the he's like the most scientifically studied psychic. Mhm. His name's Shawn Harribance. He's almost 90. And I found out about him because I'm working on another little short doc about this um this scientist in Canada who he was made famous by his God helmet experiments. So, he designed a helmet that stimulated your brain with magnetic fields and and created like the God experience. And uh he also he studied he's a very he was a he died. He's a very reputable scientist and fairly well respected and he he had this psychic Shawn Harribance into his lab to study his brain to try and figure out like what is going on with this guy and also to to run studies where he would give psychic readings of people um in a he would do a scientific study designed around this and the accuracy was pretty like statistically astounding. So, he told me to go meet with this guy. And he lives out he lives outside of Houston. So, I just drove and met him. And as soon as I walked in the room he um he asked me how I was doing like post breakup. And I had just broken up with like a girlfriend of 3 years. Really? Yep. And then he started asking me about my my work shoots that I was working on. And there's no way cuz I I these are shoots that I haven't even shot yet. And he's like oh yeah, so you're going to Africa and like crazy [ __ ] Like just as soon as I walked in the room and I was just like oh, wow. Um cuz I you know, I'd never had a reading or even necessarily believing this guy. In outside of Houston. Okay. And the problem is he um he he's like Trinidadian and Indian. And his accent is like almost indecipherable. Like I understood just half of what he was saying. It was really hard to understand him. Uh and he's super old. And not in good health. And so I would I was meeting with him to see if I would want to film with him. But yeah, it was wild and he's had um so pretty much every past president or administration has consulted him. And he had he was showing me like the official documents like whatever white like with Bill Clinton, you know, and Bill Clinton's asking him about he's advising him on like soybean future prices like crazy [ __ ] What? Yeah, yeah. He's got he has correspondence with all these past presidents and the only one of you know, probably since like Reagan that he hasn't consulted was well and Biden I doubt he has, but was uh was Trump. So Trump was the only one that he and apparently you remember Corey Trump don't have time for that [ __ ] you remember Corey Lewandowski? Trump's he was like Trump's campaign manager. Corey Lewandowski? Yeah, he was Trump's campaign manager and then he like shoved some like female reporter in event like bruised her arm and then he was out. And Oh, does he live in Florida? No, that was Ro- Roger Stone. Oh no, and you're thinking of the this other guy. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's not him. Okay. so Corey he Look that look that guy up he's talking about. Yeah. What's his name? Corey? Corey Lewandowski. Corey Lewandowski. So so Shawn Haribance told me I don't have proof obviously, but that Corey Lewandowski reached out to him and was like, "Well, you know, Trump wants a reading. We want Trump to get a reading." And Shawn Haribance basically was just like, "Yeah, I'll give him a reading if he goes and sees like a psychologist or something because like something's not right in his head. Before meeting Before before meeting him. Oh man. Yeah, that's correct. the guy. Okay. Yeah, so he he didn't want to give Trump a reading basically. Oh, I wish he would have. Yeah, would have been Could you imagine being able to film that? I know. Yeah. Yeah. But yeah, his I read a bunch of the studies that I mean he was studied at like I think like Caltech or just some some like you know, real serious educational institutions and he some of his like his hits like his his you know, psychic hits were like trillion to one odds. Yeah. Yeah, but then other times like with a lot of this phenomena it's hard to reproduce consistently. Other times he was just like as good as chance. You know, so it wasn't like every time he would he would be able to read someone accurately, but other times it was just like scary how accurate he was. Well, is he still alive? He's still alive. Look look him up real quick. Yeah. How do you spell his name? Uh Sean S E A N and then Harribance's H A R R I B A N C E. Harribance, okay. So the one of the things I'm I'm it's coming back to me now. I mean he's very intense looking. Oh, yeah. Yeah, that's what he looks like now. Yeah, the gray hair. Really nice guy. In Houston. Yeah, and so he didn't he had he didn't even learn to read or write until like in his in his like teens because he had a severe learning disability. And also he um he has no his brain has no geospatial faculty. So if he walks out of his house, he has no idea where he is. Like he's lost. Really? Immediately. Yeah, like he has no he has he he doesn't know where he is in space basically, like directionally. Yeah. And there's when they had him in the MRI, there was like it looked as if he had some kind of brain damage in certain areas. And so, you know, the the lay theory is like that, you know, damage in one area could lead to some kind of abilities. in other areas. Yeah, I've heard I've heard things similar to that with like people who have had lots of brain trauma. Right. Yeah. Like they somehow become like excel in some area of their life, whether it be like like business or whatever whatever it is or sports or amazing at math and Yeah. Oh, that's so weird. So, does he not leave his house? Not really. And I think well, with his wife he has a his wife. So, she always has to be with him. Yeah. And he's so old now, I don't think they Yeah. do much. So, did you end up filming with him at all? No. Mostly because I can't understand I can barely understand him. That's the problem. And I like so Can you do subtitles? You can, but it's just the interview with him. I don't know what he's Half the time I don't know what he's saying to me. And I I don't know if he's answering my question. And And so, maybe his wife was there, but it's yeah, that's a tough one. And also a tough one to make like how do I make that look interesting? Cuz all he does is sort of just sit at home. Mhm. And his home is, you know, it's not remarkable. And Yeah, that's one of the cool things about your doc like the first one the first uh what was the first one with David Dee's? Like the the you're just confined to like his trailer, but you [ __ ] made it look so sick with all of the shots that you made. And even when it comes to like you showed the the montage of him creating that one piece. And you had like the the wide angle just doing a 180 to him. That was so cool. we had we put a 360 cam Oh, really? him and his computer. And we just like in post we're spinning the camera. Yeah. Wow, that was [ __ ] cool. Do you do any of the cinematography yourself? Or are you just strictly directing? a little. That one was was shot by my my buddy Cody Cobb. He's like an amazing photographer. Um and basically like if I can af- like he did that as a favor. Um if I can afford a a DP, I'll just shoot it myself, but I always want to hire a real cinematographer when I can. Like 11 Saucers, that was shot by um or most of it was shot by the guy who did Napoleon Dynamite, who shot Napoleon Dynamite. What was? Uh 11 Saucers. Which What's that? That was the David Huggins one. Oh, oh, yeah, okay. Oh, I didn't understand. I thought you said 11 Sau- 11 Saucers. Yeah. So, the guy who shot Napoleon Dynamite shot that? Yes. What? Yeah. That's [ __ ] wild, dude. That was another one that was shot [ __ ] amazing. Uh-huh. And the way also like I noticed the way like you like they that you guys like spliced the B-roll. Like I love the way you cut those things. You know what I mean? Like first of all, you stuttered it with like just "I was raped or I was I lost my virginity to an alien when I was 17 years old." And then it just like cuts to him like in a [ __ ] valley or something. Like so cool the way you did that. Um what I was about to say before I went into that was um we're talking about psychics. Mhm. When um when I first had Mike Clelland on, you know his stories about like owls and UFOs, like the synchronicities of, you know, how whenever there's owl sightings, there's UFO sightings. And his theory is that um when people see these owls, um what they really are is aliens sort of using some sort of uh some sort of like visual mind trick to making you think it's an owl, so you don't think of it as you you don't remember you saw an alien. You have this implanted memory of seeing an owl. Um and the book, his first book Messengers, is just basically hundreds of different accounts, like the most famous accounts of these these things happening, these situations happening. Um and then he he goes into you know, he started telling me that he's seen multiple he's been seeing psychics Okay. his whole life and he's like, "Oh yeah, I've been to this psychic, went to that psychic, I've been seeing this psychic, I did hypnotic regression here. I I've been on in hypnosis hundreds of times." And starts talking about all these psychics and I'm like woah, like first of all, I have like deeply skeptical about psychics. Yeah. So he starts like talking about his like unwavering belief in in mediums and psychics and he sort of lost me there, which is the same thing with Bigfoot. When people like I start start talking about UFOs and people they start talking about Bigfoot. Yeah. I kind of like lose it. Yeah. I think I think with psychics what I think is is like a lot of these things um 99.99% of it is is not real and maybe that you know, not necessarily that the psychic is a scam artist, but that they're just, you know saying what's coming to them. Um or they are scam artists, but that there's there's like enough there and enough evidence that that that point 0001% like something is going on. It's like you know the are you familiar with the remote viewing phenomenon, those experiments? little bit. Yeah, so that, you know, government program that lasted 20 years many millions of dollars put into it that had results. billionaire who did that? Uh who like put a bunch of money into that? Um Oh, Bigelow. Bigelow. Yeah, yeah. So he I don't know if he he did I don't know if he specifically put money into the remote viewing. He put it into the like UFO stuff. But for the remote viewing, that was just like Pentagon. Was it? CIA money. Yeah, and once the Freedom of Information Act once they were able to get those documents through that, it painted a picture of this like whole program and the people who ran the program at Stanford were able to write about it and have written books about it. And all of the studies that they did and that were presented to the military were laid bare and and it was like there was, you know, there's stuff there that that even in their own report was like it was statistically significant and there were some hits that were like sort of impossible to to describe in any other way. And so I I do think that especially with this like psychological stuff, this like the psi as they call it, that there's something there that and it doesn't have to be like like that it's woo-woo or like magic. It's just we don't even really understand consciousness or how consciousness works. So it it it could just be something we don't understand, you know, it's like a sense that we have that's incredibly rare that some people can tap into sometimes and you know, see at a distance and that we just, you know, simply don't understand what's going on there. And so that I I think that's that is pretty interesting and and like could be real. Um but that's still pretty far from like a psychic telling you about, you know, what went on in a past life or Yeah. Yeah. You think some people are just born with just like like say there is another like parallel dimension to us. Like some people are just born with a better comprehension of that or they can see they they can they can see it more than other people can or they have better access to it whether it is just like some sort of genetic thing with their with their brain and with some so something that we don't understand like a genetic consciousness? Uh-huh. May- maybe some are more predisposed to it, but with the whole remote viewing program that the government was funding, the point of that one was was that they could teach anyone to do it. Mhm, okay. And that so they would just teach people that didn't seem to have any ability. Um, and that was the point of it was that they could train what they called the psychic spies to to like it was all to like spy on Russia. Right. You know, during the Cold War and then the Cold War ended they're like, "Well, we don't need psychic spies anymore and we also have, you know, satellites." Right, right, right. That are better at it. So, um Well, how many do you how many people successfully did like were able to do remote viewing I wonder? It was a It was an all right number. There was like, you know, a handful that were really good at it. Like like consistently pretty good. But I'll I'll um there's a great book just called Mind Reach. Mind Reach? Yeah, that's that is like sort of details the program. And the guy who one of the guys who ran it, he lives in Austin, Texas. Really? Yeah, so I want to try and he's like again another guy who's like 90 Who? Yeah. I need to try and get before he Dude, these like uh these these films that you make, they are like so long to make. Like especially with like David Huggins, she said 3 years were filmed with him. I have similar experience doing stuff like that. Um before I started this, I was I did a lot of like similar type types of like docu-series stuff. Uh-huh. And and my experience with it is like just like you explained like the first time you visit like the first time I visited uh this one group of local fishermen around here, I did a similar documentary about commercial fishing. Mhm. Um and like the the people um like the lowest level like the deck hands. And we met with the first guy and it was like, "Holy [ __ ] we just like discovered another universe." You know, we're going to go down this rabbit hole and we filmed for we filmed it for like 6 months. And then I sat on all that footage for like 3 years before I even touched anything, started editing anything cuz it was just such a daunting idea to edit and package all of that [ __ ] Yeah. And eventually, I don't know what it was, but I just like sat down and started going through it. And then once I got like a certain percentage cut, I was like, "Okay, now I can start like taking bites of this thing Yeah. and eating the whole thing, you know?" Yeah, like I I sat on the Huggins my first Huggins footage for for like 4 years. Really? touch it. I didn't look at it. I was just like, "I can't like I just can't motivate myself. I don't think it's going to be good." Mhm. Um until I finally like I cut just like a little thing out of it to show people. And then that was the motivation to to get into it. Like cut a little teaser and show people and get the like the real world excitement and it make it sort of makes it real, you know what I mean? Put some music to it and then it's like, "Okay, now I'm going to do it." And that's Yeah, that's basically also what I learned from cuz I worked in ad world, too. Yeah. Before this and still kind of do. Um and that was like a good skill to learn is like packaging something and making a thing that people will actually watch without turning away. Mhm. Did you Now when you uh when you come up with these ideas to film guys like this, did you just sort of like have the idea and you want to like fund it yourself until you can sort of like figure out how someone else can help you fund it and make it better? Or do you just want to put it out on the internet and just see what happens? Yeah, it it depends. Um the great thing about docs making docs is like you can just start. Um it's always good to you know, plan and think first, but you can you can just I can just go with a camera and audio. It's not going to be great as good as it can be, but I can do something Mhm. that that I can like with the D's thing that like we can put online. And um you know, I didn't wait for any funding for that one or or anything, but then it did lead to you know, interest in doing like a Mhm. a bigger project out of that. So, um with the series, with the like the folklore series, yeah, we shot that Mount Shasta thing as a little proof of concept, same with the cryptozoologist stuff. I think you we just sort of have to start because um similar like with the ad world, like people aren't going to get behind something unless they can already just see it and see at least a part of it, you know? And and especially now, um you have to show people exactly what it's going to look and feel like before you actually make it. My I I don't I have like a bad taste in my mouth from that whole world just because like I've done a lot of like short documentaries like you have. Um not recently, but when I did like I would have uh production companies calling me or like, you know, production companies that have deals with whatever network it is. They're like, "Hey, uh we like that. Are you working on anything else similar to that?" I just feel like they're they're [ __ ] real estate brokers, you know, calling me to try to make some money on something cool. And it's the same thing with podcasts. Um a lot of there's like executives working at production companies just scouring podcasts trying to find somebody to do a show to sell to Netflix. You know what I mean? It just feels just like a [ __ ] I I car dealership, you know what I mean? It's pretty gross. Yeah, gross. It's a good word for it. Um Yeah, it's it's the idea of because I've never I've never put a documentary on Netflix. It's just sort of it's treating it, you know, like disposable. Like consumer goods, you know? Like just thinking of it as content as opposed to a story and Yeah. Yeah. And anyways, I don't know where I was going with that, but um doing this was cool because it was like it was like doing the documentary, Yeah. but it takes instead of 3 years it takes 3 hours Yeah. and I don't have to shoot any B-roll or add any music to it. Yeah. You know what I mean? And and also, yeah, you can you've made what? How many? Right, exactly. Yeah. You can make hundreds of them in a year, you know, not one in 3 years. Move over a little bit, but camera was catching your shoulder. What's that? The camera was catching your ear. Oh, oh. Is it good now? Yeah, you're good. All right, cool. Um and also, you know, pitching to someone, "Hey, come into my studio for a few hours." is a lot easier for them to say yes to than "I'm going to be with you for 3 years." Yeah. Yeah. Of your life now. Yeah, we don't have to Tell them that in the beginning. True. You just be like, "Hey, I just want to Can I come to you and film for a day?" Whatever. And then once they get to meet you, I'm sure it's not I'm sure it's easier for them to let you come back. Like with David. And so, well, I mean, what about you with all the guests that you've had and all of their stories, have you changed your mind on things or changed your beliefs on on anything? Like as far as what? Like Oh, anything. Like have you like any beliefs that you had held that have now Um Not really. I haven't really changed any of my beliefs. I don't like I don't know. I don't really have very many like beliefs that you could probably change for me. It's more I'm more of just like open to learn I've learned a lot. I can say that. I've learned a lot of things. I've gotten better at like before I started doing this, like I was similar to you. I would just go out and like and film something interesting, let the camera roll. And I would just try to like package it into something like a cool music video that was weird to watch. You know what I mean? And now it's sort of like now I have to talk and like carry a conversation that's not edited. Yeah, yeah. So, it's more of just me like building a skill and like learning like having discipline. You know what I mean? To do like I make sure I do at least one or two of these a week. And you know, you get better at certain things. I've learn learning a lot. Um I always like kind of like I always I have this like inner war going on whether I should just do these or go make more documentaries because the documentary is much more fun to watch than [ __ ] a podcast, you know? But um Well, what about when you see owls now though? Oh, I don't see owls. I never see owls. Aliens don't want anything to do with me. Are there even owls in Tampa? know. Yeah, there's a few. My mom has owls My mom sees owls all the time in her backyard. Okay. She sees these little like these little tiny owls. So, my mom might might have some sort of connection to to you to aliens. Yeah. But um No, I don't know. He was like I love having the conversations. Sure. Um I don't think I could say I I don't want to say the guy's full of [ __ ] you know, he could totally everything he's saying could be real to him. Um but you know, I don't really think about it that much after the conversation either. Like once you do the podcast, I don't like I don't dwell on it and like and think about it a lot. I just kind of like I remember the conversation. I remember like the important parts of it. I try to I try to retain as much of it I can as I can and try to carry it into like more conversations so I can just keep like learning more and so on and so forth and just keep having like better conversations. I I try to treat these like documentaries. I try to treat these like little mini documentaries as best I possibly can. So anyways that's my story and I'm sticking to it. You've had such a like a wild group of people. Yeah. Yeah. Just look at the list. I know. Nothing's consistent. It's not very consistent at all, especially when I'm trying to like pitch like a legitimate person on here who's not like into any of like the crazy fringe ideas, cultures. Right. You know what I mean? Like a like a There's one guy I had on here who's like a He's a doctor like a nutritional doctor, scientist. Uh-huh. And then you know, typically when I try to reach out to people that I should have like show my credibility. Look, I've interviewed Yeah. Well Put aside they're all criminals and conspiracy theorists. You know? So, it's that it it weird sometimes when you're trying to talk to new people. Yeah, that's happened to me as well. Like with work where they're like they'll go look on my website and be like, "Oh, you interview wackos." Yeah, right, right. No, I'm not going to be in your film. Yeah, the consistency is the biggest thing for me. It's just trying to you know, remain consistent to it and there's a book about it too that I really like. Um I forget the name is escaping. Uh the war of art. Okay. Have you heard of that book? No, no I haven't. Um it's it's all about uh the guy's name is Steven his last name is escaping me. Anyways, it's about he's a writer um and he just talks about like confronting the muse. You know what I mean? Confront confronting resistance, right? Like the muse is a thing you get all your creativity from and like flows through you and just your connection with with with that with your creativity is hindered by resistance. Resistance can be anything whether it be like eating or checking your emails, going on your phone, playing video games, watching movies or whatever and it's like the resistance is the one thing that stands in the way of you and the muse. So like every single day if you're a creative person, the last thing you want to do is like get up and go to work in the morning every day the same time and and have a routine. So his whole thing is you know always sit down every day and do your work whether you whether you feel good or bad or creative or dry you know, always sit down and you know, put in the time every single day and that's that's what you have to do. You know, that's what creativity is is is being consistent being disciplined into in putting the time into your craft. Yeah. You know what I mean? And I was never like that before. I would just be like inspirat- I had to be inspired to do something. So even when you're not inspired, when you don't have feel that calling that that pull, you know you know mean? When you don't feel that, still sit down and push. So, that's what I gained, you know, I I made the connections between doing this and that book. Yeah, I mean, that's always been my problem and it's still my biggest problem is is not forcing myself or disciplining myself to work. I have to be excited. Mhm. And then that's why I things take years. Yeah. The resistance [ __ ] you up, man. The resistance, you'll grow old and [ __ ] look back and just be like, god damn. Yeah. You know, I also feel like sometimes looking back like in like in my early to mid 20s, like that was like feel like man, that was the most creative time of my life. Like so when I like made some of the coolest [ __ ] or did some of like the coolest [ __ ] I ever did. And I always wonder if that if that sort of like connection to the muse, whatever you want to call it, if that dwindles the older you get, you know what I mean? Your connection gets worse and worse and worse. The reception goes down. I mean, even Hunter S. Thompson, I don't know if you've ever seen his He had a schedule. He like his his sort of daily schedule. Mhm. And even you know, it which included all the drugs that he would consume. But even he had this set block of time where he would write, no matter what. Really? Yeah, and no matter how [ __ ] up he was, he would sit and write. Really? Yeah. Huh. And it would end up being at like, you know, midnight or 3:00 in the morning or something. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I've I've I've actually he he's fascinating. I've been wanting to like go down the rabbit hole of his story and his documentaries. I just haven't done it yet. Yeah. He was a fan of Florida. Was he? I think he spent some time in the Keys. Did he really? Oh, the Keys. Have you ever been to the Keys? You're going there right now, aren't you? For a month. What are you doing there? Uh I got invited to an an artist's residency. So, so basically they they give me an apartment and a studio and to just and a and like a bicycle. And um for a month and like it's just a space for me to to work on whatever without what I want to work on without any distractions of like home. Really? Family and Yeah. Yeah. So, what are you going to do? I'm just going to like write, work on a movie, like a a screenplay idea, work on these docs, like researching, editing. Mhm. Yeah. I'm writing a podcast episode for for the QAnon Anonymous guys. Oh, really? Yeah, it's going to be on Mount Shasta. About the Yeah, the Hollow Earth theory. So, yeah, so just work on all of that or not or just, you know, I've never listened to their podcast. Is it like one of those produced podcasts with like music and editing? Okay. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. I love those podcasts. They have a and they're like serialized, right? Like they have they tell stories like through episodes. Yeah, sometimes they'll be multi-parts, but but actually usually it's just like, you know, they'll get into, you know, some character in the conspiracy verse and that's what, you know, it's all about. Yeah, those podcasts are awesome. Yeah, but they focus it's just conspiracy theories. Those um the Keys is a [ __ ] crazy place, dude. Crazy. You've never been? I've I've gone for like when I was a kid and then I went like a couple days some years ago, but never really got to experience the craziness of the Keys. When I was, I think 19 years old, um like when I first started between like 17 and 18 and 19, I was like that's when I first started doing like like picking up a video camera and making money with it. And I got hired by um a really big real estate company who owned a lot of like resorts and marinas in the Keys. And through knowing somebody, they hired me to do uh video tours of all of their resorts and marinas and they owned apartment buildings everywhere. And like not apartment buildings, but like the condo buildings. So, I was going to like big houses, condos, all these things all over the Keys by myself with a a uh GL2. And I was there for I think 2 and 1/2 months when I was like 19 years old by myself. They gave me like a little hotel room at you know, I would start in each town. So, I started in Key Largo, go to Isla Morada, Marathon, then down to Key West eventually. And I was by myself the whole time living in these tiny little hotel room. And I had to give me a per diem of like 60 bucks a day and I would save it and I bought I got a little I brought my uh spear gun with me. And every night I would go I would swim under the bridges cuz there's bridges [ __ ] bridges everywhere, dude. Like like every mile there's a bridge. And I would swim under the bridges at night and I would shoot lobster illegally. And I would I would I would stuff I would rip the tails off underwater cuz it's so illegal to do this. I'd rip the tails off underwater and stuff my board shorts pockets with lobster tails. Then I go to Publix and buy corn, canned corn. And I would bake the lobster tails, eat lobster tails and corn every [ __ ] night, dude. I would save so much money. That was That was an amazing adventure. But Key Key West specifically is a wild is a crazy [ __ ] town. Yeah, I just imagine I mean a lot of drug running history. Oh, yeah. Uh-huh. Tons. like Cuban history and I hear there's still a lot of illegal like [ __ ] fighting Oh, really? going on there. Yeah, I wouldn't put it past them. Yeah. Yeah, a lot of crazy [ __ ] down there. It's fun place to It's fun place to party. A lot of college kids go down there and get [ __ ] up. You should have um uh Did you see Square Grouper? That That documentary? documentary? It's been a while. It's been a while, yeah. I've seen it. You should have this guy on uh he lives in Everglades City. Um Dave Shealy. He was in I don't know if you saw my short about the Skunk Ape which is South Florida's Bigfoot. Yeah. Did you see that? that? Yeah. That What was Is that on like Vice or something? No. Maybe No, no. I think maybe you saw something else. I just had a guy in here like 3 weeks ago. Uh-huh. Um who lives in Everglades in the Everglades. He's like a big weed pot holler guy. Was that Dave Shealy? No, his name wasn't Dave Shealy. Oh, okay. What the [ __ ] was his name? Why am I forgetting his name? Let me look it up real quick. Hold on. You should If you What the [ __ ] I feel like such an idiot for not remembering his name. This guy. Now every Tim McBride. Can I see his photo? Yeah. I don't know him, but he lives in Everglades. Google Google it. This is like a bad photo. Just Google Tim McBride. Yeah, he was like one of the biggest pot hollers in Florida. Mhm. And uh he got like a really long prison sentence. So Dave Shealy did that stuff as well, but he's also Tim McBride Uh type in saltwater cowboy after that. This guy. Ah. Vice did a thing on him. Hogan. Yeah. Um Yeah, so Dave Shealy is kind of like this guy except he also he has what's called the Skunk Ape Research Headquarters. Yeah, yeah. You I've seen this. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I want to say it was on Vice I saw. I don't remember where I I saw it online, but I didn't make the connection that you did it. Yeah, yeah. And so um so he he he had that history of like drug hauling in Everglades City and he he also is like styled himself as the foremost researcher of the Skunk Ape Mhm. in the Everglades. So he's like a He considers himself a cryptozoologist and goes out there. Oh, really? he had and he has this campground out there uh that's that's pretty pretty weird. He's just he's uh yeah, he's a character that would be super fun. Are you going to Are you going to talk to him on your way down there? Uh no. No? No. He Yeah, he uh I haven't chatted with him since I filmed with him. Um I'm not sure what he would have thought of the documentary. Maybe he'd like it, but he's kind of a scary guy. Is he really? A little bit, yeah. What Why is he scary? got like those eyes that like they're sort of like cold blue eyes that like you know could murder you if you say the wrong thing. Yeah. There's a um There's just a ton of [ __ ] There's a ton of history in here in this area of like big-time cocaine and weed pot traffickers. You know what I mean? Like like just like I know a lot of people who are in like their 50s and 60s who were just just around here that I know who were like gone went to prison for a long time for smuggling cocaine. yeah. Like a lot Like just randomly like I'll just find out like I don't even know like Yeah, I was interviewing Do you know who Manny Puig is? Mhm. He's like the wild Have you ever seen Wild Boys on MTV? I've heard of it, yeah. So he's like He's like the guy who who swims down with like the giant 15-ft crocodile alligators and like levitates them. Like he puts them in like a catatonic state underwater. And then he like go He like rides the He was the first guy to ride a giant great hammerhead shark. [ __ ] Just a crazy guy. And And he's originally from He still lives in Florida. He was on here. And I was talking to another guy who went to prison for I had a guy on the podcast who was in prison for 10 years for smuggling coke. He's like, "Oh, Manny Puig, I've met him in prison. Yeah, he used to He used to be a pot hauler." So it's just like this fraternity of drug smugglers in Florida because Miami was such a [ __ ] Oh, yeah. uh a global hub for it. Built Miami. Yeah. Yeah. It was just like a like a retirement resort, basically. It's It's insane. came through. Yeah. It's [ __ ] insane. Have you seen that new Cocaine Cowboys documentary? Or or re- Or the latest one on Netflix you didn't like the revival of it? the original. Yeah. Yeah. The original was pretty good. He's a weird way of making documentaries. Yeah, yeah. way, you know. he did that one is it called Screwball? Screwball, I haven't seen that. Yeah, me neither. Where it's like kids that are Yeah, it's kids portray the whole thing. Yeah. You know who's another really interesting guy that I want to [ __ ] meet? I know people who he lives in in Miami. One of my favorite filmmakers is Harmony Korine. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. He Um, there was this this kind of pirate 35 mm movie theater in Miami for a while called Night Owl um, that was in a half abandoned shopping mall. Mhm. And Harmony Korine's office like his production office was right above it and he would sometimes like come and curate Oh, really? films there, yeah. Wow. Yeah. Dude, he's he's got some Have you seen Beach Bum? Oh, yeah. [ __ ] amazing. I don't know if they actually shot any of it in Key West. Oh, yeah, they did. Oh, they did. Oh, yeah, you can tell. A lot of it's in the Key. I don't know if it's Key West but It's difficult to like I don't remember but a lot of it's definitely in the Keys. Some of it looked like California but Really? Yeah, some of it did. Was it Maybe it was shot in California. It looked like it was all Miami and the Keys. make sense if it was if it was Florida. Cuz he lives there, right? Yeah, he live he lives in Miami. Yeah, I'm I'm pretty sure he still lives here. Yeah, a friend of mine a friend of mine who's a like an underwater cinematographer who lives in Key Biscayne. He says his kid goes to the same school as Harmony in Miami. This was 2 years ago I think he told me that. Yeah, yeah. But I'm sure he has to still live there. Yeah. He's like he's one of those weird guys you don't like hear anything from him or see anything from him in the media at all. Just like every 10 years he comes out with some crazy film. Yeah, there used to be this this film organization in Miami called Borscht. And and Harmony would do some curation with them but he never showed up. He would never be there. Yeah, he was like behind the scenes. He seems like the kind of guy who would do what you're about to do in the Keys. Just go like sit in the empty apartment for a month and write [ __ ] Except he wouldn't need a to be invited to that residency. He'd just be able to buy it. Right, he would just do it himself. Yeah. So, are you supplementing all of this creative work with like commercial jobs? Like Kind of. Yeah, I do I do like docs for clients and like branded docs, you know? Mhm. The buzzword. Branded docs. Yeah. So, it's it's like, you know, Sponsored by Old Spice. Or like Alaska Airlines will want like a doc style thing or like I did one for Amazon and Gates Foundation and yeah. The deep state. Exactly. Amazon. Yeah, I love that guy's Jeff Bezos uh David's Jeff Bezos picture. Yeah, that he was working on as we were. Didn't make any sense, but it was funny. Yeah, no, all of it was just so absurd, but hilarious at the same time. Yeah. Man, it's so sad that guy died. I wonder what happened to all of his artwork. They should turn it into NFTs. They I I mean, he would have made a killing. He would have made a and he was so poor. Like, he was just in debt living in a trailer basically, like a double-wide trailer. Um like poverty level. And yeah, he could have I don't think he ever would have been able to figure it out. Like, he wasn't that savvy online. Someone would have had to do it all for him. But this other conspiracy theorist that like lives down the road from him who's like a bigger conspiracy theorist um he he inherited all of David's like intellectual property. Really? He's got everything. He was even selling like David's shirts. Really? And like hats and stuff after he died. A little weird. That is a little strange. Yeah. Is there is there like one subject or person that you would want to document or do a story on? Like a like a [ __ ] holy grail for Brad. Not no, it's always like every day is just kind of a new a new discovery and a new thing. So, I kind of want to make one um about the manosphere. You know, like like uh there's you know, like there's this whole sort of sphere of like men's rights activists, meninists. Um Oh, yeah. They're called like men going their own way who like have said no to all women in relationships, the incels. Um There was a conference in Orlando called the Make Women Great Again conference and it it was it and no women were involved in that. It was just these these like men's rights activists guys who were going to teach women how to be great again. Um that whole world seems seems like basically it's just like uh and how it how it uh has exploded with the sort of far-right conspiracy world, too. There's a lot of intersection there. That would be a really interesting and dark one to dive into. Yeah, that's scary. Yeah. It's scary the whole the I I haven't seen the incel thing you were talking about, but those those types of people are they seem like the most dangerous ones. They're the ones that just like blow up and shoot [ __ ] schools up and [ __ ] Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it would only be a like it wouldn't focus just on those guys, but like it like that whole world seems kind of ripe for for getting into. It's interesting like the whole QAnon thing I always thought it was like far-right wing Uh-huh. ideologically driven. Now it's the whole spectrum. Yeah. There's like yoga moms is a big part of QAnon and and hippies. You know, like ayahuasca slinging See, I had no idea. Yeah. Yeah. Like vegans. It's like It's captured everyone. Yeah. That's so wild. Uh-huh. I had a guy I have a guy on here who's a a lawyer and he's like a hardcore liberal. Okay. Um, I wouldn't say like hardcore, he doesn't like go out like flaunting it like most people flaunt their rebel flags but he he has this obsession with representing like the most extreme polar opposite of himself. Oh wow. Like like he's representing one of the capital riot people. The one of the guys who was on the capital on January 6th. Like the guy assaulted a police officer and he's like he's like defending him in court. And he also he's like defended like serial killers. He's invited like invited them into his home cuz they had nothing else like neo-Nazis who who have killed people like killed people just cuz of they were they were black. Uh-huh. Um, represented these people and just like gotten into their heads and like spent so much time with them. It's just like so interesting. I mean maybe he want to do that. Like this guy I'm like dude like you need a video camera. Yeah. You're a [ __ ] filmmaker not a lawyer. instead of doing got way more money than That's true. most documentary filmmakers. Wow. Yeah, it's weird. Mhm. It's weird. There's a lot of that stuff around in Florida. Yeah. Oh yeah. Crazy [ __ ] man. Well, thanks for doing this dude. I really appreciate it. Where where can people follow the stuff that you do online and find more of your work and do anything they can to support you? Yeah, I have a website it's bradabrahams.net and then on Instagram I'm bradwtf and on Twitter I'm loveinsaucers. That's it. is loveinsaucers. Yeah. Yeah, I made it for the film and then it's just become my personal Twitter. Yeah. That's a one more thing I wanted to ask you. What did you do to I bought it on YouTube. Is that how else are you distributing that one? That one it used to be on Amazon Prime and now Discovery, you know there's Discovery Plus now? Like Discovery Channel has their So now they have the sort of rights to that. Um, for streaming so you have to you can buy it on Amazon or iTunes or YouTube or I think on Tubi it's free. You can just watch it. Well, we want people to pay for it. I still get money from it if if they watch it on Tubi cuz there's ads. Oh, really? Yeah, yeah. Oh, sick. Yeah. So, Okay. any streaming service it's it's on and it's like four bucks to rent it. One of the best documentaries I've ever seen. Thank you. Thank you for Thanks for creating amazing content like that, dude. You're welcome. [ __ ] awesome. Yeah, of course. Goodbye, world.