Go run and run. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night, all day. Yes, the thing is about that photo of the moon that they do with the phones. They found out that that's kind of bullshit. No, I'm sure you some might have. I know. I've took it, too. But what it is is it's AI. And so what someone did on. What did this is AI? Yeah, what someone did online? One of them, clever kids. They took a very blurry photo of the moon, and they put it on a screen across the room. And then they zoomed in on it as if it's the moon. And the camera showed detailed craters. Oh, well, I'm destined. I'm talking about talking about this. OK, yeah. That's a real picture. So that should just use the 100X zoom. Yeah. You didn't use the moon. No, no, thanks. Yeah, no, there's a moon shot. There's a moon shot aspect to that. Oh, a little. I got to check that. I didn't know about that one. Yeah, if he zoom in on it, you zoom in on the moon. OK, I don't think that's real. See, that's what I'm talking about. I think that's AI. The AI creates it. Yeah. Really well. Yeah. I know. I was showing off to my family. Yeah, listen. I have the 22, I think the S22 Ultra. I had the older one, and I would take photos of the moon. I'm like, look, iPhone's bullshit. I can't do this, but it turned out. It looks like I got food. Oh, man. Yeah, because you can't hide stuff like that on the internet technology stuff. Those guys are too good. They know everything. They know everything. But we were just talking about the difference. I'm just really thinking about switching to Android. I'm just tired of being trapped. Yeah. And it's just like this resist to everybody's like, don't do that. I'm like, oh my god, it's like a mind virus. Like everybody's like culturally locked in having a blue bubble. But when you tell them you're going to switch from Apple, then Agent Smith shows up from the Matrix. And he's like, in habits their body. And they turn, try to tell you to stop doing it. Don't do it. Like try to convince you not to leave. It's like if you were a Catholic and you said, I'm going to become a Baptist. Right. People are going to don't do it. Right. Don't do it. Like what are you talking about? Yeah. It's not that much different. I know. It's crazy. It's weird. Yeah. People get weird with everything. Yeah. They get weird with their beliefs. They get weird with what they subscribe, what group they attach themselves to. So true. It's so strange. And I think this is a good way to segue into what you do. And because these subjects, so many of these subjects, so many people have an instantaneous reaction. That instantaneous reaction is, oh, hogwash. If this was true, I would already know about it. It would be taught in universities, would all be. But then you find out, no one is really just kind of trying to piece stuff together, specifically talking about these ancient tablets, to me. Some of the most interesting things about ancient history, particularly what came out of ancient Samara. Yeah. Ancient Samara, when you look at their tablets, and what are they saying? And why would they dedicate so much time to talking about this stuff? Exactly. Why do they have pictures of giant, look, enormous people looking things with a humanoid with a tail sitting on their lap? Like, what is this just fiction? Like, why would they detail this? And how do they have a representation of the solar system with the correct amount of planets, and relatively the correct order in size? It's not exact, but it's an artistic version of the real thing. And how the hell? How the hell? How the hell, 6,000, 5,000 years ago? Do they know that? And what explanations do we have? Like, what's the conventional explanations when people tried to dismiss what they knew in ancient Samara? Well, the conventional explanation is always going to determine mythology. They throw mythology around left and right to cover up the fact that they have no clue or idea. So they turn it into mythology so that it can kind of say, it's all fantasy and fairy tales. And this is how they express themselves or how they understood the universe. It's all mythology, it's all fake, but in reality, it's not all fake. These people left behind such detailed records and information. It's a time capsule of information on stone tablets for us today to be able to decipher, break down, and understand, and that's what we're here to do now. When you look at these ancient languages like CUNY form, but can you read that? Do you know how to read it? Yeah, a small amount of it. Yeah, studying at some books that I have bought right off Amazon. Yeah, so basically you take a stick. It looks like a stick with a kind of a curved end, right? Almost sharp in this color, a stylus. And then use like a stylus for an iPad. Exactly, very similar, right? And then you take a piece of wet clay. And right before it's too wet or too dry, right in the middle stage, you then start wedging, making these incredible lines into the clay. And then from that, you get this CUNY-informed text. So this text, literally, some of the letters actually relate to complete ideas, but it's incredible work and it takes a long time to do. And then you have to let this thing dry and then it becomes stone. So what, if people were supposed to be trying to worry about how they're going to get their next meal, shelter for the night and all these kind of things, who has time to sit down and write these incredible works of art like the Epic of Gilgamesh, for example? Yeah. I think they really were writing down and also they were transcribing information that was given to them by these quote-unquote gods with the lowercase G. So when you're reading things like the Epic of Gilgamesh, the Epic of Gilgamesh for people don't know, is one of the oldest versions of a lot of the stories that you hear in the Bible. Very similar to them. They seem to be, there always seems to be a great flood. There's a few heroes, there's angry gods, there's a bunch of stuff going on. And Zechariah Citchens work was like the most controversial on the Sumerian text, right? Because there's a whole website called Citriniswrong.com and who will go crazy about him? But when he starts talking about it, you, when you read some of the things that they wrote and when you see like some of the images that they created, the images that look like the double helix from DNA. And there's a bunch of like that now we represent, the Caduceus which represents pharmacies and drugs. Like that's the old version of an image of the double helix of DNA or at least it looks super similar to that. Oh, it definitely is because it's referenced even in the Egyptian book of the dead in other ancient texts. So there's no coincidence here. Now Zechariah Citrin, I don't particularly go by his work and not because it's controversial. I believe he was one of the greatest researchers of all time. And the reason why is because he laid out so many, so much information for us to begin to scratch or hit and ask questions. But what I figured out was that by going through the UCLA, CDLI online, online CUNI-form digital library, see that fast 10 times, I was able to take Stone Tabas and decipher them myself. So anyone can go online to the UCLA CDLI online CUNI-form digital library and read these Stone Tabas for themselves. You don't need Zachariah Citrin, you don't need anyone else. And as I begin to break these tablets down. Do they have them transcribed or are you reading the actual tablet? You can, you, they transcribe them. They actually transcribe them into English for you. Is there controversy as far as like, are there different versions of the transcription? Like to some people think it's interpreted differently. It's like some debate about that. Only where it comes to where some of the text is missing. There could be a piece shipped off of tablets. We see that corner missing from that tablet right there in the epigraphy map. Just look how wild is that? Just how wild is that that that exists. And that this was, it's so hard for people to put in their brain 5,000 years of time that there's these people that have this very bizarre language. Like when you look at that language, we don't even know what it sounds like, right? Right, no, and the language popped up out of nowhere. You know, you're talking about a simulation that appeared out of nothing. It looks like computer code. It does. Doesn't it? Just imagine like a human being deciding that they were gonna write down in these very bizarre, and they all agreed that all these things mean a certain thing. So they had a somehow another have a Rosetta Stone or something where they're documenting it. So that people can learn it and teach it. And then we're looking at it 5,000 years later. It's so amazing. It is. And what's incredible is this text was translated in 1800s long before Zach Rice-Hitchin was born. So there are some rumors that, oh, he was the only one that could decipher these tablets. Well, no George Smith, who worked as an a seriologist and wrote many books and he's decipher these summary and tablets in the 1800s. So we're talking about texts that have been deciphered for a few hundred years. Nothing that was just deciphered recently. So when what are the first decipherings? Like what year was the first deciphering? There was an 1800. I don't have to. I think around 1850, George Smith, he actually worked at the, at the, I think it was Cambridge. What was his take? Like what it when he's reading all these wacky stories and all the anunnaki stuff? Like what's his take on it? He is literally subscribing to this information the way almost that you and I see it today. These people saw something, experienced something interactive with something. And he cataloged and it inspired him to write a complete translation of the Enuma Elish and the seven tablets of creation. And he talks about the fact that that information was copied right from those tablets and put into the Old Testament of the Bible. And so not exactly like it's gonna go from here to the Bible, but it went into other ancient papyruses and scriptures and so forth. And then later on when it was discovered in caves, people took those and then said, okay, we gotta put this into a book and then it became the Bible much later around 100 AD. But he subscribed to the theory that these people interacted with beings in some way, shape, form and that also this information is so incredible that it became part of the biblical text. Did you ever read the Dead Sea Scrolls? Yes. So the Dead Sea Scrolls was found in, what year was that? It was in Kuma Ron, right? They found them in the world. But I think again, this was also, I believe, in the late 1800s or early 1900s. This is when they found them. So these things are written on animal skins and this is the, I mean, this is a very old version of those exact same stories or some of similar stories. Yeah. There's a lot of weirdness in the Dead Sea Scrolls. Yeah. I haven't read it, but is there any references to anything that's similar, like Anunnaki type characters, the Nephilim or anything like that in the Dead Sea Scrolls? They show up everywhere in the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Anunnamae-Lish and the Epocha-Biotropsies. Of course, even in the Bible, they're known as the Anok, ANAK. We will grasp Hopper's in their eyesight, it says in the biblical text. So no matter where you go and any culture, you're going to discover that these beings in some way, you're shape of form, engaged mankind, brought knowledge, teaching, building techniques, and just so much more wisdom and information, esoteric wisdom, alchemy, all these things came from these people. So the craziest version of this story is that they genetically engineered us out of lower primates and put us here to mine gold. And then established different types of civilizations and taught us how to build things, taught us all these different things. And enough time has passed that we've kind of forgotten. Enough time is, that's the wackiest version of it. Right, right, that's the bare bones minimum. Yeah, the wackiest versions they made us, which is, we've always talked about this a couple of times, but how bizarre it is that human beings have this incredible fascination for gold. We're fascinated with gold. This fascination with gold is really weird. Like why back when it was basically useless? You couldn't make a knife out of it. You couldn't, it didn't make sense that this would be so valuable. Just because it's rare, you're barely alive. We're going, you know right, we're going back to full on hunter and gatherer our ancestors with spears and stone chipped, and then after that gold emerges. And it stays, it stays forever. Now when you re-zuck our Citrus book, he talks about this in the 1970s. His description of it was that they needed to suspend gold particles in the atmosphere because their atmosphere is being destroyed. Right. Then you move to like somewhere around the 2000s when climate scientists start proposing this idea of suspending reflective particles in the atmosphere. And then when you realize the unique properties of gold, how unusual it is in terms of like a building material, you can coat things. The reason why things are like coated in gold, silver, plate, or gold, plated rather, you can take a tiny piece of gold and cover an enormous area with it. It's a strange metal, like really weird. And what, you know, let's suppose the story is, it's very common on earth, very rare on new berry. Right. Yeah, that's the story. And then when I started looking into this gold thing myself, and here's what I came up with. So when you start analyzing the text, you discover that there was a camp and then camp met in a place called South Africa at Adams Calendar. Okay. Now at Adams Calendar, there's actually the very first gold mines discovered. They're dating them back to about 200,000 years ago. And that's incredible because there's a building there that looks like a worn down structure. Now in the tablets, it talks about the fact that the E.G. who were the working class anternaki being, who were cleaning out the Euphrates and Tigris River so they can create irrigation and create a bustling civilization. Also, what they were doing, the actual construction themselves, no people needed just them working. They were like the construction workers and new and Enkin and Lil, these leader gods, were like, you know, the four men, the art master architects and so forth, right? The boss. So these people were working, but they weren't supposed to be enslaved. They were volunteers. They got tired of doing the working core to them for about 250,000 years of labor on earth and also according to them on Mars. This is in the text that called it Lamu. And so they decided to go to war against Enkin, Lil, and a new because their demands had not been met. So they went to meet them and the epica, ultra-hossis, they go to Adams Calendar, they go to that same structure that was discovered where that gold mine is located. I was like holy crap, there is some link here to gold, specifically exactly, I don't know, but I know if you're an advanced civilization, you need gold and the people that you have working it for, you probably think, you know, it's the dawn or to a dawn yourself or in recognition of the gods so they'll wear it and they'll utilize it, but not for technology. It was crazy as they go to war, they go to get ready to go to battle. And then Enkin says, I have an idea that will stop this war. There's an existing being on this planet, existing, not something that doesn't exist, existing. We can add our essence to it, but a slain god. So they're talking about taking the DNA of genetics from one of themselves and mixing it with the DNA of the hominid that was here. It's not specified whether it was, you know, a man or anything, but they don't specify in the tab this, but to create a worker being and they began to do this genetic modification, probably disconnecting some of our DNA, making genetic modification to us, to get us to take orders from them. They inserted something called a worship gene, which was just discovered recently, that human beings have a gene inside of them, that can be turned on and turned off. It can be turned off in a laboratory setting, it can also be turned off with a magnetic field around your head. And when it's off, you don't want to worship anything outside of yourself, you look inside. And when it's on, you look to get something from the outside. So this is incredible. And so they hate a worship gene inside of us. Yeah. To make us worship them. We're genius. It's incredible because then you're not a slave anymore. You're doing this for the honor of the gods. And for people who think this is all this talk is really crazy. I want to put into perspective that we talked about this the other day, that during the, which war was it, where the Soviet Union was experimenting? Was it, it was scientists in the Soviet Union, correct? They're experimenting with creating a chimpanzee human being hybrid that they would probably send a war. So instead of having regular people, we would make this monster, this freak, you know, ape man and send him to war and have him crush the enemies. Yeah. But he's just, that crazy is that they knew how strong chips are. I got an idea, let's turn a champion and that way, if he dies, who gives a fuck, we made them, get them to go to work for us. And now if you're a supremely enlightened being, wouldn't you think of human beings with all of our folly and all of our chaos and all of our war and bullshit and the internet and disinformation and misinformation? Wouldn't you think of us kind of the same way we would think about that champ hybrid thing? If I was a, you know, I was a president of Russia, I want my cousins to go to war or I want to send this freak that I made in a lab. Yeah. And what's interesting, I'm glad you said made in a lab. They had talked briefly in that text about fashioning people. In other words, almost like they said, they said the word fashioning, the fashioning of being. What was the, do you remember the actual quote? I got to, I would have to look it up the actual, the actual quote. But they described it as fashioning because they said even the lamb had to have been fashioned yet so they had fashioned lamps. So they fashioned, it's also an epica bilgamesh. They fashioned the friend that Gilgamesh went on the journey with. He wasn't born from a woman's womb. They created him. They created him an artificial being to go on this journey in the epica of Gilgamesh. So they used that phrase several times in the tablets. But they said, no, wait. So it was almost like that's not a good idea because in some ways it seems as if they had known that the idea of making these audifers too many artificially created people wouldn't be a good idea. Now they didn't go deeper than that. But you can see where we are today with AI and everything else in these robots that are coming. Maybe they knew something about that. But they decided to take a biological being and genetically modifying a program back to do the work and that's exactly what they did. Well, if they really knew what we would be capable of and that we would be illogical, overpopulation be a gigantic issue. And in many part, I mean it's not really that big of an issue here except for in cities. But in many parts of the world, it's the whole country. The whole country is near today, which is just fucking bonkers. And you've got a one, it's actually not true. It's not even that bad, even in China. China has a lot of open space. But when you're in those cities, they are massive and they are filled with people. And that is probably what you'd imagine a higher being would do if it was like us, like kind of illogical and kind of little bit reckless and it has a little bit too much technology for the average person that didn't develop the technology. But also, and you got some 85 IQ dope who has access to all the things that all these geniuses have created. I mean, you could, I mean, you could figure, we talked to Michio Kaku, he built a nuclear reactor in his house. Right, but he was a kid. I heard my dad, that was crazy. That's crazy. Yeah, I know. That's so crazy. But there's a lot of different stuff that you can do and have access to technology that is beyond anything. You would ever be able to invent with your own mind. But because we share things across the board, you would imagine that if you were an enlightened being from another planet that's a million years more advanced, and I said, you go, I see where this one's going. You know, like, who's an alcoholic? And then he wins the lottery, like, oh shit, Derek just won the lottery. Yeah. This is gonna be crazy. Derek's got $2 million. Right. It's gonna be fucking insane. And they knew they were going outside their own guidelines and their own laws, their parameters, because they made a statement in the text. They said, the creator of all this going to punish them, or they would have to answer to the creator of all for what they did here. So, and that lets you know they weren't really gods. They knew themselves that they weren't the creator of the universe, but that they, they masqueraded as gods on this planet. Just like we did when, you know, when different versions of human civilization would find primitive tribes, like the cargo, the cargo cults. The cargo cult that you talked about in your documentary. That is so fascinating that during World War II, Plains landed on these remote places. And these people built mock planes to show like what the thing was that came to visit them that they thought were like gods. Wow. Do you think that if the Anunnokia real and if Nibiru really exists, and there's another planet with highly intelligence beings that are far more advanced than us, if that's the case, do you think there's more advanced and more advanced and just like we are to chimpanzees, they are to us and then another races to them. And then it just keeps going on and on forever until you're god. Absolutely. I believe there's a there's levels to the game. Just like there's levels in terms of how we live on this planet. Yeah. You know, we have the first World Second World Third World, just here on Earth. Now, I magnify that as a fractal as a universe as a whole, you have civilizations that are million, two million, maybe even a billion years ahead. And every universe progresses, every, every, every, every civilization progressing within the universe that is specific. Great. So you can have beings that have already maybe even shed the corporeal bodies and only existed beings of energetic light. And then you have everything all the way back down towards us. And the Emerald Tab was a thought he actually says that he has achieved ability to incarnate at will on and in the plane he desires. He claims to be able to incarnate whenever he wants and even into other dimensions, which is wild. That's next level. Yeah. It does make sense that if we're capable of doing what we're doing, we're talking about your phone, the Samsung Galaxy S24 Ultra with zooms and all this different shit. That's magic to someone just 200 years ago. And if we keep, if it keeps going and you keep like playing this out as far as possible, it kind of makes sense there would be levels to the kind of intelligent life that exists in the universe beyond our comprehension. Yeah. What do you, have you talked to Terrence Howard? Do you know his theory about how planets are created that it's just things ejecting from the sun over billions and billions of years and that there's a Goldilocks zone where you can create life. Right. And that's where the people are. Yeah. And then as this Goldilocks zone gets burned, you have to be super technologically proficient in order to control your environment to the extent that you no longer require the sun in order to keep you alive. That kind of makes sense if the burrows out there pass Pluto. Oh, it makes a lot of sense. It makes sense in the day. I'm not sure how much power it is because I just talked to him a couple hours ago. Oh, okay. Yeah. I mean, so I used to be talking about what we do, the allegations and everything. Fuck me up for like three days. I left this podcast for three days. I was like, damn, first of all, how the fuck is he so smart? Like how would you ever imagine that a dude who's an actor on a television show or in a movie is that smart? Right. Like freaky smart. But his theory about the creation of planets and he was like, oh, that makes sense. Oh, it makes a lot of sense. We watch stuff fly off the sun all the time. And if that this matter over time would coalesce and become a planet. Yeah, creates an accretion disk and everything in space, creates accretion disk. So once that, where's that word accretion? A accretion. Yeah, what does that mean? So once you have a certain amount of mass in space, it instantaneously on its own wants to create this circular, like the shape of our Milky Way galaxy, wants to start circling and swerving around itself. And then as it does that, it creates, begins to create friction. And is that friction increases? The matter begins to collapse in towards each other, all right, based on its own energy. And then it then forms a ball. And that then builds and attracts more mass until it builds into a moon or a planet or whatever. What do you do when you encounter flat earth people? Oh, man, I just try to be quiet. I just tell them, look, it's not my thing. I remember a flat earth society offered me money years and years ago. And I was like, no, I don't believe you're off this flat. I'm not getting involved with this. And they really attacked me hard. Death threats and everything else. They get very upset. Yeah. I do not understand. I just think it's people committing to an idea. It just doesn't make sense. Well, it's a religion now. They turn it into a religion. Anytime that people can attack you so brutally over that, I mean, you're talking on life talking about quantum physics and they're in the chat. The flare of this flat, the earth is, I mean, this, that's like coming in. One guy. What is it? Fascinated by it because it's the thing. It's interesting. Yeah, because it's the ultimate conspiracy theory. The ultimate conspiracy theory is that we are all on a set and that the earth is flat. It's a diss. There's a wall. The government's aware of it. They won't let you pass it. That's right, it's a diss. Yeah, there's ice walls. And that space is just lights in the sky. Right. And the sun is a bulb. And this kind of stuff is wild. And it's attached to a version of Christianity, which is very interesting. It is. It's tied into Christianity, the 6,000 year old theme. There was only 6,000 year old. The reason why people think they're up to 6,000 years old is because most of the tablets are 6,000 years old. And the Bible was written from the information that came from tablets. So that's as far back as anybody's quote-unquote knowledge seems to extend. That's where the 6,000 year old theory comes from. But they've taken that thing and turned it into a religion. I remember one guy DM me and he was going off and telling me he was going to shoot me in the head and all this stuff. And I said, let me ask you a question. If there's no atmosphere, then what are you breathing right now? He goes, what do you mean? I'm breathing oxygen. I said, well, that's a gas. Gas doesn't exist. I said, well, then you ship you dead then. Because you're breathing a gas. And what else are you inhaling when you breathe? He goes oxygen. I said, well, no, you're breathing in helium, Krypton, all these nitrogen. Yeah, nitrogen. I said, you're breathing in all these other gases. Oxygen is only about 21% of that. Otherwise, you'd be dead. He didn't know. He couldn't test. Did you graduate from high school? He said, no, I stopped talking. Because that's when I realized, don't waste your energy on these people. Well, there's a lot of dudes, unfortunately, who just get on YouTube. And they listen to very charismatic people talk. They don't know what they're talking about, which I do all the time. But they do the way they pretend they know something is true that's not true. And people get sucked into it. And I just don't understand why you would think that Earth is the only one out of all these things that we've observed that's flat. It just doesn't make any sense. And I think this is respectfully to all these people that believe that. I think it's a giant waste of time. I think concentrating on the shape of the Earth, even if it was flat, who fucking cares? It makes sense. Look at what's going on out there. It would be kind of crazy if it was flat. That would kind of like bolster the idea that we're the shit. And we're just so much more powerful in advance and special than everything else in the universe, because we're the only ones that exist on a flat plane. But the whole thing is just so insane. Just what we know about the physical universe itself and without atoms. And just what we know about all the matter that exists in our lives is insane. Yeah, it's insane. I mean, obviously they haven't tapped into it. Even forget quantum. They standard physics. They don't comprehend it. And so because of that, they're awesome. I mean, satellites don't exist, obviously, to them. So I remember I remember this as a cookie. It's very you can watch them. I mean, it's crazy. Hurricane Maria comes in destroys the Caribbean. And unfortunately, I have some loved ones that it went involved. And that and I posted a picture of the hurricane because I was raising money for hurricane supplies. And they were commenting and attacking. That's a fake image. It doesn't exist. I'm like, how many? But let me ask you this. How much of that is bullshit? Like how much of that is government, either entities from other foreign governments, whether they jump into these subjects to make people seem really stupid. And when people say something really stupid, if they have one of the things they like to do is put a foreign flag, like American flag rather. And they're a little, yeah. They're pro-life. Yeah. And they're just saying, that dumb is shit. And I'm going, I don't know if this is a real person. I think it's not. I think it's one of those things that's designed to muddy up any discourse about anything. Yes, a sigh up. I'm telling you, I told people a long time ago, this whole flatter thing was a CIA sigh up. I think it was rapid in there. It wasn't CIA sigh up. It was someone from Fort Jan who just wanted to be silly and went so hard with explanations that a lot of gullible people without science degrees like me. They went along with it. And it's just one of those things where it's just man what a giant waste of time. It is a Swiss energy. And there's so much more we can learn like these ancient texts. And people say, why you were spoken on the ancient past? Well, because the past is pro-log. If we don't understand what happened back then, we're doomed to continue to repeat these cycles of time that we've been in for quite some time for eons. Can't mean it's just direct evidence that civilizations don't last when they go cookie. And on the things go sideways and there's natural disasters and wars that reshape landscapes like, look, it's all there. And it's happening right now. And if we're not aware of it, it'll happen us. And then we'll be a footnote of history. We'll be one of those things. There was this amazing country called America. They got crazy. They created all this art and culture. And they did amazing things. But they went fucking sideways. They sold out the money. They got involved in wars. And then the next thing you know, the world is operating essentially like communist China, the whole world. And that's possible, two kids. All right, you got to be, you got to fight for this. Because whatever this thing is that we have, this is like super fucking unique. But if you don't want to look at the past, if you're not fascinated by ancient structures, if you're not fascinated by what kind of technology and knowledge that they have 4,500 plus years ago. Accinated by ancient structures if you're not fascinated by what kind of technology and knowledge that they have 4,500 plus years ago to make impairments right who are these people exactly what were they doing? Yeah, how do they do that and what was that thing was that a power plant? I mean if you I know you know that Oh, yeah, that's a crazy theory that sounds so it sounds completely wackadoo But then when you have it laid out you Christopher, what's his last name done? Christopher done on my podcast a few weeks. I just had him a couple weeks ago Yeah, just had a brain fart the his depiction of the Mechanisms that would be involved in turning this Giant structure into some sort of a power plant You hear about you a way to minute. Yeah, whoa. Yeah, it makes a lot of sense And him and I have very similar theories on how the power generation occurred And I believe that the Nile you know when it used to run up close to the pyramids and the water would run underneath the pyramid and That would create something called physiostatic electricity as it ran underneath that magnetized crystal granite Those ions would pour up into the chamber move up the Grand gallery where there used to be resonating rods with you can see the slots where the rods used to be They'll remove now, but the slots are still there Then it would be pushed into the King's chamber where it would be amplified and some type of fusion would take place Then forced up through the apex and then the crystal granite obelisk around the region would capture that ambient wireless Electricity and then if you had something called a jet which looks like a Tesla coil You can you can capture that energy and you can transfer it into a device for gold electroplating For any other electrical tools you need like some of the tools They had to have used to create some of these incredible works of art You can we can see the tool marks so we know they had the tools and but they had wireless electricity way back then That's insane That's if that's true that's insane because you would think there would be some kind of physical evidence of a device like something left over some sort of a you know Ancient chainsaw like something. Yeah, they did a great job cleaning up I mean they poured sand over Giza to bury another couple hundred pyramids there at Giza Do you think they poured sand? Do you think that's just natural erosion over time? Because when when Giza when the pyramids existed it was a very different place, right? like if you go back before the pyramid like 9,000 years ago is a lush rainforest right yeah, and then over time it became sand and The same with the entire Sahara desert which is really crazy We just we're talking about the other day. They find whale bones. Yeah in the Sahara desert Yeah, yeah, I'm going to the value of the whales in a few weeks in Egypt actually It's no you know it's incredible that there's whale bones out there also We're going out there to the to the valley of the whales whale bones. Yeah Whoa, yeah, but so the point being that this this place has changed radically like absolutely radically over time So who knows what's do you know why those things recovered up? Is it possible that it was just sand over time? Well if you look at the tablets again They talk about this war, right? And this war that occurred is a lot of wars obviously But this one particular war it seems like the same one that damaged the area or the region of Giza plateau Also Mohan Jandaro in the Indus Valley up there by Pakistan and And the reason why it's interesting is if you look at the war in the text and then go to those areas It looks now almost you can begin to see oh wait a minute It looks like war Mohan Jandaro and this valley the buildings turn to glass The sand turned to glass and the bodies are still laying in the street right now today holding hands never been scavenged by animals So wait where is this Mohan Jandaro Photos that we can look at oh yeah look it up Mohan Jandaro Indus Valley dead bodies still laying in his street thousands of years later And they just lay there knowing they're not covered them up. No one covered them up Yeah, we put a guy or counter over them hired them background level radiation Yeah, and if it aren't stones hired them background level radiation some stones are some stones are especially like diarite and Crystal granite but these bodies these are just bones Hock them they're hired them background level Let's see this. Yeah, why haven't I ever heard of this Mohan Jandaro MOHEN there you go Whoa Yeah, this is evidence of a nuclear war or nuclear type to the other the one that one there that one's insane Yeah There's bodies that are sitting on the edge of steps next to their own Buildings that they lived in the building is turned to glass. That's three thousand plus degree temperature Weapons fire so there's a bunch of people that seem to die all at once to scatter around Yeah, and what's the conventional explanation for how these people died they have no idea they have zero idea The only thing that you know, that was just a couple Jamie go to the other with just the Mohan Jandaro mythical mass massacre Yeah, so that they think it's a massacre. Do there there's there any They're just laying there and that that building those stones are a vitrified which means three thousand plus degree temperature Oh shit, what kind of you know what could have caused that level of temperature? energetic release Well, it could have been a low atmosphere asteroid. It could have been That's possible Tunguska. Yeah, it could have been a little but then their bones would have been splattered apart and broken up into pieces Good call. Yeah, that's good call. Yeah, because They don't seem to be broken apart. No, they're not broken apart Right that impact would have shattered the bones and spread them out over Right without impact even if you just look at the one that bursts in the atmosphere in Tunguska Just flattened trees, flattened everything I think it's some insane like a million acres or something crazy. Yeah, it's incredible Tunguska explosion that that one's yeah, so those bodies would be toast The trees were ripped apart the buildings would have been flattened the legs would have flown off There's no way they would just be laying there like that. That's interesting and they don't seem to be like chopped up No, did they have any evidence of stab wounds or anything on them? They don't have any evidence of any injury of any kind of attack or any cutting or like swords or anything They just all got cooked right and then in the tablet it says that the evil wind moved over to land after they released these weapons and They and then Enki goes to his father. I mean, yeah, Enki goes to his father I knew and says hey Can you stop the evil wind because he had fallen in love with some people? You know and down there and he's like there's nothing I can do he said getting your sky shipment for a boat That means get the hell out of here and he said that people's here was falling out Their eyes were bleeding their nose were bleeding the fingernails were curling off. That sounds like radiation sickness So you think its radiation sickness that did this to all these people or was it an impact that did this all these people? Nobody nobody knows, you know, but they're they're not blown apart right They're not on the part it seems like whatever wherever whatever struck or whatever energetic weapon it was It could have been not it might not have been a weapon whatever it was It seems like that shock wave reached them at some point and whatever was in that wave This killed everybody that's what it did. Yeah, and They just don't know what it is today. How does a conventional Archaeologist describe it? Did they just say it's a massacre? They just call it a mythical masker and they stay away from it When you look in the other text the Mahabharata and the Bhagavagita you find out about these wars also They're they record it they have weapons called the Brahma-Astrra and the Brahma-Honda weapon and these weapons They do what they describe them as doing duplicate what you saw there How do they describe them they describe them describe them as weapons that once release can't be revolted or can't be turned back and That they will obliterate any area any city and they say that some of the one of the weapons can destroy any man on three worlds It's crazy stuff. This is where Oppenheimer got his famous quote when he obviously tested the nuke right now I have become death destroy of worlds. He got that from the Mahabharata. Yeah, yeah, what a great quote Yeah, after you detonate the first name of your mom Yeah, what a great quote. Yeah, so so the idea is that there were beings that were having wars on this planet Where they do you believe they were having wars with people that were revolting or were they having wars with other beings They were fighting with each other and Happiness of this of these wars can be found in the book of Deuteronomy in the modern day Bible These gods only do mean gods with an ask because everywhere in the Bible were says God singular It's actually a mistranslation the actual if you backwards look up the translation in Arabic and down to Aramaic and everything else You find out that's God's plural they were fighting each other over resources and people and control of control that are planet And so that's why in the book of Deuteronomy God tells people go to this city and it's like a far city way They don't even know these people exist. They go over there to kill them He says kill the women kill the children and bring the spoils of war back to me And you see these wars in the Mahabharata the Bhagavagita the Bible the Sumerian tablets And these wars are just non-salt the Indian Vedas and it's always about attacking another city and Even talk about Trojan Trojan horse methods to get behind the gates and then to you know Utilize that to attack and kill and bring back these spoils which is pretty crazy stuff It's like they were attacking each other. They had gone awry They had gone rogue out here on this planet and then began to fight over over people and population relations and resources and We would hope that we would get past that But there's no evidence that we have so far so like why would we think that as AI gets implemented and technology? escalates and and all we're gonna be able to do in the future in terms of being able to go visit other planets and do get out on other Plans right like there was a whole story today about China just landed on the far side of the moon So they landed a probe over there. Yeah, yeah, maybe it's this is you know There's the China America war on the moon Like what if America claims a spot and China lands and plants a flag there and you know Hey fuck you that's ours now that's this would happen Especially if there's like something on the moon they can mine. It's very valuable. Oh, this stuff up there I research the Clementine mission years ago NASA and I just say it's military sent a military at that time It was a top-secret mission called Clementine It was a low lunar orbiting satellite to go to the dark side of the moon And when I saw the name Clementine I knew right away this thing and coming back and as I began to dig deeper into the declassified Documents of course it ever came back. Oh my junk. Oh my darling Clementine. You were lost. I'm gone forever Wow, and I was right and sure enough it hits something on the dark side of the moon Which is really just the back side. It's not really dark there But it hits something and but it sent the back sent back about 20 gigs of data and these images are available to the general public They've been declassified and there are strange anomalies on those images This is pre-photo shot pre-everything things that shouldn't be there that look like broken structures and junk and things that just seem to be laying around So I think it was a reconnaissance mission together Intel and data Which is probably why China's gone to the to that far side of the moon as well because they're probably going It's the race to see who can correct capture ancient technology and then reverse engineer it and then weaponize it Well, that's the most fun theory ever the most fun theory ever is that there's bases on the moon in the dark side of the moon that Aliens of abandoned Jamie are there any photos of these anomalies? That's the most fun. I can provide you some with links to the sources too. Okay. Yeah, that'd be cool But Jamie will probably find something cool. So what are these structures look like to you when you look at them? Just don't structures there. I don't there's domes So and matter of fact one of the astronauts I think it was Neil Armstrong if you get the declassified from the freedom of information act documents that are the the black box audio and the black box redacted Tech statement from NASA which is available to the general public Neil says look at those convex structures down there I bet that people in there never get out and he's talking about dome structures on the moon And this is an exact statement that was made that's in the black box audio Which I can provide you to link to that as well. Okay, so where are these structures? Do you see any of these that you find you look for a anomalies on the back side of the moon We can't we have you utilize a lot of these on our Facebook groups on On Facebook. We have these groups anomaly hunting groups We form the United Family of anomaly hunters and we've cataloged about 60,000 anomalies now a lot of them are on the dark side of the moon But to your type in Clementine moon photos anomaly you may be able to find some If not I'll send you to link to some resources where you can look them up and you can take a look at some of these crazy objects out of there That one right there in the upper right hand corner. Yeah, that one's there some structure It looks like two pyramids on to the left of it and then another structure Which almost seems like has geometry underneath that you see the blur That looks like obfuscation Directly, uh, you know if you go back to that top right top right Right B. Okay. You see that where his hand is. I'm moved to the left going down Slowly see it all see how that opposite that go back up again See that over what his hand is over right now It looks like obfuscation sometimes you can take these images and put them into a photoshop and take away the Contrast and all the sudden structures pop right out But right above that you see those shadows of those pyramid structures Right above that. Yeah, you see those pyramids you can see the dark shadow. See this I see two lines Okay, well, I see the arrow that's pointing to that one straight line and then I see what looks like two superimposed arrows Okay, do you see yeah those things? Okay. Yeah those are superimposed right like no those are shadows But look there's the same things that are in the bottom are they just pointing at something aren't those pointers? I think they're high they may be highlighting something right I think it's a cursor mark or something So what they're say I see what they're pointing to they're pointing to that thing in the upper right hand corner It looks like a pyramid. Yeah, you see that you see that right there. Yeah. Yeah. It kind of looks like a pyramid It's cleaned up a little bit there and see sees more clean, but you know those struck those those things don't look like they belong there Well, it's hard to tell yeah, it's hard to tell now if we have really there's a very famous That's a very old image. That's on the moon. There's a this should be a link to that There's a lot of a lot of that bad particular ones been around for years and years and years It's kind of hard to think that that were formed by natural now and what what happens is We're not saying we know exactly what these things are. We're just saying that we feel like they don't belong there Jamie go back to that image that you're just looking at the thing that will be a pyramid That one yeah, yeah get that one big Hmm Balance crazy. Yeah, that one's very strange looking because the way it points at the top and has flat sides like yeah You're like yeah, all right, so if that's real that's interesting. Yeah, but it That's a good question There's a there's a measuring tool. We don't have it obviously access to it So what that is but there is a measuring tool you can see the shadow which gives you an idea of the height I'd like to see in real life though You know I mean like sometimes things fuck with you. It's just but the angles so unnatural looking Yeah, definitely looks unnatural We just try to catalog things that appear to be a nomiest things that appear to be out of place Right it could be anything and if in this in the Sumerian tab is you have this time Where and little takes a son to the moon and he says well grab your eagles mask because you're gonna need it They were referencing that the atmosphere was harsh So when you see that when you see the anternoth you with the eagles head that's actually their helmet It's a helmet really could breathe around exactly They talk about it twice once to go to the moon in the second time to go to Mars Yeah, and there's been other depictions of ancient gods and people that look like they're wearing so kind of mask right Yeah, exactly. I mean one of the cooler ones is the the bubble spacehead looking guys in the cave Yes, you know like what did you guys say right? What did you guys say in the middle of like hunting gazels trying to stay alive trying to make a fire and then you decided to draw that thing What is that and we know they can draw because they can show you what a gazelle is they can show you what a person looks like But then they draw that and you have to think well why right? Why is that the only thing you drew that's fake right exactly? It looks like I'm the waist and it looks like a dude in a suit with a helmet on right and how Here's the question how many different things are visiting us? Like and from how many different places? Oh a lot if We can't just think everything's gonna look exactly the same that seems just as silly as thinking that all of our animals should look Exactly the same correct. I think we have three different levels of visitation going on simultaneously One is corporeal beings in the physical body most likely and it's humbly similar to us Biilateral bipedal organism but two forward facing eyes maybe do you think two sets of hands? We eventually become it's what they are it's possible that maybe we already are them just uh You know earth could be an abandoned sea colony We every culture that I've talked to and digitously around the planet It's all say they were seated on this planet by pliadians or other beings star brothers in various different places So like the dodonts like the doe guns the no mo the Hopi and the Lakota tribe the star brothers The ab original elders say that they were seated here by pliadians all of a sudden Why is everybody having the same story that we were brought here? We could be genetically I don't believe we're even from earth to be quite honest with you our psychotic rhythm doesn't even match earth's Or rotation on its axis was slightly off It's actually better tuned to Mars orbit on its us rotation on its own axis What do you mean? How's that work? The psychotic rhythm of a human body the way can sleep cycle Is actually more tuned to Mars rotation on its own axis a Mars day versus earth day Which is pretty weird that we don't we aren't synced to our own planet after all these thousands of these 100s are six years Circadian rhythm right so when How do they calculate it's more tuned to Mars like how does that work? Well, it's just they they geneticists and scientists discovered that our day are perfect Wake and sleep cycle is more tuned to Mars rotation on its axis Which is about 23 and something minute hours and versus earth being 24 hours And so they said wow, this is incredible and the more they tested and more they studied they realized we're more tuned to To the Mars then we are to earth which is pretty strange We are weird. We have we accept shit like leap year right Like what kind of whack calendar do you have Where here's makeup stuff if some some years the month is longer what the fuck are you doing? Better calendar isn't there better calendar? Yeah shouldn't there be like a digital calendar that represents exactly what's going on and not Go January It's pretty bizarre, but you know what's interesting if you want to say well human beings could be aliens Well actually every person on this planet is an alien even our planet itself is an alien Scientists just discovered something interesting. I've never talked about this shit on a podcast and you guys will look this up so our Milky Way galaxy Is pretty interesting because it's absorbing another galaxy at this exact moment called the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy Not the Sagittarius constellation that's something totally different We are absorbing the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy at this exact moment People thought for all these decades looking them even hundreds of years looking up in the night sky Seeing that swath of stars going across that's the Milky Way Guess what we've been wrong the whole time? This is now being taught in universities in astrophysics So what we're looking at you're looking at the absorption or the the merging of the Sagittarius with the Milky Way galaxy And the exact point where it emerges and drops into the Milky Way Is right where our solar system is located Which would explain the rogue planets that we know that are out there There's millions of rogue planets that have no sun that just floating free around There's planets and solar systems that are orbiting far beyond the orbiter Pluto in our inner ort cloud Admitted by us by astronomers now that there's other solar systems within this inner ort cloud area orbiting our Sun to be 4200 years So all of a sudden that's Corey Powell the astronomer at discovery magazine by the way who said that So this is pretty interesting We're talking about the fact that our solar system itself is an implant into the Milky Way that we come from Sagittarius We're not even part of the Milky Way galaxy Whoa, okay, so when they're looking at our own solar system They have an understanding that there's a thing called the Kuiper Belt It's out there and there's so many objects in there. They're small Yeah, that's one of the reasons why they decided to declassify Pluto as a planet because there's other objects Real similar in its eye, it's rocky and all those other planets, but they think there's something large out there They think there's something large out there that they haven't yet identified because of the way The that gravity is responding like what is the reason for well what happens is they discovered that in some way Millions of years ago something moved through our solar system and captured its own weird orbit around our Sun And what's crazy is the evidence is in our solar system so Saturn and Neptune switch locations Because of a gravitational field Uranus is flipped on its side in orbits It's it's equator is orbiting north and south not east and west And they know that you got hit like you got hit or something gravitationally just tugged at it so hard that it flipped sideways They never stopped never stopped and it's moved through our solar system way out beyond orbit of Pluto And this thing captured its own orbit This is in the enumeration in seven types of creation this exact process that's been described now by astrophysicist and astronomers Is in ancient text that we can read and we can see oh my god This is exactly what this text is saying. It's talking about the creation of our solar system It even talks about the creation of earth in that text. It says that when Marduk aka Nubiru a moon of moon but Nubiru crashed into Teomat It broke into pieces and became the hammer and blase it. That's the asteroid belt One giant chunk swung away reco a less with everything water land and organic material needed for life and became the earth Tugging with it the moon so It's pretty crazy that the creation of this planet itself and it says that it pushed the net force Pushed mercury closer to the Sun and pushed Venus closer to the Sun and then we took the third spot in place Around our orbit around our Sun and then of course we have Mars which used to be a moon a habitable moon of Teomat A planet that was four to six times larger than earth and it's lung into this crazy orbit That's why Mars has this weird orbit and you have to you have to rendezvous with it If you're NASA or anybody trying to rendezvous with Mars every two years doing this in apogee or paragie You have to with apogee or paragie one of them is further away than the other one is 80 million miles and other ones closer So if you run into it rendezvous every two years you can capture the orbit of Mars You can actually get there in four months and then they looked at it and said wow they meaning astrophysic This looks like this Mars Wasn't originally in this type of orbit it must have been orbiting something else in our solar system which it was One side is charred black and the other side is smooth. So the site where Teomat exploded Those chunks hit Mars on one side created a very charred side and the other side is a smoothness surface In the solar system which is because of the global flood that created and then Mars's axis on its equator is tilted 45 degrees on its axis Which means the the mass shifted it down 45 degrees. They had a major global catastrophe there on that one Mars And then after Mars you have another little planet that survived called series CERES Which is also a result of this Teomat exploding people only been talking about series It has the most fresh water of any other planet in our solar system more more. Where is this location? That's the next planet after Mars series really CERES how big is it? It's about maybe two-third smaller than Mars and Guess what? It's worth plan so they don't it's falls in orbit between Mars and Jupiter near the middle of the asteroid belt with an Orbital period click on that Jamie when they flew by it about this I didn't know there's another planet out there listen when they flew by it a few years ago the lights were on They sent the probe out there what the lights were on and so they start trying to say it was ice particles glistening into sunlight So when they got to the dark side guess what the lights were on on the dark side So they couldn't use the ice particle explanation anymore. So they just said we don't know what it is What Series small size means that even at its brightest is too dim to be seen by the naked eye except under extremely dark skies It's apparent magnitude ranges for from 6.7 to 9.3 peeking in opposition. What's closest to earth Once every 15 to 16 months in how do you say that word sin O dick? Synodick I don't know where you're at now 16th month synodick period Oh, yeah, synodick. Yeah. Yeah. It's a result. It's not a dick as a result Its surface features are barely visible even with the most powerful telescopes and little is known about it until the robotic NASA Spacecraft dawn approach series for its orbital mission in 2015 And we have high resolution images of the surface There are strange things there as well, which is pretty crazy So what are the images of the surface? You have to go to nasa.gov and go to the dawn images and you can download or there's sometimes the European space agency has them as well ES and then you can grab those images. It's pretty crazy. Some things just don't look right there But there's what what doesn't look right well, you know if you look at mohenjandara or areas of Egypt this you know Or even you know Iraq where it used to be some area Structures that used to be there that are all worn down and weathered They have similar looks there similar things that they look similar there not this not not saying that they are I'm just saying that they look strange some things look a lot of strange things on earth that are natural That's true. We sure do we even have octagons and straight lines on earth that are natural as well That was one of the craziest ones that terence brought up was the octagon on Saturn. Yeah Was it Saturn? Yeah Saturn Saturn that when you look at the octagon on Saturn that it it it's mimicked in the model that they created by using a The whole Idea that he really blew my mind with was the goldilocks zone idea that planets reach a certain distance from the Sun and that's when life starts Happening and this is a normal force that happens everywhere in the universe and as time goes on that plan is going to get further and further for the Sun And then it's gonna lose its ability to do that and then a new plan It'll move in the goldilocks zone and that is also going to become like us And then so if you are following this idea of this idea makes sense It means that this is just this sort of natural process that these intelligent creatures go through and even though We're looking at like AI and we're looking at technologists like oh my god We can't be people anymore. Well, guess what we can't be people anymore, right? Because we're not gonna make it right? Don't yeah, there's there's a timeline it seems like you're only gonna live a hundred years. So it's no big deal but Humans if we keep going like a few million years. We're gonna have a real problem Yeah, yeah a billion years now We're not gonna be around anymore No, and then there's gonna come a time where the Sun doesn't exist anymore Exactly So if you get so intelligent that you can escape the boundaries of the physical world and you can move throughout the cosmos wherever you want Then you've escaped right you escape this fear, but that's almost like there's an intelligent tests Yeah, and intelligence test that life goes through like we're gonna give you all the tools Just like you're in the womb you're in the womb of Mother Earth Wanna give you all the tools, but you got to get out of the house. Yeah at a certain point in time Gotta get out of the house you're 24 still living in home The fuck out of the house. They're waiting for us to grow up. Yeah, that's what you know human human beings are like babies right now It's a civilization trying to learn how to walk and right now we're barely crawling and then we plop down on our stomach Everybody screams in cries, but we're getting to the point eventually where we'll go to the edge of a table and pull ourselves up and Then we'll take a couple of steps and then we'll fall again everybody will think it's all over Oh my god, we were doing so good in the collapse again But no, that's just a fall the baby will pull itself back up It'll cry less and it'll take more steps until it falls again until it can get this controlled fall and that's the definition of walking Controlling your fall. So we're in that process now like you said This is a proving ground for us to be able to develop Consciously spiritually ascend to higher levels and eventually I believe I'm pretty optimistic for mankind that we will get through This period Well, that's a beautiful thing to hear. I love when people are optimistic because I'm always like I don't know which way I tend to be optimistic Well, you know it proves what these ancient beings were doing They were creating breakaway civilizations throughout the entire Milky Way galaxy because of what you just said the fact that You know plan is won't be habitable forever even earth Let's say earth never move in state right where it's at in the Goldilocks zone We're gonna lose our control over the weather because the moon is moving away at a few centimeters every single year And as the moon backs off of earth Weather patterns are gonna get more hectic and chaotic and the wobble is gonna be uncontrollable So the point where life won't be able to exist not our kind of life won't be able to exist on this planet So just losing the moon alone in a few million years is gonna destroy us So we have to create breakaway civilizations. We have to get out of here Which is what all these other advanced civilizations in the in these ancient texts have done? Well, it only makes sense if if Terrence is correct about this idea of the Goldilocks zone It only makes sense and if there are other planets somewhere in another galaxy or ours that have the same exact Sort of features water the same temperature the same mixture of amino acids and whatever the hell else is here that makes life and then it happens there too It just makes sense that some places are gonna be more stable So they're gonna have less natural disasters so like people will evolve faster and longer they'll exist longer But then you know, there's the argument that the natural disasters are actually good Because the natural disasters knock us back down If we're about to destroy everything knock us back down to some much more primitive version of ourselves And then we have to rebuild society again over thousands of years which that's a universe is the blink of an eye I said blink of an eye. You're right. That's exactly what happened in the emerald tablets You know 36,000 years ago though this heat arrives in this place called the land of camp versus the blink of an eye. That's a blink of an eye. You're right. That's exactly what happened in the animal tablets. You know, 36,000 years ago, though, he arrives in this place called the land of Kim, ancient Kimmit before it was known as Egypt. His father sent them one mission to rebuild civilization back up to a high level. The meaning that it only was an a high level prior to this flood situation. And he says he gets into the great ship of the master and he takes off into the sky until the earth disappears. And then he goes to the point and he sees beneath him the children of the land of Kim. And he descends down. He doesn't sail in. He descends down. And when his ship lands, he opens his doors and he comes out with his crew. And he says the barbarians came at him to attack him with clutches and spears. He says, I raised my staff and sent that array of vibrations, stopping him still a sprag and substone of the mountain. So we had a stun gun. He had a weapon that, you know, not root, not lethal, not lethal weapon that can freeze you in your tracks tracks. And we have something just like that now in the military called the act of denial system. They can send a beam at a crowd coming to attack and make them stop still right in their tracks. They can make you feel like you want fire, make you feel like you want to vomit. They can even put voices in your head. They can make you be an extreme, extreme pain. It's called the act of denial system. So he's talking about technology back then that we have right now. Could you go look at look at that? Because is that you think that's what that Havana syndrome is possible, man? This thing, if you put it above like in the sky and aiming at an area and it beams spreads a little bit, you can create mass illness, mass sickness, mass hysteria. You can have everyone running around thinking that they've got somebody talking to them and telling command items to do certain things. It's out of control. This weapon can be fully weaponized in a lethal way. And the way that can make people become psychotic, you can make somebody think they're burning in them fire. Wow. Active denial system demo. Can we listen to what this guy's saying? It can deter individuals on a military perimeter all the way up to a riotous crowd, all without permanent harm. They're only penetrates one six and four to the next year. Those very shallow, uh, into where your nerve receptors are. I can't take the pain. Whoa. So was it due to them? It's not a frequency, a beam of frequency. It's just like Dolt says in the animal tablets. I put this in my book because it's important. The guests volunteer to test out its effectiveness and safety, including the assistant commandant of the Marine Corps. Wow, he said fuck it. He said fuck it. It's this secretary of the Navy. Most described it as feeling like a hot oven or grill being opened up. Something that Wow. So that's what he used on them thousands of years ago. Holy shit. Or something like 2012. Oh, now they turn you into statue. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. No. Yeah. It's over in Medusa. Yeah. Medusa. Holy shit. Same tech. What do you say Medusa was? Frequency technology. I imagine that. Imagine that story. We always thought that was just some crazy story. Yeah. Imagine there's a technology back then that can actually turn you into stone. Now that we know that people can do things like that and then we would imagine a thousand years of evolution, 10,000, 500,000, whatever these people are, whatever these things are that have the ability, it's kind of disappointing that they're still waging war. I got to tell you that. Yeah. That's crazy. That's a bummer. That's a real archaic mindset. You know, we have to find a way that rides above. This is why we need to understand exactly what happened. And how do we overcome what's been embedded into our epigenetic memories? Because we're suffering from epigenetic mental hysteria, or just psychosis in this war psychosis. We've been programmed as human beings to have consumption and fighting and competition over collaboration. Everything is designed to keep us separate dividing conquer with the main mission and it works so well for so many thousands of years. And this dividing conquer tactic has been burnt into our DNA in our code, has put us in a situation where we are not advancing as we should be. We're getting now this technology leaked out to us. And yes, that's advancing pretty fast. But consciously and spiritually, it's holding us back. Everyone's putting themselves in boxes and saying, I'm a part of this thing and I'm a part of that thing and then we don't work together. No, that's that's such an important point and it needs to be drilled into people's heads. Yeah. We're distracting ourselves by getting involved in these stupid arguments over stupid things. Right. There's really important issues with the world. And those aren't being addressed. And one of the big ones is how do you stop people from killing each other? Why stop war? How do we stop this insane practice of having groups of people go up against groups of people they'd never even met and killing them? Exactly. And then we're all okay with this. We talk about how this is normal and this has to be done and these war is ugly and it's unfortunate. But we have to do it. Like, okay, are you fucking sure? Who's who's pulling the strings here? People with 10,000, I will suits that don't get on the front line. Yeah. They send poor kids and young kids, young men and women to die. Yeah. And you know, they suck and it's all about money. It's all about money. And you know, smelly Butler wrote about it in 1933. War is a racket. Yeah. And that's right. You read that. Read that from 1933 folks. And this was a general who was he general? It was general. Who's retiring and he wrote this piece about how he thought he was preserving democracy. He was really just making the place safe for bankers. Yeah. Just it's an ugly business that Eisenhower tried to warn us about and is leaving from office speech. That's right. When he stepped down or when he was no longer the president, he left office and gave a speech about warning about the military industrial complex and its influence. Be sure to do it. And I don't think they knew back then that people would be able to have YouTube just watch that. Yeah. And if that's how they did it back then, imagine how good they are at it now. Oh man, they're masters at neuroscience, applying neuroscience to the general population, they are masters at it. And they know how to get into the psyche of a human being. And they know how to turn them again, turn this against each other while they themselves chop it all up. Like I always say, there is no Democrat or Republican doesn't exist. The only thing that exists is a group of elite oligarchs that torture men, women and children worldwide. That exists. They capitalize and monetize us and they put their boot on our neck. But the thing that's left wing in the right wing, I think it's the same bird. Yeah. It's all just money. Yeah. It's all money. And they use social issues, whatever they are, whether it's Christianity or abortion rights or whatever it is. They just use those. It's like little moves that they put in their little game. Yeah. And really what it's about is enriching themselves and staying in power. And the best way to stay in power is control narratives and control influence and make people believe a very specific thing and drill it into their head. But the problem is like, I think human beings are more awake now than ever before. And they know this game now. At least a large number of us know this game. It's shifting so fast. It's shifting like incredibly fast, which is great. How are you Billy? I'll be 53 in September. You look great. Thanks man. So you and I are basically close to the same age. I'm 56. And when we were kids, this version of the world was never discussed. You'd have to be a complete cook to think that money is what why wars are started. Oh, come on. No one would ever do that. Right. You would be a complete cook to think that the pharmaceutical drug companies lie about their drugs. What are you talking about? They can't do that. They would be arrested. Yeah. You'd be a cook. And now, especially after the pandemic, that's how everybody feels. And then watching these wars go on between Ukraine and Russia and Palestine and Israel. You're like, what the fuck is going on? 21st century. This is still happening right now in large scale. And people are having debate over the acceptable amount of numbers of women and children that are allowed to die in a war. Right. And it's insane. It's insane. It's insane. Earth is, you know, partly is a giant mental facility. Mental health is a major issue on this planet. Yeah. When a person can look at someone and say they deserve to die because of their beliefs or their non-belief, that's a major problem. That's a sign of mental illness. It's also a sign of like a spoiled child. It's almost like we we skipped the line. Right. We didn't really do it. We didn't pay our dues to become people. Yeah. We got turned into people. Yeah. You know, like, it's not like the right because if we there's a anthropologists are looking at chimpanzees now and they're looking at them saying they're entering into the stone. Yeah. Like they're using tools now. Now, if you watch that same chimpanzee and you went a few million years in the future, who knows what it looks like? Probably looks like an upward looking human that has much more intricate tools. Who knows if it's created stone weapons, structures, houses, they make develop a language. We could watch chimpanzees over the course of evolution, but that's too slow. Yeah. And so if you were another highly intelligent being for another planet, they're going to get there. Give them a little something. Give them a little something. And the evidence of that is a little chance. Tablets call the myth of a dapa, which means first man to myth of a dapa and ancient Sumerian text. It's a tablet. And in this tablet, you can buy the book myth of a dapa on Amazon. You can read it for yourself completely translated and translated by scholars, by the way. And it's talking about the fact that according to the anonaki, human beings were created in a way that genetically we were supposed to become more superior than them. They didn't know this was going to happen. And Lil was angry at his brother, Enki, because Enki put a little extra in the sauce. Yeah, Lil extra. And he said that the mysteries to unlock the secrets of the universe is hidden within our bodies. And that we ourselves can rise to be even higher than them. This is the major thing to be putting into texts like this. Now, who sits around? How does this specific? That sounds insane. Yeah. How they specifically describe that? They described just like that. It says that human beings or a man, a dapa, a dapa was created to be even higher than us. And that all the secrets of the universe, the mysteries are within our body. And I believe that because when I started studying DNA, that took me into a whole DNA study, I discovered this scientist called George Church. And he created this e-book that he was able to take from a digital format and he was able to download it onto one drop, one gram of DNA, a digital book. He converted it from AC's, T's and G's from zero to one. I'm sorry, he converted it from zero to one into AC's, T's and G's read, write, read, write, put it on the DNA. Then he said, wow, this is incredible. DNA can store information and a volume. Then he said, okay, this what we're going to do. Let's replicate this book. So he replicated the book 80 billion times on one gram of DNA. And this is a, this is not just a regular e-book. This book had graphics and images and everything else in it. So then he said, let's see if we can get it back. So he can convert it. He may create it a read, write again. He converted it from AC's, T's and G's back to zeros and ones and uploaded it back to the server. So now he knows that DNA can upload and download information. Crazy. So now they said, okay, well, how much data can store, he stored on one drop over 433 petabytes of data, a petabyte is a thousand terabytes. What an unfortunate name. I know, right? I know, it's a crazy name. I was like, why'd y'all name it this? It's a bite. But anyway, let it away. So, for that, so they said now they discovered recently on whole medium atoms scientists have now written information data onto an individual whole medium atom. And they discovered that we can store information. They can read right directly onto the surface of an actual atom. Now think about that for a second. Oh my God. So they're saying that a human body can store 13.5 billion years of roughly of data, which is roughly around the time they believe the universe probably exists. So that myth of a doppa text could be accurate. The secrets of the universe is probably encoded into our body because we're we're just recycled atoms. Right. And then as we evolve technologically and biologically, we develop a higher and higher ability to access that information. Exactly. That's exactly what it is. The longer we go, the more we're able to tap in to this information tap into who we truly are. We begin to walk in our power, look inside, go to inner space, not outer space. We'll begin to tap into this. And they discovered now that junk DNA is not no longer junk. They're taking the term junk off of it. That it really has function. It always had function. It was never junk. That's just the word to keep us programmed and thinking that we're junk. I think it was a way for them to explain something that they couldn't explain. Right. But when you use the word junk, if you're weird, if you understand affirmations, you know, I would never call myself junk. So that's a weird way to do it. But but now they're finding out that that's, you know, and again, and in myth of a doppa, it's saying that we're going to tap into this. So I believe that all of our innate abilities that we used to have are going to start to come back over time, like accessing Earth's magnetic field with the magnetite crystals in our brains. We all have billions of magnetite crystals in our brains. And they put a guy into a laboratory and they put a giant bar of maggot and moved it around the room and they put an EEG cap on them and in the scanner. And they saw that they were orienting themselves to the magnetic field. So we still have the the ability to navigate magnetic fields. We just don't don't even know where unaware of it. Well, we know it exists in animals. Yeah. So we have it in our body as well. So all these things are going to become to begin to come back. There's a little true understanding of like how birds migrate, like how they all know when to do it and what is calling them what a very specific direction are they using landmarks on the ground? Or they just be using some sort of a magnetic field? Or they just tuned in to where the North Pole is. And what are they doing? How are they doing? What is the organ that's allowing them to do it? Is that something that humans have? And we just we it went away just like I can't remember anybody's phone number anymore? Right. I said so many phone numbers in my head. We had to happen because we're you know, we're 70s babies. Yeah. You're 60, 60, I'm 70s, 71. But yeah, but what happened was if you look at the tablets again, this is why I love these tablets, man. They talk about the fact that, you know, they had created this this being not creative from scratch, but genetically modified. They add their essence to it. But they say, add it or essence. So by adding the essence, you can see where all of a sudden, maybe our ancestors were in tune with the magnetic field. And we're able to communicate psychopathically, maybe even had telekinesis and these other innate abilities weren't technologically advanced, but maybe more spiritually advanced. And they tinkered with us and took away our memory, took away our ability to tap into that so we could focus solely on them. Hmm. Well, I guess if you were gonna, you know, have you ever seen the movie Prometheus? Oh, yeah. When the alien dies and DNA goes into the water. Yeah. If you were gonna play a real long game and seed life in the universe. And then you were gonna, I mean, especially with us, you were gonna create something that's very sophisticated and encode inside of it enough information that they could figure out everything. Just just gonna take time. You have to earn this information, but it's in there. Yeah. It's such a compelling theory. The problem is I get so wrapped up in these that I hope they're true. And when I hope they're true, I stop thinking critically. Because like, that's the most fun. The most fun to think that we were created by aliens. The most fun to think there's a base on the north side of the moon. But the undeniable stuff that to me is equally compelling, I think, even then the aliens is like, how did they make the pyramids? Like who did that? Who did that? What was that culture like? Right. Like if I could go one place, I would go to Egypt, geese when it's thriving. When it's thriving, whatever, I don't even know what the number is. You know, I don't know if it's a John Anthony West number or if it's a, you know, more conventional number of 4,000, whatever it is. She's just get me there. Just get, let me see what that was. What were you guys doing? Right. How the fuck did you make that thing? How did you get those stones from 500 miles away? How did you cut them so perfectly? How did you get them all the way up in the ceiling of this giant king's chamber? What was that damn thing? Why didn't I have a gold cap on the top? Right. Like what did you guys do? How did you make the gold cap? Like what did you guys do? Wow. I go with the John Anthony West theory. I'm close to his timeframes. Yeah. The rest in peace, John Anthony West. He was amazing. Amazing. Amazing man. Wow. Yeah. Magical Egypt folks. I think there's two versions of the video series. That you can get online. Go find it. It's incredible. The first one I watched like 10 times. Yeah. Yeah. Like this is just the, I mean, forget about speculation, forget about like timelines. Just the undeniable majesty of the construction of those structures and the statues and like what they built was like, my god. Like nothing else. Yeah. Like nothing else in the world. No, one's even a distant second place. No, not even close. Egypt can, I mean, wild. Egypt can just stand above all of it. And it was so long ago. Yeah. That's super ancient. You know, and what I like about John Anthony West, his, his theory aligns with the animal tablets date range because you know, when he talks about the great Sphinx being built two processional periods back. It takes it back to around 36, 38,000 years ago around the same time that Tholt claims to have written the animal tablets. And in these tablets, he talks about building the great pyramid. He said, build it. I have the great pyramid pattern after Earth's force so that it too might remain through the ages. So he claims to be the master architect of the structure of the great pyramid. And what he did was he incorporated into it advanced science. It's not just a power generator. It's also, in my opinion, it also could be a multi functional stone computer. Okay. And this thing calculates the orbits of the planets and the inner solar system, which is crazy. How does it do that? Well, if I have some, can I open up this? This is recent notes. I guess I'm incredible notes that I did some math that I did. I'm amazing. How much you don't need notes? There's a few people that come on this podcast that blow me away without notes. Like Terrors is one of them. Yeah, he's one of me. One to have Rhonda Patrick. She's the other one of them. I just want to get the numbers exact. Okay. So one thing, the equatorial circumference of the Earth can be calculated by the great pyramid because the great pyramid itself is one by 43,200 scaled down. So if you take the great pyramid and scale it up 43,200 times, it fits directly inside the sphere of the earth. And it touches the equator. Okay. So meaning the dimensions of how the angles of it would fit inside of a sphere. Inside of a sphere. It's a representation of the earth in a pyramidal format. Okay. That's crazy. And if you multiply that by the base perimeter, you get 24,734.94 miles, which is roughly within 170 miles of the circumference of the planet Earth itself. Okay. Which is wild. You can also calculate the speed of the earth around the sun. So the great pyramid, basically you take a pyramid inch times 10 to the eighth power. It equals the speed of earth around the sun. That's wild. The problem with these kind of of calculations is a Flint Dibble made note of this that you could take that and you could do that with a lot of different things. Like what was the one he used for 420? 420 and 69. Yeah. It's a bunch of different funny ones. 420. Yeah. Yeah. He was explaining how you take these arbitrary procession of the equinox numbers. And you could multiply them times like whatever you want. You could get a bunch of different results, like based on what you wanted the result to be. Not based on the actual. Some other parts to do, check this out. Forget about multiplying things. What about taking the fact that the pyramid, the great pyramid is located at the center of land mass on earth. Not the center of the earth, the center of land mass. Now the only way you can put the pyramid at the center of land mass is you have to have a polar orbiting satellite. If we were to do it today, a polar orbiting satellite that's orbiting this way. And as earth spins on its axis, you're taking swaths of data and you're calculating the land mass. And then you're going to say, okay, this is the center point for land mass and you put it there. So the center point for land mass being you take the surface of the earth, what percentage of it is covered with water, where the ground is. Right. And then you find the center of where the most ground is. Yes. And that's where the pyramid is. Exactly. Exactly. Is taking all the average heights of all the peaks on earth and then dividing that to get the average height and making that the height of the great pyramid. Now you can't just randomly calculate those numbers. Okay. That's the average height of all the mountains and the peaks on earth. That's right. Wow. That's right. And that's an absolute fact. The grand gallery, the latitude of the grand gallery inside the great pyramid leading into the King's chamber, the latitude are the exact digits of the speed of light in meters per second. You can't just randomly calculate that one. Well, you can't just get those stones down. I mean, there's not one thing about it. I mean, you can get real crazy with numbers and mathematics, but there's not one thing about it that's not completely insane. Like every single aspect of it is completely insane. The fact that we still will try to pretend today that it's not impressive or that it was impressive, but that they did it with sand and they did it with like, how do you know? Well, you would need more mud. If you the mud ramp theory, you would need more mud in mass than the pyramid itself. So that's that's the first. The mud thing. I mean, it's like, just show me one. Yeah. Show me one. Just here's the problem with that mud ramp theory. I don't think people realize I take people on tour to the pyramid every single year. I take people on a huge story. The last year we had 140 people on tour in Egypt for 12 days or whatever it was. But the pyramid itself, each individual stone at the pyramid, each individual stone at the pyramid is a different shape and size. There are no two stones that are perfectly the same. Each stone fits in the interlocking format. So you can't say, go over here and cut these stones. We're going to bring them over here and we're going to throw up this pyramid. It doesn't work that way. Each stone is made individually specifically for the location that it's exactly in because they all have to be in an angle. Because they're going up towards the sand also. And there's a lot of cut perfect. Exactly. So they're interlocking stones and there's, there's no way to say just cut this cookie cutter out and we're going to bring them in hoisted and all of them are perfect. And if you accidentally cut the wrong size or you're off by a few inches, you can't make the pyramid. You can spend a week or two getting a stone to a location that don't fit. It doesn't make any sense. They had four knowledge. People don't take their amount of resources, energy, effort that it took to build that structure and then guessing that it will work out in the end. You only build that if you have a complete blueprint and you've got proven facts. Right. You have proof of concept that it works and you've done this before. Now, what do you think about the other pyramids that are wonky? Like the ones that aren't perfect. Do you think that they were trying to duplicate the great pyramid? Do you think they were trying to make their own? The deeper you go into antiquity, the more perfect construction was, the further you come forward in time, the more wonky and crazy things are on begin to fall apart. So do you think they just forgot how to do it? The knowledge was lost. You can see the evidence of the knowledge. But tell me got to Alexander the Great. Have you ever been to Alexandria? No. I thought I was going to go see this incredible place. It looks like a bunch of crap, a bunch of piles of rocks, buildings leaning on each other, even the people living in apartments that are leaning, buildings leaning. Oh wow. Everything there looks just, it was the what the stones or small. I could pick up those stones with my own hands. They tried to duplicate the majesty of ancient Egypt, but they didn't even come close. It's just so bizarre that one civilization got so much further than everybody else. And no one really knows exactly how they did it. Right. Might yours ahead. Now when you hear the carbon dating of the Great Pyramid, what is your take on that? Because the the radiocarbon dating is 2500 BC. That's what they think. I just don't believe it. Why is that? Well, first of all, the way that the structures made, if you look at other structures made in that same timeframe, they don't have the same majesty. They don't have the same level of construction. They don't have the same capability of with standing time. Right. So why are these falling apart? But this one isn't falling apart. But that's not necessarily because look, you can have a shitty house today and you can live right next to Jeff Bezos's house. That's very true. I mean, it's just there's going to be different cultures and different abilities and and you know different craftsmen. Yeah. Within the same region, I'm talking about the same area. But even in the same area, you're always going to have people that suck. If you look at the subterranean shaft, I don't know if you've ever been there, it descends beneath the Great Pyramid down into the ground on the specific angle about 65 meters. And there's another 30 meter drop straight beneath that. And this is where Christopher Dunn has hypothesized that there was something that was creating a frequency down there, something like pounds in the earth creates a very specific frequency in a very specific vibration that goes through the entire stone structure, which theoretically could work. Oh yeah. Absolutely. And then this whole thing about using different chemicals in these shafts that leak through the limestone and that limestone is porous and you would have a specific amount of thickness with limestone. So you'd know exactly how much chemicals to put in the shafts. And the shafts did exist and they did have openings to them and they were sealed. Yeah. But you could open them up and dump things into them. And then the passage way that goes into the King's Chamber. They're so called King's Chamber. Yeah. And that it has opening shafts that go to the heavens. Yes, I do. And I think I know why my hypothesis on those shafts is that you look at the way the Pyramid of Design, the Queen's Chamber is technology. It seems to be like an electrolysis generating machine to extract hydrogen from water. And Chris Dunn had the same, pretty close to the same hypothesis I had with that. Now why hydrogen? It's the most abundant element in the universe. And right now today we try to communicate with ET on the hydrogen frequency. Now those shafts imagine on the certain alignments we know for a fact that that pyramid aligns with specific planets or stars Orion, El Debron, Draco, these alignments. And then these shafts would send out this hydrogen frequency potentially on my hypothesis around those alignments. Why? For communication purposes updates on this breakway civilization because I believe there was an ancient galactic war which I talk about in my show, my docuseries, Anarnaki. And this ancient war created these space refugees which then spread out around the Milky Way. Earth just happens to be one of the breakway civilizations. It's not outside the realm of possibility when you think about what we're doing. And if we get more advanced and do this better that we could be still involved in very similar types of activities throughout the galaxy. It sounds terrible. But that just might be how things get done. Unfortunately war might just be a part of our essence and it might be a part of the whole cosmic balance of good and evil that the shifting of the winds and this you know of the tides coming in and coming out. It's like this it needs good and bad. It needs all these things. Yeah. Well in the biblical text God says in Isaiah, I create the good and I create the evil. Do what I say at the Lord. Right. The best I will say. He creates good and evil. Yenn and Yang is what they call in ancient cultures. Good and evil dark and light and all the same thing. It's the most fascinating subject to me. It really is. The most fascinating subject is when I hear stories from the Bible or the Bhagavad Gita or the Talmud or any any stories like what was the origin? What were they trying to say? What were they documenting? What were they sharing in an oral tradition of the history of people and of the earth and of the heavens themselves? Like what were they sharing? What were those things? How much of it was myth? How much of it was someone misinterpreted the original story and watered it down. But at the beginning of it, even at the beginning there was light. It's literally like the big bang. It's literally describing what the current scientists believe happened. And then you think about these stories of floods and then we know there's evidence. Like the Randall Carlson work all his work on the flooding that existed where you could see these enormous channels cut through that it's indicative of just insane amounts of water over a short period of time. And when he describes that you're like, what? Then the fact that we know that there's asteroid impacts, there's comet impacts and that the ice age ended abruptly and that all these areas like this is where it was. This is what it went down and this might be every fucking story that you've heard from the beginning of time. Epocha, googamesh, know in the arc all these stories. Yeah, all of them. I mean, obviously the Noah story is inside of the epocha, googamesh. Yes. I believe that is a result of the younger driest incident. And the epocha, epocha, hot seas, there is this, this strike or this either an asteroid or whatever it is. It's just going to hit it doesn't specifically say, but they had the ability to stop it. And there's this other disk that has kunia form riding on it, which is supposedly the direction that this thing took course through space to hit earth. And so it was kind of known that this was going to happen. And everywhere you look on the earth around that same time period that this is estimated to happen, make, make a let the construction stopped. What happened that everyone stopped at the same time unfinished in the quarry, unfinished in the quarry, all of a sudden around the entire planet, everything is unfinished. Something happened globally that made people stop working on these structures and go to maybe Darren, who you underground base or in the, in the Americas that, you know, they say that the ant people, the hope he said the ant people took them under. If you couldn't go under and save yourself, you had a ship, we know old to maybe Darren Cool, you underground base or in the in the Americas that you know they say that the ant people the hope he said the ant people took them under if you couldn't go under and save yourself you had a ship you know that Zia Zirdra and the epic of Gilgamesh was told how to build a ship but it wasn't a boat like what we know of was said in the Bible is actually a disc he was told to build we found the tablet for that so we have the tablet and the British Museum it was an actual disc that looked that looked like pie sections on the inside and he was told to collect his local floor and fauna and his local livestock not two of every kind in the world it didn't get too tickled and too fleas and two it didn't happen you know he had local livestock but he built a disc not a ship which is pretty interesting but yeah these stories are everywhere you know it's pretty crazy it is crazy and it's it's just so strange when you see resistance to the idea while there's still real evidence of this impact yeah once there is real evidence of the impact once the younger tries impact theory started being discussed by legitimate scientists and they recognize when they're doing these core samples that they find nuclear glass and they find all of these things like iridium that are very common in space very rare on earth all this very thin layer it's like it's real clear there's a time where all this shit goes down yeah it and there's also mass die-offs in places and my friend John Reeves have you ever seen the Alaska Boneyard on Instagram no I haven't seen that one wow Jamie pulled that up so he has this piece of land and he's a gold miner in Alaska he's a fucking great character and he has this amazing piece of land that they've pulled out thousands of bones and tusks and woolly mammoths and animals that aren't eat the Boneyard Alaska is his Instagram that put things that weren't even supposed to exist in that that area yeah they have absolute proof of these things existed different cats and short-faced bears and all kinds of shit so they're pulling things out every day he just texted me the other day yeah asked me to come out and blow out a massed on bone I can't make it bro okay I'm busy but I love this dude yeah and what he's doing up there is all his yes his property so he's got it all documented he's got warehouses he spent millions of dollars doing all this stuff yeah and his one area it's only a few acres man wow it's only a few amazing was really up there imagine what's really up there and what he thinks is that there was a mass die-off that probably happened instantaneously and all these things got swept in the water yeah and and wash down into this one particular area where they collected and that's where he's finding that makes sense so he's got two very specific areas that aren't that big yeah just a few acres each I think the biggest one is like six acres wow it's crazy and so they're using these high pressure hoses and they shoot into the permafrost and they look because it's you know it's cold it's like everything is just frozen into the ground right so they blast into the permafrost and start to loosen things up and show some of the images of the warehouses that yes I mean in the same amounts of tusks and bones wow and there's even more than this the the what is the museum in New York that has his bones natural history museum from the previous owners of this property they they took a bunch of these bones and they wind up dumping some of them in the East River because they had too many of them oh man so then they've sent out people what is his name dirty water Dan Don dirty water Don dirty water Don who's this fucking scuba diver guy who goes into the East River who found woolly mammoth bones and what would the other one bison bones all these different bones at the bottom of the fucking East River exactly where he said they would be dumped off wow so they dumped them because they had so much of them and then they have a bunch of them that are still there so now they have a last in politicians who are pressuring the museum to release these things back to these people so they can get them in the hands of people that could fucking study them right because they just have them locked up and they're just trying to say that they're there first they tried to deny they have them then he provided paperwork and there's proof and then they denied there was ever any dumped into the East River but now they pulled them out of the East River now they know it's real so look at this that's incredible that's a that's an incredible graveyard this is insane Wow boning he calls when you help your it's a bone yard so if you go there you become a boner so he wants to make me an official boner so all these bones I mean this is just a small sampling of what this guy has we have one out there we have a bison head wow that he gave me well so on yeah that is that is that's a little leave here yeah there's probably 15,000 years old yes well I mean that's crazy so things insane look at all this stuff these got I mean it's just and this is just one small area that they're chipping away at a few acres so and there's charred surface there's a layer that they go through that's all completely charred and he's documented this too like what the fuck happened here look at this layer this layer is insane this whole place was up in flames see the chari's got it in there goes there's thick layers of that could scroll up to his caption what does it say something came in hot from out of this world I'm thinking what you're looking at is what we found on the bedrock and we're digging the the drain the bedrock is burned the gravel is burned and nobody knows why yet that's okay we'll figure it out someday so there's a whole layer of this is clearly something was on fucking fire definitely well we found charred stones just like that at the base ejected out from the base of the bent pyramid of doja real and if you look at this we've been documenting this I'm putting in my tv show you know the anaunky series there's areas of the bent pyramid that look like they've been blown out something hit it and blew out the stones and charred them black like just like that and there's like a debris field out there and nobody's studying this stuff so we started studying these these charred stones these charred rocks and up above the area where you kind of walk in to go down into the bent pyramid there's more look like another impact point where there's more stones blown away and as you walk out away from the face you discover that's where they lay and you put your hand in the sand and pull up these charred burnt stones which is just wild so can we see some of that see what those like look at the bent pyramid the bent pyramid that anybody goes to those corners this is a common theory this theory of it being hit by something nobody's talked about it you know this why I'm trying to and we're trying to analyze and see what could have happened a piece hit there yeah but like the bigger impact where somewhere else right just wiped everything something comes in it breaks into chunks yeah and then a piece it's over here yeah see that corner there you see that corner now that corner you know which we can get a better color picture but there's a debris field there all those stones are just it looks like an impact and there's out away from it there's charred burnt rocks in the sand you pick up a regular piece of rock you can see what that is a geode you put it up these it looks like charred burnt stone that came from the pyramid zone I like to see the image of the charkers to me when I'm looking at that it's just like people are stealing rocks yeah you get yeah yeah but you know that that's exactly what it looks like but that's not stealing rocks there and the guide the home grown archaeologist that was with its mahamadi brim has the same exact belief because we are able to see the broken those areas there the massive what's missing majority of it's in the sand which is why I would send you the photo oh okay so it wasn't stolen yeah it's knocked off yeah it's there it's still there so I'll send you the photo that would be added please click on the one to the left of your cursor yeah that one thank you can you make that one bigger I see yeah so all that got blown apart it's blown apart and the it's the mass is still there a lot of it turned into dust and powder but the dark the black pieces are further towards would be further toward me can you tell us where we could find images of those the charred I have some can you show them to jammy or send them to you right away absolutely you can't air draw because you use and foreign technology not even yeah we'll just download them an email to you but we want to be able to do it there are a little photo drive right now could you just send it to him yeah you an email would do it right now absolutely okay jammy we give me an email we'll pause it for a second photo of these images we're going to know okay so we left off with the burnt pyramid areas that look like they've been hit yeah and he said so we we got the photographs from your wife so let's take a look at them here so this is a video yeah so I'd have the videos because they were gonna give me screenshots from the videos yeah so I figured we just look at the videos instead there's one that's kind of more zoomed in but yeah sorry to start to get the idea of the coloration the discoloration there from no resolution you know phone video do we have any other videos or is just videos jammy we have photos oh okay there's some of those areas there that's those black areas on the stone if you rub them they get very black underneath there's also other piece that are smaller laying further out there so there's charred areas that have been covered with dust and sand over time right exactly if you brush it off you see a chart you see those dark areas there on those yeah that's not the color that's not the natural color at all those colors there and the geologist and the homegrown guide they'll be using the archaeologists also said that's not the normal coloration they don't know what energetically happened here okay so now I see it I see it in that stop right there I see in that stone right there as well so it charred and then over the thousands of years covered with dust and sand but you dust off the dust and sand you see a chart surface right oh yeah which is crazy well that does kind of make sense of a little chunk hit that and a bunch hit some other spots and that was just yeah and it also makes sense if you think about how an advanced civilization like that can just disappear what would it would have to be the moment it just doesn't make any sense I know there's the burning of the library of Alexandria where they lost a lot of the information but I think there might have been a book heist really yeah I think the burning of the library of Alexandria was the heist the burning did happen don't get me wrong but that was just a distraction to steal the knowledge and that the majority of that knowledge ended up in the back of the archive I know I did you see the Vatican that's what I've had it is one of my favorites yeah that's one of my favorites I went there with my family a few years back and I was blown away and I highly recommend it to anybody that that gets to go to Rome if you go to Rome please go to the Vatican it's stunning yeah it's stunning all the artwork they have and they also have an Egyptian obelisk yes right you know that obelisk that courtyard is the same courtyard as Teotihuacan if you look at Teotihuacan not to dimensions but just the actual shape of that courtyard it matches the courtyard of Teotihuacan so really yeah it's an incredible coincidence that they built it based on the Teotihuacan where the avenue of the dead has those platforms and then you have the pyramid of the sun on the right and the pyramid of the moon straight ahead that area resembles the courtyard of the Vatican wow the Vatican is so insane it it really I didn't know I knew that it had a lot of art I didn't know it did it's outrageous when you go to St. Peter's Basilica you just like what what did you do yeah how much time do this this is so intricate and so incredible I know there's one of the most spectacular things I think I've ever seen in my life in terms of like what human beings can do with ingenuity and time and artisans and craftsmen and people that artisans that just create the most insane ceiling you've ever seen in your life so intricate yeah I mean and perfect for a house of worship because you walk in there you believe in God like immediately right like this is obviously so grand is God yeah exactly and the fact that they did it for so long they're hundreds of years to make that place I know it's incredible it's so amazing let's you know that there's time periods where people would operate within a golden age in certain regions of the planet and have time to do that type of extensive art and craft and beauty create that kind of beauty right and the only way you do that is when you got your resources covered in your army strong that's it and that was Rome yeah I mean that's that's what they were back then they tried to take over the world yeah and the thing about what they're what they have is they don't have to kind of tell you yeah like you know so if they do like there's archives that they have in Rome that have them in search like we're not they're not just opening them up to everyone right that everyone could look in and see what they have so there's always been speculation that they have some wild chit written down in there yeah some wild stuff I mean they're investigating aliens you know right I mean one of the Pope's most recent speech in the Thomas you know they were talking about years ago though here we're talking about years ago that they wanted to the Pope wanted to baptize the first alien now that's the credible that's an incredible statement that we like to meet you Kaku into a scientist right it's like that would be hilarious that would be hilarious and then they built this telescope called Lucifer to look for alien life that's not a good name yeah you would think out of anybody who would know better right the light bearers that you know what Lucifer means supposedly but yeah they built the telescope named Lucifer right but the swastika used to be a side of peace right you can't really use it anymore that you can't use it I know I know right yeah it's like things could be stolen forever no one's rocking that Hitler mustache that's a wrap it's over it's over and it's over no one's getting called Adolph that's over that's over you know that's right I guess they they they they didn't want to you know cut that name loose but they utilized that name for that the name of that and it's actually in America I believe it's in Arizona really yeah no kidding wow Lucifer telescope oh kooky I know all of the telescopes are fascinating but the what's really the most interesting to me is the James Webb and the information that's coming out about the birth of the cosmos and about how they're looking at these galaxies that seem too big that they form too quickly and that they're starting to reexamine the timeline of the big bang and then they're reconsidering whether or not they were correct with this 13 point what is it not 13 point five to 13 point eight billion year yeah and they think these galaxies should not exist in this I was just watching a documentary on it yesterday or a couple days ago where where they were getting into why this doesn't make sense and the size of these galaxies and yeah they were too formed right it was I believe it was 500 million years after the big bang right like this doesn't make sense yeah according to us now according to us right yeah you know we still trying to figure out what dark matter is right well I'm just the terence Howard the the concept of stars creating planets and the planets eventually getting to a goldilocks zone then eventually getting out and then this is how life propagates through the universe like it makes so much sense yeah and with our limited understanding of the cosmos and our adherence to very specific ideas of how it always created and the resistance the things like even the James Webb telescope discoveries yeah you realize that like science like everything else it's when it's practiced by humans humans fuck everything up yeah they use their ego they use arrogance they they don't want to be corrected they want their initial ideas to be correct and then there's you know a lot of great scientists that are just looking at it and going this is amazing like let's let's keep doing this and let's get an even better telescope out there that maybe could see even further and maybe we'll have to re-examine what we think about the birth of the universe exactly I mean it just keeps getting better technology keeps getting better I remember Hubble when it came back with the two trillion sky book two trillion galaxies is what it estimated exists within our known universe and then the web comes out and it's just showing this stuff in much more clarity and it's probably going to make discoveries that are even going to surpass obviously Hubble in terms of the quantity of galaxies and just keeps getting better and better we're getting a bigger and better understanding of our place in the universe as a whole and some people are scared of that this is why they don't want it to get out they don't want the information to be put forth that's going to change the paradigm but the paradigm is not to be afraid the paradigm shift is about to be embrace embrace this new huge part of us that's connected directly to us we're part of it and it's part of us intrinsically energetically and I think people are just afraid of what they think is the unknown because it makes them feel small when I hear all the stuff going on out there it makes me feel bigger because I know that I am part of it yeah we are part of it yeah we like to think as individuals right you know oh my god I'm not important the universe is infinite exactly universe is not just infinite it's so infinite that the infinite nature of the universe might be a part of an atom right in another infinite universe that's the fraco hauler universe yeah when you when you go fractals on things and you start thinking about it in that terms you just you know what yeah it's never ending it's just this constant thing that's in you in subatomic particles and deeper than that and then further out than that it just never ends right it goes both ways forever yeah yeah you just go oh boy I know it's hard to take yourself too seriously it's this and it's hard because I think individuality I think individuality is an illusion we have we appear to be separate and individuals but energetically we're really all the same entity that same consciousness experiencing itself differently subjectively through different bodies yes different life experiences exactly different places in the world right yeah but we're all the same thing you know and you know that's the hardest thing for people to get in their head anyone that you run into is you living another life right we're all the the concept of me when you think about it everyone has that same feeling of me everyone has me inside of them just me with less information more information better brain better this better that shittier the shittier that there's an infinite number of examples of it and then it's probably exist everywhere in the cosmos and it's probably what facilitates change and growth is that there is this imbalance and there is this constant struggle amongst human beings right that's probably what makes us constantly try to improve it's just very disheartening to think that we improve to the point where we can travel other planets and have a war I know I know we don't want that to happen that's we don't want it to happen but just if it really did happen here it just makes you think like is that just what we do forever and is this just when we have this utopian perspective of being able to eliminate war on earth someday which no one thinks is going to happen and not with this current version of human beings right and then you think well if we we've surpassed earth if we passed out if we passed our genes and our civilization out into the universe are we still going to be behaving the same way right and if we were I if I was an alien I'd be like don't let those dudes in you know if we get to a point where we're us now but 500 years from now right with the same genes yeah blacky ass crazy genes but now we have time travel now we have interplanetary travels like that and then we show up with nuclear bombs they give us all your titanium right you know like fuck you know like that's a problem yeah that would be problem I would be really trying hard to stop us yeah I was from another planet I think a lot of a lot of these suppression and oppression of technologies potentially this hypothesis could be that there there's a hand in the background holding us back a little bit mmm it's quite possible but then there's a theory like the Diana Pissocos books where they talk about these discs that they have found and the recovery program that apparently does exist there's they call them donations they think that these things are kind of left here yeah so that we can just go oh fiber optic sort of a great idea Velcro oh yeah there's a lot of these things that seem to like transistor ships right yeah a lot of these things seem to have come very quickly after Roswell yeah which is interesting that's the fact I believe in the ARVs alien reproduction vehicles I believe that exactly is what's really going on with a lot of these UAPs I think that there are a lot of them are ours I believe that there's UFOs out there but a lot of these objects that we see in the sky are probably made by us by re engineering existing alien technology and so but you know it comes sort of point are we going to be able to advance as a civilization to get beyond war and I just saw they release an AI fighter jet that went to a dog fight yes just a few weeks ago yeah Mike Baker was on here showing us that right it beats the beats the human piloted planes 100% of the time yeah yeah that's a wrap that's kind of it yeah that's going in the online and then on top of that instead of just AI powered fighter jet you could develop a fighter jet that no longer has a person in it so you have to worry about g forces right you do wild shit yes yes exactly it is fully AI controlled vehicle especially as these technology scale up like I have a Tesla and my Tesla has auto drive and I can set in a destination like restaurant I like to go to press auto drive and navigation and it does everything it hits the blinkers it stops at stop signs it stops at red lights it takes turns it changes lanes it moves around park vehicles it's fucking wild man and it's not done yet this is the beginning that does hit curbs or hurt it's curbs I heard like when you're taking turns like for all over passes or under passes oh man like a few people have curved up so keep your hands on the wheels kids yeah but it's not there yet but it's a lot better than what when I first got it I remember I was driving down Laurel Canyon and I was with my wife and I was playing around I was like I have like we're blessing the lead zeplet and I'm like moving my my hand around the steering I'm like look at this car's driving itself this is crazy but that was primitive back then I didn't totally trust it it was probably better than I thought it was but like every now and then it would get a little wonky now it's smooth wow now it's you use it or all Jamie here and there I kind of almost forget sometimes where it is like oh yeah this car drives this fucking cell I do it for goof sometimes yeah it's just randomly I've been doing it a lot lately though yeah it's shockingly good well grandkids are gonna that's all they're gonna know 100% they won't have to drive at all yeah but right now like like people joke around about manual cars that it's a good theft deterrent device have a manual transmission nobody knows how to drive that fucking thing this is hard yeah well used to be the only way you get a car I was it I learned I learned to buy accident you know because I was an emergency situation and I had to drive up my friend's car that was a manual I had to learn within the distance between where I was to where I had to go oh wow because one of my kids they got hurt doing something and the only car that was a manual that was it yeah it's hard I mean you could learn it quick but most people don't know how to do it but the thing is like that's going away like they're they're now saying that the next version of porsches it's going to be the last version they have with a manual transmission and all yeah all which is crazy because porsches that was the one thing that people held on to was that you could get that stick shift to be the love that engagement of the car right but that's gonna be the thing of the past everything's gonna be automated because your freedom to drive that people are gonna you know the communist nature of especially California they'll do it first probably your freedom to drive that is not worth you know the potential of you taking someone's life in an accident right you know and this is make sense that's part of the problem it does make sense you can see the argument oh yeah it makes sense and that's where everything's gonna come in there's gonna be so many I mean drivers are gonna disappear like you know show first and so forth it's all yeah it's all gonna go away there's a lot of that in here they cause traffic jams these wacky driverless cars you know they have them here and they're not quite there yet but they're good enough to take people around which is crazy you know take me to red ash drives you to the restaurant drops you out bye thank you all in an app everything's done simple it's kind of nuts and it's just the beginning I mean we didn't have any of this 10 years ago now 10 years in most time periods is not that big of a deal technology no with technologically rather yeah right now it's a fast well chat cheek be D5 when they it's gonna be as big a leap if not bigger than three to four and three to four was nuts yeah I mean in a hundred years we went from a horse buggy and carriage all the way to putting remote control cars on Mars yeah we're moving at an extremely fast pace right now and they just released this chat cheek PT and other robotics on on humanity which is great it's gonna do a lot of good for us but at the same time if you're gonna replace somebody's job you have to then take away their financial responsibilities you can't expect them to still have the financial responsibilities and take away the job right so that's gonna be the conundrum I'm waiting to see how that's gonna pan out how many of us are gonna stand up and say look wait a minute now I got my mother I'm a single mother of three and I can't wait for us anymore so what's gonna happen or even attorneys are at risk nurses are at risk now so well here's what they're gonna do there's enough money in this country just in this country alone to if you did replace jobs you'd make it so that whatever controls that industry has to give a certain percentage to ensure not just like a living wage but a good wage where people live well and they don't have to think about it but then you got to give people a purpose because you can't just have them laying around getting free money and not having a life because a lot of people their purpose is their job you know that's what they look forward to they get engaged with something they have a community there they have tasks that they do they succeed they go out to dinner and celebrate that's a big part of life for people you can't just take that away so then how does that get replaced right I think it's video games I think they just they're gonna go to cyberworld yes when you look into the ancient texts they had similar situations in these golden ages but people spent time working for things like service to others traveling arts and crafts exploring inner peace so it's about teaching people's new people new ways to define and develop their passions and how to explore those passions that would be a big yoga explosion of the country that would be great yeah people get into fitness martial arts and just be able to do but you have to do something right if you're I mean well if you become stagnant you die yeah and you still should have the ability to possibly work if you want to yeah right it shouldn't be mutually exclusive like you don't get this money unless if everybody got like 200 grand a year just imagine the entire country just gets a 300 to 200 grand a year you're never gonna have to worry about food you're never gonna have to worry about a place to live you're good yeah you got two hundred thousand dollars a year because everything's automated everything's done by the government then you're gonna have to find something right you gotta find a purpose you're gonna it's gotta be a thing that you whether it's art or writing or whatever it it's better find something you're gonna go crazy yeah and then there's gonna be a percentage of our population that's active they're gonna be working out and there's gonna be a bunch of us that just fuck off and drink beer and play call to do you just sit down yeah just get hammered and fucking order pizza and never have to do anything yeah live in a nice place you don't have to worry about money ever yeah you could always buy a good laptop and you get together with your buddies and you all play games but you better have something go balding you better have something better have something you like to do yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah that's where that's where it's going though wouldn't that be better than work because for most people like you know there's a great satisfaction working and accomplishing a hard days work and you know you get your paycheck and you feel like you've accomplished something but wouldn't it be better if you just all of your needs were met yeah yeah and we put an emphasis in our culture on creating and doing things that interest you and whether it's competition or whether whatever it is but this will be financed essentially by this ability that you just get free money because robots control everything they have plenty of more jobs more jobs me they don't have to pay a salary to these robots on the care costs exactly management costs obviously so yeah and the two hundred thousand dollars that everybody gets they're getting it anyway because they're gonna buy stuff from them exactly exactly it would be a wild change and shift in how human beings interact and if if there was a way for us to channel that at a positive manner it could ultimately be beneficial and we could be looking back on these days where people are working Wendy's and what the fuck was that about yeah well most people are working in jobs that are not they're not passionate right these jobs right and it's evident in their work you know their effort in their short work ethics also evident in their success right and they're happiness right like you got like you who likes to do you do what you like you enjoy this you pursue this you talk about this you're very good at it this is a great way to live yeah and other people can find other similar things or different things that similarly excite them yeah and if we were under that new scenario of 200,000 a year whatever was I would still do this you know so of course people will work it's like Star Trek they work for free on Star Trek they don't you know it's just a TV series but they don't have a paycheck Kirk didn't get paid no they never got paid any money it was all for free communists they were trying to listen to communists all for free but they did it because they were passionate about it and they believed in it so much and so there's things that people can still do if they're passionate about those things and you know it's just work but you don't ask for a paycheck right if there was a base paycheck for the whole country just a base paycheck based on I wonder if 200 grams even possible what is 200,000 dollars times 333 million check that out Jamie what's it only only a hundred ninety million or adults 190 million adults right that's right let's just make let's be generous let's make it 200 million adults yeah so 200 million times 200,000 is what so be two times two is four add add all the zeros from the the 200,000 onto the four million right what is that in like the word is it trillions 200,000 times 200 million Is it trillions? 200,000. 200,000 times 200 million. So six zeros is a billion. No, six zeros is a million. Nine zeros is a trillion of billions. It's giving me 4E, 13. So it's 4 or 13 zeros. 13 zeros. 4, 13. 4 times 13 zeros. It's a lot of money, folks. Good enough to drain these oligarchs. Whoa. Whoa. Tax the rich. What was the numbers? 200,000 times 200 million. 40 billion, that doesn't sound right. That is going to be... You have 40 billion or 400 billion. It's 40 billion dollars. 40 billion, that's it? That's reasonable. That's reasonable. That's so reasonable. That's so reasonable. That's less than the military industrial complex budget for the year. 100%. Imagine that, folks. I just want you to think about that. We could give 200 million people $200,000 a year. That's a good amount of money. $200,000 is nice. You can live in a nice house, go on vacation, you can eat well. $200,000. Not bad at all. Not bad at all. And if you did that, you could also still work. You could also still make money. But everybody, if we just elevated every adult in this country to that amount of money. It will be kicked off in communist. No, no, I'm talking. Everything's going to be automated, folks. And there should be some sort of attacks on the result that this has on society, particularly when if everything is automated, the people who run the automation and they're going to be making staggering amounts of money. So if attacks of 40 billion dollars a year to keep everybody happy, keep everybody from going fucking crazy, that might be... It sounds crazy. Because it goes against human instincts, right? Human nature is... It's our program yet. What we've been programmed to believe is correct. And it's not because we were designed to mine for gold. That's right. Designed to work hard, right? Designed to work hard, man. Because it's kind of in our head that we have to work hard. Listen, we're so programmed to believe what happened in ancient times that we believe the government is in control of us and we're in the control of the government. We allow them to tell us what to do when we should be telling them what to do and what we want. But we sit back and allow them to put rules in place, laws on us, and even law enforcement and do things to us. And there's nothing we can do about it. But people think there's nothing we can do. There is something we can do. We've given up our power. We've relinquished our power to an outside source because of dividing concrete allows it to work. Once we realize that dividing concrete is just a distraction that we should coordinate together and organize, then we can take back control of this planet. Yeah. And this idea of the government being in control of you is literally how it works with every single country in the world. It's just a natural course of human nature that the people in power want more power. When you're selling skateboards, you want to sell more skateboards next year. When you're in power, you don't want to relinquish some of your power and make it better on the people. You want to clamp down that power more. We had to get on Facebook and stop these people from tweeting about things or posting about things. We have to become a problem. Let's put pressure on this company to censor certain voices on YouTube. Exactly. That's really what happens because they're not acting in the best interests of humanity. They're acting in their best interests, which is what every industry does when it's just trying to make money. Exactly. Well, the United States is a company. It's a corporation. Right. And so they're acting like a corporation. That's the reality of it. I agree with you too about this UAP thing, UFO, UAP. Just many people have said this, but I'll repeat it. There's something about them doing it always near where military bases are. Yes. It's super suspicious. Come on. Listen, to me, what's going to happen or what potentially could happen, another Gulf of Tunken incident, you know, that it's been created to be at the Vietnamese war. They lied about an attack at the Gulf of Tunken. False flag. To create the Vietnamese war. Yeah, exactly. So all of a sudden, you see one of these UAPs that are going to call it one of these not ours. We don't know who's it is. And then it attacks a Navy vessel. And now they've got the right to say we need $10 trillion here, whatever the number is, to create these after Iran. Yeah. Whatever. And it generates more money. So could this be why the formation of the space forces here so that they can find a way to channel money into something else where these private corporations can create these black budget projects that we've approved because we're afraid we're going to be attacked by aliens now. And then they take that money and they develop these projects that never see the light of day and they all chop up the money behind the scenes. Yeah. That's the reality of the world. We live in folks. If you're clinging on to this left versus right, this are these cultural war arguments. You are getting caught up in their bullshit game. Most people want the same thing. They want to be healthy. They want their family to be healthy and happy. They want to have a pursuit that they enjoy. They want to enjoy their community and enjoy their loved ones. That's what most people want. Most people want the same thing. Most of the shit that you're seeing has all been stirred up by foreign governments and special interest groups and a bunch of shit. And if you're online, they're spoon feeding it to you. If you're online and you're engaging on social media, they're shoving that down your throat every day. Gaslighting you every day. It's more and more obvious now that it's ever been before because people at least are aware of it. They know what's going on, but it is shocking how much of it is going on. And it's allowing us to fight with each other while all this shit is going on behind the scenes and all these hundreds of billions of dollars. When we talked about $40 billion a year, what is the amount of money we spent so far in Ukraine? What's the, they continue to raise it, right? They just approved a new batch of money that's headed over there. It's insane amounts of money. I'm not sure it's incredible. Yeah. And we have infrastructure falling apart here. People on this, I just came from LA a few weeks ago. People on the streets of LA. Okay. So Congress passed five bills, appropriating 175 billion in response to Russia's February 22 of Asian view of Ukraine. So this is the May 9th of 2024, which is the most recent. So 175 billion, that could have solved all poverty in America. Literally solved poverty, which is wild. But if poverty and crime are number one problem in this country, which I would say they are, that would solve our number one problem. And crime is, is this a side effect of the poverty? Yes. And you know, I always said this, if Haliburton can get these no bid contracts to clean up Iraq after we bomb it, and it's for profit. Right. So they make a lot of money doing that. How about a no bid contract to clean up terrible neighborhoods? Exactly. No build contract to a no bid contract rather to develop community programs. And will they'll be funded through the state. You'll make a ton of money. Mm hmm. And you can do this. And also you'll have a ripple effect. You'll have a less crime. You'll have more people that are out there in the workforce. You have more people that are being productive. More people that are inventing things, creating music and culture and art and all kinds of other things that people like to do when they're not getting locked up and fucking jail. Exactly. And then you just have to figure out a way to get off the grip of the military or the rather prison industrial complex, which has a vested interest in keeping people locked up. Yeah. Because that's what they, the idea that we let that happen. I know. We let it be profitable to put people in fucking jail. And then we let the prison guards actively campaign to make sure that certain laws stay in place so that people keep getting locked up for non-violent crimes. Yeah. 40% of the people that are locked up in America are locked up on victimless crimes. Yeah. They only hurt themselves. It's so nuts. And the amount of money that's generated by private prisons, that should be zero. Yeah. It should be zero dollars. Right. It should be no incentive to put people in a cage. Yeah. You can't have capitalism and everything. Capitalism has to be broken into pieces. You can't have it in medicine, healthcare, prison systems. No. Right. Imagine if that was the way with the fire department. Imagine if you had to pay to get your house right, put out. Right. Wow. That's one thing that we exist that we rather accept rather universally that we pay for. Yeah. It's a socialist idea. The fire department is paid for by the state. And we need fire department people. We need everybody well trained and all the equipment to be working perfectly. We all agree to that. Why? Because it's a real dilemma. It makes sense. How is poverty? Yeah. So's crime. And mental health. And mental health. Yeah. And people on the street are mentally ill. And giving kids guidance, having community programs and having education programs and giving people an avenue where they can get out from where they are and see a path to success so they don't feel despair. Yeah. They have a possibility and show and have it be run by people already made it through. I say, I can help you just like you could teach someone how to play piano, or you could teach someone a door 30. You could teach people how to live a life. That's right. Yeah, and it cost a lot less than what it cost in the Ukraine. And how much would it benefit our economy? How much would it benefit our culture, our society? How much more would get done if there was less crime? A lot more. And then those people have all, instead of being criminals, now they're contributors. Yeah. There's enough for everybody. And a civilization grows the way it should grow. Yes, the way it should grow. The way the world's the direction. The problem is it's been captured. It's been captured by elites that want to keep draining money. And they keep draining money and using it for their own needs and their own means. And it's terrifying. That's why I call it polytrix. Polytrix, that's what it's called. Yeah, we made a pretty bad math error. Oh, 40 trillion. 40 trillion. That's much more than a shoe. Ladies and gentlemen, I retrained with buck. We're never going to have enough money to fix this problem. I forgot what I said. Which is our GMP. What is our, yeah, but that's a problem too, because that creates inflation. What's our GDP? Boy, it's big down to $40 trillion and $40 billion. How many people are yelling at the computer? Oh, I got a few full ingredients. I worked backwards. One of the things it did says $875, like, wait, that is not enough to get everybody out of here. That's hilarious. GDP increased in 2020 to 27.36 trillion. That's our GDP every year. Oh, so we don't even have enough money. Because it would take double our GDP. That's the 200K if you want to go to 200K. Yeah. Well, you have to give people, and it's only 200 million people. It's not even everybody. Yeah. Right. That's why I $4,000. So we're fucked. A back to where fucked. You just cut it down. I've got a half you could do it. If you do it, you could cut it even then. If you have it, like $80,000, and then let people work to earn their own money and other things. Yeah, 200K was a little off the game. OK, so if it's $40 trillion, you could get it down to $15 trillion. It's still most of the money we make. It's still a lot. It's going to increase, though, significantly in the next 10 years because of the AI. Right. Yeah. All the chips and robots. When a company can lay off like Amazon lay off 1,000 people and replace them with 1,000 robots, this profit profit margin goes up significantly within the first eight to 10 years. Yeah. What, if anything, is being done to provide a safety net? Because you can't give people 200 bucks a week. Whatever it is, it's got to be a significant amount of money to actually get by. Whatever that number is, whatever we decide that number is. The number could be less if things are covered, like if AI becomes so efficient at creating power, we have it in our head that power must be paid for. But if AI becomes so efficient and eliminates jobs that we decide that we're going to nationalize all of our power. And then we'll look at power the same way we were looking at the fire department. And we set it up as a socialist power system, which is not the worst idea in the world if you consider that most power is being generated by the use of natural resources, which really belong to the earth. And that individuals are pulling these out and profiting from them wildly, especially when they're doing offshore oil drills, like who owns that spot? Yeah, no. How are you able to just suck all that oil and make billions of dollars out of the ground that we all live on? It seems like that should be everybody's. But then you lose the incentive for profit that allows you to go drip. True. It loses instead of, yeah, I think that everything is going to move, not everything, but a lot of power is going to move towards hydrogen. That's the big new push. The Navy has vessels now that run off of hydrogen, so they never have to go refuel. Do you know that Bob Bazzar made a hydrogen Corvette in 1990? Wow, incredible. That's psycho. Yeah. Wow. Yeah, he made it. He was such a freak. Wow. He is such a freak. But Bob, I love that dude. I'm fascinated by him, and I don't know if he's telling the truth, but boy, I hope he does. He is. But one of the crazy stories about him was in the Los Alamos Labs days when he was living there in New Mexico. He developed a rocket-powered Honda. So he put a jet engine on a fucking Honda. Wow. A lot of time on this answer. Well, he's just a genius. Yes, a genius. He's an absolute genius. Look, he talked about element 115 before we discovered element 115. Yes. So that's what sold me on him. Well, he also has never really varied from his story. And to tell a story for more than 30 years until the exact same story is pretty strange. And also didn't really profit off of it. No. He's not like a thing that he's selling Bobble as our T-shirts and Bobble's always right baseball hats and constantly going on podcast. No, he did my podcast. I don't even know if he's done another one. I don't know. I know he got a lot of hell for it. Yeah. I'll try to get him rid of that one again. But he's working on it. Well, during the Jeremy Corbelle documentary, the FBI rated him, which is insane. It's insane. Why do you think that they believe that he has a stable version of element 115 that he has a sample of one? Yeah. And so he thinks that's what they want looking for. They love to get their hands on that. Because the decay rate so fast. Well, the video that George Nap had, there's a video that George Nap had from a long time ago where he was demonstrating with George Nap how this element when bombarded with radioactivity could distort gravity. And he showed some, he had some experiment that they did that we could show with light. And I don't know exactly remember what the parameters of the experiment were, but that thing is one of the things that could Vince George Nap that maybe he's telling the truth. And this whole thing is crazy. And then when you see like these images where it shows these crafts behaving as he described that this gravity projection generator of whatever it is, his gravity generator, whatever this thing is, whatever they weren't exactly sure how to, because they at least back then in 89. But that you would turn towards where you wanted to go, sideways. And that's how it would travel. And they saw these videos of these crafts doing that, rotating. Yeah. By fighter jets. So fighter jets are locked in on them with these high speed sensors and they're locking in. And there's like a video where they go, finally I got it locked in. And they're like, look at it go. Yeah. Yeah. See me find that video, because that video is one of my favorites, because the pilots are so genuinely excited about this. When they finally lock it in, I think that's the go fast. Go fast, go fast. The go fast. Walker. And they're like, whoo. We got it. We got it locked in. Like what the fuck is this thing? Have you researched any of the bananas from the ancient texts? Yes. That's very, very fast. Yeah. Because the in the bakabakita and what is this the one? Yeah. Yeah, this is it. And in the Mahabharata, they talk about these flying crafts. What is this? What you're about to hear is actually US fighter pilots, powerful Raytheon. Good display pod display. How come I'm not hearing any voices? Oh, there it goes. There it goes. Oh, there's just explaining how the display works. It's great, Raytheon display and how these fighter jets are using this to try to lock in on this thing. So look how it zooms in. They see it pass by. It's going so fast. They're trying to lock in on it. But they're having a hard time. So they keep adjusting and they're trying to get their sensors. Boom. So they got it. Yeah. Now they're excited. Yeah. What the fuck is that? What is that? Like what the fuck is that? Right. Wow, man. What is that? Like I said, I just see these things and I go back to the, like the, you know, the Vomanas. They ran on a ferrofluid vortex engine. That's how it was described. Yeah. Ferrofluid. So they had liquid, my ferrofluid. Ferrofluid, which is liquid metal. And so they put liquid metal in. Is that how do you spell that? F-E-R-R-O ferro. Ferro. We still have a ferrofluid lamp. Yeah. Really? Remember, I bought you that one thing. You like put a magnet on it. Oh, yeah. Where is that? Is that an storage store? So these are ferrofluid. So you put, if you take a tourist, we're gonna do one, Jamie, or someone. If you take a tourist and you put a ferrofluid like mercury inside of it and you magnetize the tourist in a way that creates this rotation, this RPM of the, of the mercury moving around that field and you get it up to about 60,000 RPMs and then you actually pressurize the tourist to about 250,000 atmospheres. And you electrify it, you get antigravity properties. What? Yeah. So you can create an antigravity flying device utilizing that technique and this is really well known. And how do they describe it in the text? And it's actually talk about the fact that it used mercury in a rotating disc. Really? And then they have some of the flight plans and some of the layout of actually the plans of the actual ship itself, one of the ships. And so from that, you can almost hypothesize a backward engineer what it might have been able to do. And in the text, it says they used to take a compliment of men to many worlds. So this is incredible technology. A compliment of men to many worlds. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. So do you think that the government has access to something similar to that? Oh, I believe so. 1,000% I believe they've been backwards engineering information from ancient texts. And of course, any artifacts that they've found from anywhere in the world, they might have even gotten information from Saddam Hussein's museum. Because that's the first place we went. And the Gulf, after the whole situation happened with wanting to go take him out of power and kill him, they went straight to the museum. So this is the gym. You just pulled the sub, it says flying with pharaoh fluids to solve this problem. Elbrad King, Ron and Elaine Star, Professor in Space Systems at Michigan Tech, is creating a new kind of microthruster that assembles itself out of its own propellant when excited by a magnetic field. The tiny thruster requires no fragile needles and is essentially indestructible. We'll work with unique material called ionic fluid pharaoh fluid. King says, explaining that it's both magnetic and ionic a liquid salt. When we put a magnet underneath a small pool of pharaoh fluid, it turns into a beautiful hedgehog structure of aligned peaks. When we apply a strong electric field to that array of peaks, each one emits an individual microjet of ions. Yeah. Exactly. You have to electrify. Once you electrify it, you create this electromagnetic activity. This is what it looks like in. Yeah, this is not two screws. I think it's just transverse. They're just giving you how it transfers itself. Wow. And so you could use that as something that could propel a device. Yes. Absolutely. Wow. And you don't get to reduce the gravity, the weight of an object is zero, but you significantly reduce the weight of an object. And the fact that they figured this out and that it's in, Mahabharata or the Bhagavad Gita? And the Mahabharata. Wow. And then also I think we just want to count in the Vedas. Like, what is the definition? Like, what's the explanation for how they figured that out? Like, help me out. They help me out. How they say they have flying cities. They said that they say they have flying cities. And these cities would go to a battle sometimes against each other in the sky. Oh, God. Yeah. So you talk about massive objects flying around. Right. Like, and how do they explain that away? That's what I want to know. How do you explain that away? How do you explain somebody thousands of years ago sitting down to write a sci-fi epic? Well, not just that, but writing about a process of creating this field that now has been documented all these thousands of years later. It works now. Like, how did you figure that out? And this happens over and over again in text. And the Apple tab, it's just the book I wrote, both talks about using sciatic frequencies and light waves to create manifest solid matter. And what happened about four years ago in a laboratory, they used sciatic frequencies and photons to create solid matter out of nothing. Just happened about four years ago. What did they create? They just create a few particles, you know? But the fact that we can do it, but it was already in ancient text. Wow. So now we can do it on a very small scale. It was just like we can create element 115 with a collider. Correct. Same kind of thing. And it's a very small, unstable version of element 115 that only exists for a fraction of a second, but they can measure it. Right. So, but if, with sufficiently advanced technology, you could create it and then form a stable version of that. Right. Imagine being able to build an entire city by manifesting the matter needed to build a city instead of harvest things, instead of harvesting the city from right. 3D print the city with nanobots. You would, you would, you would nanobots to build the whole city. You would manifest as it went. And you could also use that to repair things. Absolutely. So you would never have to have like construction again. Everything would be self-reproposable. Correct. Self-reparable. Correct. Wow. Well, like, of course, if you just scale up, just think about what we can do now and keep going, make it much better and much more efficient. We're talking about programmable matter now. Programmable matter. And what you're saying about DNA, the fact that you can encode the DNA and that you could actually hold information in DNA. Yeah. Microsoft has created the very first DNA hard drive. So it's a molecular hard drive that works on hard, you know, technology that's hardware and also a biological software. And so a device, a hard drive decides on my cell phone, can store any enormous amount of petabytes of data. So things like teleportation are going to be possible in the near future. We've already teleported, I think, a couple of articles from Earth to the space station, right? But what's stopping us from teleporting a human being? Understanding and knowing the location of every atom and the rotation and the spirit of every atom, that's a lot of information, a lot of storage space. Now with DNA hard drives, the storage space problem goes away. We'll be able to teleport biological beings or objects, big objects into space or wherever we want on the planet. Like Star Trek. Like Star Trek. Whoa. Who's going to be the first guy to get beamed up? Somebody's going to be a real guinea pig for that one. Yeah. We're going to have to find some petabytes. Because when you teleport, you die. I don't know if people know that. Oh, yeah. Well, that's a bit of an issue. I mean, you're reborn again instantly in the other location, but it's a facsimile of you. Anytime you teleport, even the molecules that we teleport now, the original version, the original molecule or the starting matter, it's destroyed. And the data is then transmitted and then it's reformulated. So a teleportation is actually the death of you and the reformation of you. Maybe they could do a better job looking at the grand filter. Yeah. You know, maybe you could, maybe you could just like tone a few things up, clean up a little bit. Get rid of some scars or whatever. Get rid of some body fat. Right. Right. Maybe they can make a better version of you. But you have to be willing to die. Yeah. Yeah, but maybe that's hell. Maybe maybe you come back and you have no soul. Well, they're trying to teleport your soul doesn't go with you. Well, they're transmitting your consciousness. So everything is saved. All you're trying to say. We know that was done also in ancient times. Both talks in the animal tablets about being able to go into these halls of a mentee where he had rejuvenation chambers, which is what I believe is the Serapeum and Socara. And he would go into these gigantic stone boxes and he would then transfer his consciousness from his body into another body. And he would leave the body that he left inside of one of those gigantic boxes, one of those gigantic diaries stone boxes for a hundred years while we charged itself and rejuvenated while he said he walks amongst men, but unlike a man. Yeah, and he would do this for eons. He would transfer from body to body, not bodies. He stole bodies he created and he didn't create it himself through probably some of the advanced form of stem cell technology. And he would walk amongst men, but unlike a man. And he was known all around the planet because of this guy lived for he's according to the ancient Egyptians. He ruled over them for 16,000 years. One person. What? Yeah. Yeah. So was this those ancient texts like the ancient hybrid lifts that show kings going back like 30,000 years? Well, that's the Sumerian Kings list located in the Ashmole Museum in Oxford, England. I was there myself in person to check out this stone work. And it's an incredible tablet that talks about the reigns of kings. Yeah. Some kings rule for 28,800 years, 14,000 years. I mean, 20,000 if the numbers are insane. These are not Egyptian. This is this is none. Not Egyptian. This is these are anorrhaki. This is pre flood. This is post, uh, uh, sorry, anti-deluvial. And then when the flood comes, it talks about, and then the flood swept over the land. After the flood happens, then they they they they descend in kingship from heaven back down to humans. And then the rains of humans begin, but they're, or they're not really full humans. They're demigods. They're half human, half anorrhaki. And then their, their life spans are like, you know, much shorter because they're ruling times only like a thousand years and 800 years and 700 years. And it starts to go down, down, down. just while like no, 600 years old. Right. Exactly. So this, uh, this, these tablets, what do they call the end? Are you talking about the, uh, the Marian, Sumerian Kings list. Can you show me that, Jamie? I want to see what that looks like. It's a giant foresight at tablet located in the Ashmole Museum in Oxford, England. Yeah. And so what exactly does it say? Like it gives you those. Is it right here? That's it right there. Those are all four sides. And how old is this? Oh, this is, you know, they're saying 6,000, but make it bigger, Jamie? Believe me, it's much older than that. I just want to look at it. Yeah. This is a copy of a copy of a copy of a copy over 10,000 of the years in my opinion. But this text gives the reins of kings in Shars. S H A R, a Shars, 3600 years. So one Shower would be 3600 years. 241,000 years of rule. Whoa. On that stone right there. The Sumerian Kings list. Yeah. Now, if this is right, if this is all true, what a mind-blowing idea that humans have been around that were engineered hundreds of thousands of years ago. And that this is the reason why there's this bizarre shift between lower primates and us, which you don't see in any other animal. Right. There's nothing like it. No. There's nothing like us. Look, we have 46 chromosomes. Right. So what happens is that 48? Exactly. They discovered that chromosome number two was taken out, they call it an artificial mutation. They mean geneticists, views together, and two telomere caps put on, one telomere cap on each side. Who in the world took chromosome number two out, views it together and put telomere caps on it? They say that it happened as an estimated 200,000 years ago. Right at the time that Sumerians have to say, they decided to make mankind to do the labor. There's no coincidence that the tablets are lining with modern science. And this means that a couple things. The first thing it means that we were genetically modified. The second thing that it means is the telomere caps limit our lifespan to about 120 years max, according to Harvard scientists. Now in the Bible, what does it say? It says that my speech should not abide in man forever. His years should be 120. That was taken from the Sumerian tablets, even further back than that. Thousands of years before the Bible was written when and when Yahweh, AKA and Lil shows back up, sees the human beings building a tower into the heavens, copying a tower that they themselves had built. It pissed them off and he said, wherever their hearts decide to do the ocean, they shall achieve it. My speech should not abide in man. His years would be 120. And then he did a genetic modification at that point, I believe, with the telomeres. And he spread mankind out around the planet and he confused their language. He had us speaking different languages. So we couldn't collaborate. Now we're in competition, no collaboration, divide and conquer. And there's the tower of battle. That's it. That's it, man. So it was all done just to keep us from rising. Yes. We were advancing too fast and he had to slow us down. If we shorten their lifespan, then they won't have enough time. But at the time they realized who they are and what power they have, they'll be dead. And see, that's what's happened to us. So if the Anunnaki are real and the Bureau is real, and the Bureau is on an elliptical cycle that comes between, it's like Mars and Jupiter, right? Somewhere around there? Like, well, it's further out now. It's over time. Right. It's been pushed out. And that's just one planet that these Anunnaki people come from. They come from many planets. But do you think that this planet, the Bureau, that's on an elliptical orbit, if it's coming every 3,600 years, wouldn't there be some sort of documentation 3,600 years ago at the very least? Well, you have to look for geological disasters as marker points. This object, this Nibiru planet, which is mentioned, by the way, in the Numa Elisha, it's not a fabricated name. Just so people know that it's a real name, in the Anunnaki Elisha, oldest version of the Numa Elisha. This marker points. This object, this Nibiru Planet, which is mentioned by the way in the Numa Elish. It's not a fabricated name. Just so people know that it's a real name in the Numa Elish, the oldest version of the Numa Elish, it says Nibiru as one of the planets. But you look at the timeframe when this thing gets close. It orbits another star. So it orbits a brown dwarf star. This brown dwarf star has the same amount of mass as our sun, but it's much smaller. But it generates enough heat through friction and or its orbiting planets. You can see it in two mass infrared mode coming out of the constellation of Leo if you go to a worldwide telescope and download the software and all of that. But the fact that modern science now admit that there's an object out there that they say orbit our sun every 4200 years. And that's Corey Powell from Discovery Magazine. He's a real astronomer. He's been on Fox News. He said that on Fox News. If I can find a clip I'll send it to you. It might affect. And so we'll find it. Yeah, we'll find it. Yeah, Fox News, Corey Powell. And so what's happening is we are seeing evidence that there is something out there that's orbiting our sun and then our sun is a binary star system. So we used to think that our sun, one sun and the solar system is normal. But as they look out into space with Hubble and now the web, they discover no binary is more of the normal and even try an area. And so it's like, wait a minute, if binary is normal, they start looking for this object that gravitationally should exist and they believe that it's out there far beyond orbit of Pluto. And that Corey Powell says our solar system exists within our solar system. And he goes on to say we come from there on Fox News, which is just crazy. So the idea if you follow Terrence Howard's theory is that matter comes from the sun, it moves away coalesces into planets, it gets to a Goldilocks zone, life comes out of that life becomes far more intelligent as time goes on, develops more capabilities and then is also assisted by other beings that have been through this process already. And then if this scales out for hundreds of millions of years, you get to a point where this nebira is, yeah, or billions of years or whatever it takes for it to get all the way to fuck out. I estimate that they're about a million years ahead of us technologically. Now it could be there's things that are millions of years ahead of them. Oh, wait ahead of them. There's things that are far far ahead of them, which is this was what's hard for us to scale out. We like to think that aliens are flying spaceships. That's top of the food chain, right, but not even close. Yeah. Like I was saying before, I never got to it really. There's three types of beings I think that exists. One is the physical corporeal being that could be what we see flying around in these UFOs, not all of them, some of them that visit us at an interact with us in the ancient past, not all are a little green man, but they have very different body types. The second kind that I believe is potentially multi-dimensional beings. Okay. That there's life in every different dimension. And you know, Michio Kaku was famous for saying that the universe, they believe has 11 dimensions. So that's 11 dimensions. We're only in the third. There's fourth, fifth, sixth, all of it up to 11 at least. Or the universe he says would collapse. So if you're in a being in a higher dimension, you can see the past president future all at once in the third. And if you say, that's an interesting place. I'd like to visit it. If you can actually create a face shift in your atomic frequency to match the atomic frequency of this dimension, you can walk right in and then you can walk right back. And then you probably have something else that's outside of this entire universe that has the capability. Maybe this is the creators of the universe itself, which is where I wrote the book, Frackel Hall of the Graphic Universe. Maybe there's a create horse or creator outside of this entire universe that has a hand in creating this ancestral universe itself. But it also makes sense that if you scaled intelligent life up infinitely, you're going to reach a point where you have God like powers, this being or collection of beings as hive mind, whatever it is. It could essentially, if given a hundred million years, harness the very power of the universe itself or maybe even create the universe. I created up the universe. Yeah. Yeah. Which is the ultimate mind blower that intelligent life is the reason why this thing exists. Then it creates this thing. We're creating universes right now as human beings on this planet. 14 college kids created a video game called No Man's Sky. No Man's Sky is on one DVD disk and it has 80 quadrillion planets and unlimited life forms in the game never ends. We've talked about that right? Yeah. That one's a weird one. Yeah. You put, but you put AI in it, then what's going to happen? Right. Scale up to a quantum computer. Now all of a sudden, we have a virtual reality headset. Boom. Yeah. The people when they're, who are we? Where are we? Right. What is the big bang when we turn to console alone? That's the big bang for you. Yeah. Sims. The Sims are going to get AI now. They're going to be asking questions. They're going to be creating your own software within the software and trying to build their own copy of a universe. We're not even close to base reality. We're literally living in a stacked reality. We're just one reality out of who knows, Googles of actual realities that exist. Do you think the simulation theory has weight? Oh, I believe so. I just, I wrote a book about it. That book is, uh, is about the Fracoholic graphic universe. And I believe that we're living in a simulation. One of these books, you got a stack of it. Uh, no, I just looks if you're right. Are written rather. The one just came out today to Fracoholic graphic universe. This is the Emerald Tabits, the Epic of Humanity and my financial book, Woke doesn't mean broke financial literacy book, not the political woke either with the real woke. When did you start going down this road of exploring all these interesting subjects? Well, as long time ago, 1977 in Miami, Florida, we moved from New York to Miami next to the Opalaca airport living in the hood. I used to go out in the backyard. You know how it is back in no cable TV, no cell phones, no tablets. You just go outside and play. So I'm in there. I'm outside in the backyard playing, but I'm looking at the airplanes go over. And this one day, this playing goes over, but it's not really a plane. It clears the horizon in seconds, not minutes. It just goes straight across. I know from as a little kid, the plane take a long time to go from one point to the other and it went straight across. And it was more like not a full size, not not cigar, but not a egg kind of in between the two glowing. A tank. Almost like a tick that glowing metal. Yes. And then it came back and it stopped right over me completely silent about now I can estimate about 250 meters. And then it just went poo gone. And I ran into the house when I told my mom, I told you, I can't believe what I just saw. And my mom said to me, son, back in the day, there were advanced beings that came to this planet. This is 1977. Mom's or mom's? Yeah. That's why dedicated the book tour. And she said they they used to live on tops of mountains like in Peru and Machu Picchu, which is why one of the greatest places I ever went, I had to go there. And so I went to the library at Rainbow Park Elementary the next morning. And I told the teacher, I have to go to the library inside the school. Rainbow Park. And I said, I need to get all the encyclopedia on on space on aerospace. And she gave me the encyclopedia on aerospace. And that's when I started researching from that exact moment. And I haven't stopped since. So you were held eight seven seven years old. Oh my god. You just got locked in. I got locked in. I started researching sweat wing Delta wing, ballistics into current intercontinental ballistics. I'm looking at submarines. I'm looking at hovercraft that existed way back then flying just that we had created in the military way back then. You know, SR 71s and all this stuff. And I'm trying to figure out what the hell did I see. And I couldn't find it. But it took me down the path of technologies and advanced technologies and aerospace information and I kind of became a quasi aerospace historian. And that led me in further on down the line to studying, you know, architecture and seeing connection between the two. And you studied it both Harvard and MIT. Harvard was for ancient civilizations. I took a class and got a certificate in ancient civilizations. And MIT, I took a class in applied neuroscience and got a certificate in applied neuroscience. And do you just doing this for your own edification? Just as you're interested in it? Yeah. Yeah. Right now I'm enrolled again in MIT right now for a class in AI. And when you first got down this road, we're talking about a time where there's no internet and there's no, you're just like trying to make sense of some things. Just trying to make sense, and this one, if you ever seen anything since then? Yeah. Yeah. It's actually Eddie said he ranch in 2017, I believe it was. We were out there. I was out there to do speak at this ranch in Washington state. And it's down from the basin of Mount Shasta. And that's called the SETI ranch. E-SETI. Okay. E-SETI, E-C-E-T-I. It's like a private kingdom in America actually. It's a private, they've got registered as a small kingdom. They don't even have mail or anything there. It's where I had to stay in a year. It's really crazy out there. I spoke there for a whole week. I had to get used to it because nobody told me about this before I got there. You had to stay in a year for a week? Stay in a year for a week. Did they have running water? At the community bathroom. Oh boy. E-SETI? Yeah. You know, enlightened contact with extraterrestrial intelligence. Oh boy. So they're just out there with no technology trying to talk to aliens. No, no, just out there every night sky watching basically. Really? And the video that we could- That's how we- That's how rich crazy person's idea. Yeah. The video that we- The video that we created that night watching those UFOs in the sky actually made it onto an episode that I'm in on ancient aliens. Oh. Yeah. That shows the best show to get hired to. Yeah. You can see action brought in the show with you to watch ancient aliens who just get stoned and watch ancient aliens. That shows crazy. But yeah. So we recorded some crazy footage in the skies there. What did you see? Well, they were giant disflying around. Some were changing colors. Yeah, video footage of this. It's on the up. But I sent it to ancient aliens and you know- Seaving and finding that. It's on the James Gilliland. There are who owns the ranch, licensed it, licensed it and approved ancient. But if you go to E-SETI Ranch YouTube videos, you could probably find one right on YouTube right now. Wow. Yeah. It was incredible. So these folks are just out there trying to make contact? They're not trying to make contact. Just watching. Just watching. Just like an an amazement. There's no contact attempt there. And why? Yeah, there you go. That's it. That was the bad night. That video I was standing there that night. And you know, there was a lot of activity that night. There was some crazy stuff going on. And what does this thing look like to the naked eye? We're seeing very blurry. Looks like zoomed in footage. Yeah. What do you hear this from? This is probably the 18 or 18. Yeah. You're now the now the Samsung Galaxy S-12. We didn't have that. We didn't have that one back then. But from the naked eye, it looks like these giant glowing balls moving around. Sometimes they expand and get, they change colors. Sometimes they descend right down by Mount Shasta. And then they, you can see the lighting in the tree line. And then they would go back up into space again. It was just crazy stuff. Have you seen that ball lightning that they get in Texas that comes out of the mountains? No, I saw one on a railroad track though ball lightning. There's this phenomenon that happens in this one particular area in Texas. What was it called Marfa? Was that what it's called? Jamie? I think it's Marfa. It's like this bizarre artist community town. And they have like frequent instances of what they call the Marfa lights. And it's ball lightning that flies around out there. Wow. You don't think that could be that? No, because sometimes they would keep going until they just went out into space. Yeah, and there were so many. Sometimes they were too uncommon. They wouldn't circle each other. And then one would change direction and drop down by the mountain. And one would just take off another direction. Some would go slow and then go and just go how frequent does this take place? I don't know. I was only there for those seven nights. I say the first time we were there with those when we saw like the 10 in the sky and moving around and doing things. The second night, not too much. The third that was a little bit more maybe four or five. So do you think that what it is is that this place has no light pollution and they depict a very specific area that they knew these things are current. It's possible no light pollution and plus also maybe that's an area where they have an opening or access or I don't know who knows. I'm just I'm just now speculating now, but I don't know why that people came from all over the world to that location. The date, the week I was there to just camp out and look up at the sky. Wow. Yeah. Well, this man, we covered a lot. Yeah. Three hours. I really appreciate your time and appreciate all the stuff you put out there. It's so fun. So fascinating. And it's so interesting. And thank you very much for being here, man. I really had a good time. I enjoyed it, Grant. Thank you. Thank you. Please tell everybody how to find your website, all your social media, all that stuff. Yeah. Well, first of all, I have my own streaming TV network called Forbidden Knowledge TV. It's an app on the app store. So they can just go get the Forbidden Knowledge TV app with the number four for Forbidden Knowledge. And they can get access to a lot of videos and stuff that you can't find on YouTube or anywhere else. You know, Purdue shows like the one you watched my internockey series is on the Forbidden Knowledge TV app. And of course, I have all my books on our website for Forbidden Knowledge TV on Amazon as well. And just everything for Forbidden Knowledge for the number four for BIDD and Forbidden. There it is. Yes. We'll do this again, man. I think we could talk for like 50 days. I know. I know. For sure. Thank you, Billy. Appreciate you, man. Bye, everybody.