The general gonna experience. But let me ask you this one though. What do you think about all this, the Pentagon, saying that there's crafts that are coming from another world? That's a New World Order. What do you think that is, getting people to believe in the fake alien invasion? So what do you think those things are, these people keep saying? It's probably who knows. The Nazis were scaring their people with UFOs. They made UFOs, like, and they were like scaring people. It's like, look at the timeline. The times were trying to develop some kind of an actual flying saucer. And they were scaring their people, and they were using like, look, we're gonna save you, look, UFOs, they were scaring them, like, the government's gonna save you from the UFOs, right? So 1946, World War II's over, 1946, 47, operation paper clip. That's when we took a bunch of Nazis, and Russia took a bunch of Nazis. And so 1947, Roswell, right? That was, Roswell was the beginning of the UFO craze, right after Roswell, all these comic books, Mars attacks, the 50s, all these shitty, space movies and alien movies, there was Star Trek came, but Roswell kicked it off. That was the first one that kicked it off. So like, wow, that's 1947. That's right when we brought in all the Nazis. Who knows, man, maybe the Nazis were like, dude, you guys aren't scaring your people with UFOs. You dumb motherfuckers, just get on it, boom. So that Roswell, like, they just take some craft, and they get people that they interview, probably think it was real, like, it was a crash. So you think it was an orchestrated crash just to freak people out? I think it seems like a lot of money to, oh, you covered up and hide it. When is anything too expensive? When is anything too expensive for the government? But the official answer was never that it was a craft. The official answer was that it's a fucking weather balloon. Everybody believed that. They get people, yeah. They show the record. But people that believe in UFOs, like myself and you, back in the day, I no longer, I have a different view of UFOs now. But back then, we didn't care that they said, like the fact that they said that, oh, it's just weather balloon. We were like, oh, dude, you guys are bullshitting. You're trying to cover up the real shit. So it's 3D chess. Exactly. So that's what I think it's drones. I'm up the opinion. drones and, you know how those red laser pointers, you know, you fuck with your cat with that shit? You go, it's incredible speeds. Yeah, but there's some stuff. There's some stuff like the Commander David, for everyone is pretty important. For sure, they're seeing stuff. For sure, they're seeing stuff like I think these are on. I think Bob lives are sauce and shit. I think they set them up. That's what I think. I think he's telling the truth, but they set them up. That's what they do. They take, that's what William Cooper said. He was set up too. He worked for the Office of Naval Intelligence, setting up meetings, like high level meetings. And they, he said, he thinks that he was reading, he was setting up meetings and looking at documents going, oh, shit, they're going to be discussing crash, you have faux shit and reverse engineering crash, you have foes. So at first, he believed it. Then eventually he realized, oh, they set them up. So they set them up so that he'll talk about them. Yeah, he said, he thinks they set up due to talk a lot, big mouths that are drunk. That's what he thinks. He said, they set them up and they buck. And that's what he said. He's Adam up, big mouths that are drunk because they know they're going to give out the information. They talk. They want them to talk. So they let them get in there. They let them see it. They go, don't go into that room. We'll be right back. Don't go in that room. We're going to go, and then they go in. They see like a, like Philip Corso, remember that guy here? From the Pentagon back in the day when I was into all this shit, I would like, look, dude, from the Pentagon is saying it. Of course, it's got to be true. A Navy pilot is saying it. Of course, they're the most credible guy. But now looking back, I'm like, dude, now, of course, it's the dude in the Pentagon. Philip Corso said he wrote a book the day after or something. He wrote a book about how he saw the bodies in the coffins. He saw the bodies. He goes, I was that I saw the bodies. I mean, so either he really saw alien bodies. Like he walked in a room and then we're in a casket and it was open casket or something like that. Either he really saw that or he did see it and they weren't real or something and he said, they said, I'm a fucking crazy diseases. It would come from an alien body. Can you imagine they would just have an alien body in a room and you could do autopsy on it with one of those stupid masks on? Yeah. You'll imagine, just stop and think of that. Because they think about like the Europeans that came to North America and killed 90% of the Native Americans with smallpox. Imagine what the fuck aliens have. Imagine what shit that is in there. If they're a biological creature, they probably exist like we do. We're filled with bacteria. We're filled. Like there's more E. coli in your gut than if ever been people ever. We're filled with this stuff. Imagine what kind of crazy diseases some alien body would have. You have no immunity to. And just ravages the population ever instead. And these guys just have these old stupid masks on. They're cutting into this alien.