The Joe Rogan experience. And in another case, I saw it was a magpie, one of these birds known for how smart it is. There was a full half-liter plastic thing of water. It was just water. A water bottle. And it was full. So the magpie goes over and sips out the water. Now the beak is only what? An inch and a half long or an inch at moat. So it goes in until it can't reach the water anymore. So what does it do? It goes off to the side, gets a rock. Just the right size. Drops it into the water bottle. It raises the level of water. Thereby displacing water. Here it is. That is heavy. You've got the view. There it is. And so it comes and it goes back and gets another stone. Drops it in. And every time it drops it in, the water level rises and it can drink more water. And it just keeps doing this. It's pretty amazing. OK? And so every time we study animals, there's smarter than we ever thought they were. So maybe for our own ego, we kept building ourselves up saying how separate and distinct we are as humans in the animal kingdom. When maybe we're not as separate and distinct as we think we are. So now what's my broader point there that I was making? I just distracted myself. I know I'm trying to get back to UFOs on that. The fact that we have high resolution cameras in our pocket, we take videos of things that are very unusual. Exactly. So here's a video of a magpie doing Bernoulli experiments on a water bottle. Who would have known that even happened? You can't bring the bird into a lab. Maybe you could, but I don't know that anyone did. All right. Here's my point. In the 1960s and 70s, there were many, many reports of alien abductions. People said, how did the aliens came to me? And they brought me in and then they released me. Do you have any footage? No, they took my camera. Or no, they zapped my film and now there's no image on the film. But there were countless stories. Well now you can stream live from your camera, anything that's going on in front of you. So if the aliens come and they want them to duck you to stream it, that would be instantly viral. Oh my gosh. You know, the stuff that goes viral is much less than that. A cat that kitten that jumps to the table and falls, that goes viral. You don't think of video footage of an alien is not going to go viral instantly. But there's none. So I'm just saying, I'm thinking if we were being visited, somebody would have some good footage. If we were being visited, I'm thinking maybe Google satellite images would catch spaceships that are not airplanes moving on our surface. If we were being visited, I'm thinking we'd have something better than fuzzy monochromatic video of objects that apparently reveal themselves only to Navy pilots. So that one of the reasons is most of these sightings actually occur far offshore in the ocean. And the speculation is this is one of the ways, no, obviously I'm going to put my tin foil hat on. Nice and tight. Do your thing. This is one of the ways that they monitor us. The best way to do it is to do it with their, hold their base where no one is around, which is the ocean. No, it's not true. Go in the ocean, pop up and fly out. It's not true. What do you mean it's not true? It's not true. Yeah. What is lives on the ocean? Yes, that's correct. But have you, well, so it leaves the lives down under sea. This is what the speculation is. Okay, it lives down under sea. That's why these trans medium devices have been, okay, these trans medium crafts have been observed. If you want, if you are sure we are being visited by aliens and you don't actually have really good evidence, then you have to say that. Sure. Well, you know that you have to say that. You have to say this is really happening and they're observing us and they're concealing themselves in this particular way. You have to say that. So that's your way to maintain your alien belief system by saying that. And I don't have a problem with it. Go get them. Go get them. But all of what has been put forth as evidence for aliens, to me, is insufficient evidence to excite my interest, my research interest in devoting time to finding it out. But it definitely is excited other people. I have not stopped them. I am not saying defund the military program on UAPs, which of course is just updated UFO. I know. They like to say that now because it's just a stigma to me. I know. That's just that's a really transparent sneaky way. No, not even sneaky. It's actually I think it's embarrassing. It's like maybe if we call them UAPs, people take them seriously. People take them seriously. No, I'm of the belief that they're probably akin to what we did on Mars. I don't think there's aliens in them. I have a feeling that these things are probes. And I feel like if you just think about biological entities flying through the universe, why do that? When you have sophisticated technology that's good enough right now from our relatively primitive consideration of what we think is possible a million years from now. We could send that Mars rover around. We have a helicopter on Mars. There's multiple satellites flying through the universe right now, taking images. We can do all that. But I will be probes are not targeting the Martian military fighter. Because there's no Martian military. But if there were, we certainly winning out in the open. Right. But if we had something like, are you familiar with one of the most famous cases was a case with Commander David Freaver of the Navy who encountered with one or two other jets off of the Nimitz. They encountered this thing that was shaped like a tick-tack. You know this story. Yeah. This story. It went from, they tracked it going from 80,000 feet above sea level to 50 in less than a second. They have no idea how it moved. There's no visible propulsion system. It was blocking their radar. It was actively blocking tracking. This is what their sensors told them. Exactly. Just be clear about that. You're stating information as though it is facts. I'm stating information as Commander Freaver of the Navy. It doesn't matter. It's human. We're all human here. But as a scientist when you're presenting information, you don't say this thing was at 80,000 feet and it dropped to zero to sea level in one second or whatever it was. That's the wrong way to report it. What you say is we have sensors that told us this is what I understand what we're saying. That's a very important distinction. So now, all right, your first question then, tell me about the sensors. Yeah. Are they double checked? So if you're just going to say, there's this craft at 80,000 feet, then everyone is thinking about a craft and no one is thinking about the sensor. They actually saw with their eyes too. This is something that they actually got. You can't see something at 80,000 feet. No, the actual visual on the craft. Okay. They didn't see it at 80,000 feet. But this craft, it's not just something that was tracked with equipment. Got it. But they didn't see it at 80,000 feet. That's my point. So, by the way, this level of attention I'm giving to the detail and the reporting of information, we do that with fellow scientists for much less than if we're being visited by intelligent aliens from another planet. So visit a go to a scientific conference and watch the level of scrutiny we put on other people's work. If they have a sensor that has a new result, we'll say, did you calibrate the sensor? Did you, how long has the sensor been in use? What, I'll give you an example. Here's an example. Okay. Do you remember Planet X? Yes. The search for Planet X? Nibiru. That was one, there was, sorry, there were several incarnations of Planet X. That was among them. That was among them. That was among them. I'm talking about 100 years ago Planet X. Yes. 100 years ago? Mother several Planet Xs, right? So Uranus was moving weirdly. Nobody understood. Maybe there's a planet beyond it whose gravity we have yet to reckon in our equations. Oh, boom. We discovered Neptune. Wait a minute. Neptune is moving a little, unfamiliarly. I'm going to drop that thing and break it with no case on. So yeah, I got the 12 and yeah, I can still do this. I'm just sorry. Last time you were here, you had a broken case. You're broken back. Remember? So why are you distracting me? I was like on a roll and Neptune. Neptune. So Neptune, we're looking at Neptune's orbit and it's not following new. And this is all. Well, we've been down that road before. Uranus didn't follow. It was, we proposed another planet and we found it. So Neptune's not following all the laws of gravity that from all the other planets in the Sun, there must be another planet out there. A Planet X. Let's look for it. Is that boat's law? Boat's law is a fitting function that gets you, it got a little more attention than it deserved. It's just a planet's, every next planet is about twice as far away from the Sun as the previous one. So you just make a quick equation out of that. Oh, that's it. But it doesn't work for Mercury and it didn't work for Pluto. I thought it was based on the mass of the planet. No, not at all. And that's has nothing to do with it. And it predicted the asteroid belt, but the asteroid belt, there's no planet there. Right. And if you glue together all the pieces of the asteroid belt, you get something like 5% the mass of the moon. So yeah, it gave us the location of the asteroid belt, but that's not a planet. So boat's law is fun to play with, but there are limits to how far you want to declare its relevance to the actual universe. So we're out here in Neptune. And so it's, so I said maybe there's a planet X. Everybody started looking. Everybody started looking, including Percilful Lowell. All right, back in the 1920s. And he said, I want to find Planet X because something's perturbing Neptune. So he sets out looking for it and he doesn't find it. Then he hires Clyde Tombow and he dies. So he doesn't see the results of this. Clyde Tombow said, I can't find it either. I'll just systematically search everywhere. Because if you think something's affecting you gravitationally, you ought to have some idea where it is to be tugging on you in that way. All right, that's not, that's not some kind of weird. It's like you're moving differently. Where must the thing be to tug on you so that you're moving in that way? No one could find such a planet X. So Clyde Tombow said, it's got to be out there somewhere. I will systematically image the entire sky. All right? And you got to do it on multiple nights because if something's moving, you'd see it change from one picture to an X. He does this, discovers Pluto. Was Pluto where planet X was supposed to have been? No. Was Pluto the mass that planet X should have been? Everyone assumed it was. But over the decades, the mass of Pluto got lower and lower and lower as our estimates it's got more and more accurate. Then we found out that Pluto is one fifth the mass of our moon made of half ice. And this is why Pluto got into trouble later in the 20th century. It's not because we had some vendetta against Pluto. Pluto just never belonged in that list to begin with. That's really how you need to think about it. Anyhow, there's still the matter of Neptune's orbit. Pluto did not have enough mass to make those changes. So the search for planet X continued. So what happens? 1993. A colleague of mine named Miles Standish. OK? He's probably related to the Miles Standish on the Mayflower. He is an astrophysicist. Look at all of the data people were using to say Neptune's orbit was crooked. Look at all the data. Did any found out that one particular observatory was that the gearbox or the timing mechanism had just been cleaned or swapped out? Or there was some, because in the observing log, you write down everything. Because you just don't know. OK? Was there a glitch in the current? Was there a bird flyover? You make notes of everything. One of the observatories, whose data was being grafted together with the other observatories, had this sort of gearbox. I don't remember if it was a gearbox. There was some mechanical adjustment that was made. He said, I wonder if that had an effect on the positioning of this telescope. He removed those data from his analysis and fitted data to all the other telescopes that he had for the positions of Uranus of Neptune. When he did that, Planet X evaporated in that instant. In that instant. There was no Planet X. All the other data, when he connects across, removing the data from the one where the observing log said they did something different, Neptune fell right onto Newton's laws. So since 1993, there is no Planet X. Not for that, we probably would have been a long time before we discovered Pluto because no one would have looked for it. They found another... Let me just finish the live. What was it? The lesson there. The lesson there is. You have information that you think is correct from your sensors. This was an observatory, a fine observatory. You're going to say this observatory says Neptune is misbehaving. But then you learned there was something wrong with the data. You throw it out. I'm trying to say this happens all the time in science. You have to be careful what you're analyzing before you declare that what the thing measured is true and then realign all your resources to address what you think is true. It might have just simply been a glitch or multiple glitches or anything. And we do this all the time in science. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan Experience for free, only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips. Easily, seamlessly, switch between video and audio experience. On Spotify, you can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan Experience.