Thanks for doing this man. My pleasure. My pleasure. My pleasure. My hair is good. The Joe Rogan experience There's only been two people ever that Dennis McKenna's record recommended for this podcast you and Josh Wickerham So that puts you in very lofty company. Oh, yeah, yeah I Domer that's the way dame your French. It's dumb air, but is that how your family pronounce it? It's the correct way Dammers are the best, but do your friends call you dumb air Anybody like give you full respect in the French here. No, no, that's a thousand years ago They gave it up after a while they gave it up after they invaded Britain. Oh 1066. That's clever. That's a good move You got a very unusual background man. I mean Dennis would not stop raving about you And then I started doing research on you I was like you were this is the craziest story of all time Not not the craziest, but it's pretty crazy. You were in burning man during Katrina With you were partying in burning man with people who work in the Pentagon. Yes When Katrina went down yep can't play a gun That is the most ridiculous thing that gives me great discomfort to know the people who work in the Pentagon are Party in a burning man rockin We called for black hawks, but we got the order denied But that's a whole other that's a whole story well That's well well when Katrina was happening you guys were amongst the people that were in burning man The very few that had a connection to the outside world We had a you know where our camp was doing the Wi-Fi and the internet for burning man for the public and emergency Network's the private network and so we had a dish and we could take over satellites So one of our guys took over recon satellite Check that off Is that legal is that a Pentagon move? It's a Pentagon move So he took this thing offline and I actually been at a NRO National Reconnaissance Office. I had been at an NRO launch Just the year before and then I look over and I see the logo on the laptop And I say what are you doing? You know I to this man who remained nameless And he said shut up turned his laptop away and he pounded in a code and he took this thing offline and so our iridium phone rang You know this Pentagon wireless satellite phone. It's like the the general on the other side to saying what's going on and basically the he instructed the guy not to answer So we then had control of this thing and we could watch Katrina come in Whoa Because the government wasn't doing anything with all these national resource assets to To help people and this was the frustration that he had He wanted to be evacuated to be taken out off-ply with black hawks and heavy-duty helicopters because he had just come back from the Asian Sonami, you know the Bandai Ache event and then he went straight to to Afghanistan And then he went to Baghdad and then he came to Burning Man I looked at this man's face and was like lying deeply, you know just Unbelievable stress. Can you imagine this was his job? He works on title 10 money doing extreme comms extreme emergency relief efforts And he's invented all this shit like cell phones that come down on parachutes They'll run for a month and people pick up these cell phones and push a button and there's so many who speaks Tagalog right on right there to say what do you need? What are your what's your position? Whoa, and that cool. That's amazing. It's amazing the cell phones run for a month They're like in rubberized cases. This guy's invented all this technology So this rubberized case just has a massive battery in it. It comes precharged. Yep. Yep So this guy you know really thinking so here we have a natural disaster happening in our own country You know barreling in nobody at Burning Man knows about it because there's no cell phone service Right then back in 2007. It's barreling in and 2005 rather and we watch it coming in now the amazing thing is we we saw it you could watch a Video for more of it on the screen on this guy's screen and you could watch people walking down Like we saw a levee breach the first levee breach in like the ninth ward or something We saw that on the screen from plot from our camp at Burning Man So when you say you took over satellites satellites at a broadcasting what is a broadcasting media like it was Hi-res no high-res reconnaissance imagery. Okay, so it's a satellite that is like one of those spying on bad guy satellites Exactly whoa. Yeah, I couldn't we couldn't read you know to talk about this If someone finds out about that is that like is this an issue? I don't think so And that seems like something that would be really frowned upon well the phone The iridium phone kept ringing Yeah, it's like your dad's calling you're having a party the neighbors are calling your dad going hey man I don't know what your son's doing But the lights are on there's a million people on your front and the phone just keeps ringing and you're like But these guys knew who they're dealing with this is this innovative genius type guy that is totally respected and So the general that initiated the inquiry was covering for him. I see so the general could then contact space command and say I can't get any information Oh, okay. Okay. I see he hit put the satellite in some kind of Failsafe fallback mode, so they would spend the next several days trying to get back into it Whoa, right? He was just like bypassing it and keeping him out burn hydrogen and locate You know stuff on on the plant Wow, so how would in 2005 tell me all the details But he's it basically don't you know, I'm doing this right? What what kind of satellite internet connection was available in 2005 was a very small slow upload Yeah a little bit quicker download, but still pretty whack right by that time Yeah, the next year I think they got the big tower on the plyo Which have the dish that went right to girl act with an OC3 connection, but What does that mean? What'd you just like a really fast? Sort of almost like a radar latch. What is girl act girl? Oh, you haven't been out there. No You know, I love hippies and small doses hippies smell like pizza You know, I just can't I can't eat pizza every day for like a month. I was with but you can hang around Playagon pinna gun people. Yes. I could probably hang around your camp If I went out there with a really dirty people with sure buzz sure buzz sure buzz. That's the broad shirpas Now they're they're white people white sure buzz. They're servers for the billionaires and their billionaire camps That's too much and they have walls of motor homes. I want to hang out with a hundred thousand an air camp I don't want to hang out with a billionaire care I don't hang out with people who like in our v's and like everybody's clean But I don't eat chirpas. Well come, you know what I here's a secret that I'll tell you on here. Oh Well, it won't be a secret my one a minute. So Dennis hasn't been to Burning Man Dennis McKenna good me and him same page so I told guys who don't want to party with young kids So I told him that Dan to tell you that Dennis would only go to Burning Man if you went oh Did you do it the opposite way you clean up against each other there you go. Yeah, that doesn't work with me But thanks that's sweet So girl I would go anywhere with him though. He's going anywhere with yeah, yeah I really would go with him just to talk to him for days. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's he's amazing The world's most amazing teddy bear. Yeah, he's a he's he explained the stone ape theory in a way That I've never heard anybody explained before with science and the way that Silas I've an interact with the human mind and you know in a way was like oh yeah Well, that had to be a part of it You know, I'm sure there's many factors that led to the the increase in human brain size But when he describes it, you know like oh, let's fuck it mushrooms There has to be and you know we are at a meeting an event yesterday We're all a civil side in research was being presented by the the Johns Hopkins teams and UCLA and Madison things things people are doing Silaside and funded research to for smoking cessation. Yes end of life No reduction of anxiety and PTSD and yeah, and this one young researcher Matt that we talked to he basically said this amazing thing which was We're not plugging up neural transmitter portals to deal with addiction here We seem to be hitting higher order brain functions much higher rather than you know plugging up your desire for nicotine We're when we watch the fMRI's when we put people under the magnet which means put them in an fMRI real-time brain scanning We watch this the parts of the brain talking to each other like the default mode network seems to be changed And is this while you're under while they're on mushrooms? See I would have to think that that was a civil assignment So assignment I would have to think that would radically affect your experience Because is an MRI in an fMRI similar because I've been in MRI before it was like Bmp, bmp, bmp, bmp, bmp If I was on mushrooms and I was in an MRI I would freak the fuck out Okay, I've never been in it I've never been in an MRI I've never been in an MRI I was in one less than a year ago I had an issue with my back and I had a bulging disc in my back so I had to get an exam and find MRI and you lie down on a plank Like a little skinny little gurney thing and they roll you into this tube machine That's a giant magnet and all I could think of is some story that I'd heard about some kid who died Because they left a fire extinguisher in the room and then turned on the MRI and it sucked the fire extinguisher into the magnet and killed one freak incident out of a billion Usage it was like a torpedo exactly yeah, I killed somebody But it's a very claustrophobic and strange experience you roll into this thing and just lay there You can't move and you can It's all just echoing around you. I mean you get earplugs put earplugs on you close your eyes You just deal with it, but it's I would imagine that tripping on that would be incredibly strange So I would think if fMRI is very similar to its functional MRI It's the same machine that would I mean the old adages, you know five grams in silent darkness, right? That's what terence always described Prescribed our buddy. This is like the opposite of five grams in silent darkness Yeah, this is like well, maybe they've got it down to a baseball cap now, you know I don't think they do I don't think they do I've had two MRI's actually in the past year and a half So I'm pretty sure maybe by the 2050's will all be like This is a theory that I have of where all this is going that I can reveal to you later I'm absolutely interested But what I always thinking was that the whole experience of silosive and depends very much so on Well, where you're at while you're experiencing it if you're in a beautiful peaceful place like those colors are brighter And you you see like all sorts of cool visions and you have this connection to nature where you feel like you're grounded and But if you were in like some horrible place and you were on silosive and you would be very sensitive to that horrible place I could imagine like doing silosive and going to like a war zone experiencing war You know or or anything else horrible like the jimber move The movie that depicted the Vietnam that's you know Yeah, what was it? Jacob's ladder no the ones where they got high and Vietnam on all said oh Moving one movie Not apocalypse now yeah apocalypse now Well then acid oh, that's right Martin Sheen was on acid when he punched it when he did karate in his hotel room and Punch the mirror. Yeah. No, there's another there's a video of British soldiers on acid in the 50s Remember that they're all the last thing and yeah, they can't be made to fear the enemy or put fear into the enemy or be a part of any organization Which is what the British army was about to become anyway. Yeah, that's a beautiful video. I love that video Yeah, that was that was peace and love before the Beatles even got rolling in 59 right yeah Well, it shows you also what a Incredible like transformative drug that isn't it kind of really for the most part all psychedelics have that capacity So incredibly transformative capacity because you're here. You're dealing with people whose job is to kill folks That's what their job is and what are they doing? They're giggling and they're falling down and you know, they're not thinking about war They're they're like they think everything's preposterous. Mm-hmm. You know and it's it's just amazing when you look at the Transformation in our culture from the 1950s to 1970 when everything was clamped down on yeah I mean what a radical Couple decades of change. I mean people don't realize I mean I try to explain to people that if you I'm a technology historian I have the Digi bar and computer museum. I've got like 30 tons of vintage computer hardware in the barn And I've interviewed a thousand people on how did this all happen? How did the arpanet get made? How did Apple found and all that stuff and the years between 1945 and 1970 oh my god the the change that happened unbelievable unbelievable and really if you drive into a neighborhood even around here from that amount of valuing houses built in like 1962 the only difference in Technology is that there's ethernet like there's an internet. There's a network and there's computers otherwise you know house of 1970 had microwave ovens In a cable TV in the beginning and all that sort of stuff not a lot of difference Right. Just the digital tech that's the only really big thing is come in and that model has now spread to the whole planet So China did it in shorter time, you know, and I lived in Czechoslovakia And they did the whole transition in like eight years. It's incredible. So I've ever given it to the transition like 15 Just boom to our model Wow shopping center, you know off-ramp You know wired into the matrix, you know consumer culture boom the whole world just went bang bang bang bang bang adopting that it's a very strange time isn't it yeah? Yeah, and everyone's rushing to that model. I mean, there's no no stop in it well It's everything's tied into it now, too, which is really spooky, you know, I'm absolutely fascinated by ancient cultures by the idea that there were great civilizations that fell apart and like what caused it? Was it natural disaster was if this was that and When you look at your Graham him Graham him. Yes month. Yeah, I've had Graham on a few times He's awesome and I've also had Randall Carlson on who's also really enlightening when it comes to that subject because he's a true Expert in cataclysmic disasters, particularly the comet. Yes, a period of comet in here that create all that flooding Yeah, well, that's one of his I mean he's he's an expert on pretty much every significant trace of all Impact and it's it's really crazy. He can like drive as SUV and read land right? You can sort of read the yeah, what the lands teaching and what happened well He'll show you some things on satellite images that if you looked at it you would go Oh, that's just some hills and hill but the way he describes it He'll draw it out for you know Here's where the crater is and this is where the crater is in the middle of this ocean on this part of the ocean and if you follow that crater out You realize these are where the waves hit and toward the landscape apart like you're looking at a gigantic version of what you see when you see the ocean leave marks on the sand when high tide comes in Well, you're seeing this unbelievably extreme version of it that probably happened instantaneously You remember Jerry Purnell and Larry Niven's sci-fi classic Lucifer's hammer. No, no It's fantastic was about a comet impact on the Pacific and the scene These are these are master sci-fi writers They both live in here in the San Fernando Valley and this wave was a 1200 feet Tall and he did they describe it coming across the south land and there's this surfer Now the surfer out on you know, Santa Monica right? Decides to take this wave now what's happening before the wave arrives as the ocean is roaring You know at hundred miles an hour out toward the sea so this guy's been carried out You know 40 miles out to sea because this wave is sucking down The coastline, but he knows what is going on because he saw the fireball because I'm gonna die anyway I'm gonna try to take this wave and this is a great you know sci-fi novel and he does it and What happens is the the wave comes you know? Cross he looks down and he can he's on the face of this wave as it's coming across Los Angeles And he's looking down at the city, you know like 800 feet below as this wave is because he has on the face of it And he's managing his board. Oh, and then he looks up and and the the language is great It's like in the first interstate building hit him like a flyswatter, you know That's a crazy way to die and the wave crashed it went inland to like palm springs kind of India That's where and it created sort of loose looks loose the first hammer worth getting worth getting and here's a really Larry Niven and Jerry porn out of the two great hardcore sci-fi writers and Larry told me about 15 years ago. He said let me tell you something I was in my office And there was this earthquake like you've been in the South line long enough right? This is earthquakes every X amount of time and they do a certain amount of damage like Northridge was big But before an earthridge Larry sitting his office at like eight in the morning in an earthquake hits I think it's a witty earthquake or something and the last thing he remembers is a bookshelf coming right at him right and he comes to and he is blacked out I mean he's blacked out for a couple of hours right and he has this vision comes to he sees a spine of books and one of them says Lucifer's Hammer hardcover edition and he realizes I was almost killed by my life's work He has an Lucifer's hammer knocked him out Wow, so he bolted the shelf to the wall for the next one that's a good move bolting shelves always good move here We started this off talking about being fascinated with ancient civilizations in the fact that we don't really like we know quite a bit about ancient Egypt in Sort of if you look at it the fact that it's 2500 plus BC, you know, we know quite a bit. That's a long time ago and we have some pretty Incredible structures that still remain from them which is pretty amazing, but no writing. I mean just hieroglyphs We don't have books. We don't have like the library of Alexander was burned to the ground and who knows what was in that? You know, there's so much lost when it comes to ancient civilizations and one of the things that I worry about Is that we're moving everything digital and everything even more than just digital people are storing things like in the cloud like crazy and that When we get a Lucifer's hammer is all gone right that's the thing if we left behind some flash drives and some hard drives and some old computers and stuff and then Everybody else died except for like a few thousand people that live like nomads How long would it would all be absorbed by the earth right remember Wally trying to get all the trash compacted and everything And he's choosing things that he would you know the Wally the robot from the movie the Pixar movie oh And he's like all keep that you know because he's he's making a library of parts so he himself going He's skipping so going for 50,000 years this way and and the shit he's throwing away like he does keep an iPod because it plays this favorite movie You know, and he's able to rig it up. He's a robot right his little Macintosh robot right but it's interesting to see the Pixar's depiction of what is going to trash And when the earth is so toxic and is covered with trash and the people have a vacuade and are living aboard a ship because the earth talks about But we're sort of banking on the fact that nothing happens when we have like the Georgia guide stones which are dubious It's very weird to keep population the 500,000 what's 500 million world-wide or something like that You know, it's like very you know interesting rules to live by but doesn't tell you anything about how to set up solar power You know, what is the internet? How is it how does it connect China to the UK? You know, there's none of that. Well, here's an interesting thing for you Britain Southern Britain when Rome fell right and the Romans left No one was there to maintain led pipes so the Romans invented fantastic bath systems with led pipes that That could run cold water hot water that valves and everything And so all the stuff went to potty and the roads went Bluey and the Roman roads were straight and they had these Mounds on either side that you could have watchers and stuff like that And it was super high-tech right and then Rome went away and all the stuff just fell into ruin and the British forgot how to make bricks So there were no brick buildings, you know, they had to go back to knocking out stone to build the first Christian churches in England Were made out of because they did not have brick technology. Wow gone What was the classic example of like what's going on right now? We have so many things that we need like I had a joke I was doing about how What I thought happened with Egypt was that the dumb people Just outfucked the smart people and left behind a bunch of shit that didn't understand and that If I left you alone in the woods right now with a hatchet how long before you could send me an email Right like we have so much that we rely on on a daily basis me you might understand it I don't understand it. I know most people that use it don't understand it One of the most terrifying TV shows I've ever seen about this is James Burke's connections Which came around 1980 and in the first episode what you see is this British guy, you know Master presenter right and he's walking up to a screen door on a farm And he's saying the electricity has been off for a week two weeks four weeks The people are starving people are trying to leave the city you escape the city you manage to get to this farm The farm is abandoned Right You know, it's one of the places you could survive you are coming up to the door The people are not there What do you do you go you see there's a milking machine you can't use it. It's no electricity You see everything That you can't use to farm even though you maybe you understand farming but modern farming Then you go up into the attic of the barn and you find a discarded plow from like the 1910s That is your tool You have to know how to use that and how to put that onto animals onto pulling draft animals to break the soil You're now on the 11th century If you can't master that plow if you can't find that plow and know everything there is to do about that Technology you're out of luck Everything else is just trash at that point And that would go away in a thousand years if that was still left around Thousand years from now that would be nothing. No plows and no nothing. So how much do you think happened like that with like ancient Egypt? I mean how much of that stuff just Whatever they built or whatever they design. I mean we essentially we have like fossil remnants of their civilization We have what what survived in pottery form and in stone form The papers all gone either burned or destroyed or thrown in rivers or whatever there's very little That's telling I mean how much of what we have today would be around in just like a thousand years all the computers have begun Cars would be gone. You know there's that great TV was it on the scivory or history where they showed the earth after life after people or something like enter people and man you know watch men hat and you watch The at 500 years The Brooklyn Bridge finally comes down is it so well built You know the the case ons or belt incredibly strongly the the cable ties and everything they figured it would take about 500 years for those Cables to rust through and finally the decking whatever's left of it to come down. That's nothing. Yeah, that's nothing But that would be the last piece in New York Oh, as this is their skeletal frameworks the the blackberry bushes would come back the streams would come back in their normal On Manhattan Island right it would just come back Dear would come back in and one of the last things would be this this Brooklyn Bridge coming down That is so crazy, but hat that that it totally makes sense I mean nothing not that stuff lasts. It's not gonna last We don't build I mean the pyramids did you know that the pyramids? I didn't know this we had this wonderful lecture by an Egyptologist who worked on the Giza plateau for like 20 years and he said We've discovered so many things about the city of artisans and craftsmen and teams that built the pyramids by excavating This massive area now that they've done He said one of the things we discovered is the pyramids were clouds clad with polished limestone Yeah, they used it all to make Cairo they chipped it all away Yeah, but and you find this in in Vazas and China The stuff was taken off the cladding is it the pyramids used to be shine used to be like a prism They say blind you if you're coming in a certain angle in the desert in the sun They would just this incredible shining pyramid Can you imagine the power on the average nomad seeing that with a gold cap too? There's a golden cap Oh, and cap. Yeah, so like our money, you know With a little eye on the top. Yeah, but and so people ripped the stuff off and they took it and it's all over the world and Harry's holes assholes ruin everything but this but this guy he showed us this Initially he went to the Giza plateau in the 70s He was part of some kind of a cult that believed the pyramids were built by extraterrestrials And he was literally in this cult and he went to See it he was sort of like sent there by the cult Got so interested in excavation in the reality of trying to really solve it He sort of left the cult went back out of PhD and he's been working there for 20 years And he gave us oh, yeah, it was amazing Wow and he showed us You know, he said all the Hollywood mythology of slaves building the pyramids and it was all complete You know, who we right here's here's the plan of the city of the artisans and the construction teams and the contractors that built the pyramid Central Avenue big hospital complex the best one in in the ancient world huge bakery This bakery would make Conical bread loaves that the guys could put a rope around throw over their backs And then go up to the job site and they ate the bread And then he said we kept cutting down through sand through these clay layers That didn't see they shouldn't be there You know 20 feet down and there's a layer of clay They figured out the clay was from a quarry up up the Amazon up the Nile rather No wrong Brain going in the wrong place And then he said what an earth is going on And so they started excavating horizontally and they found that these were clay tracks And they said what an earth is this and then they started saying these these clay tracks matter a lot They're not just left over Layers in the desert and then they they mapped them out And there was a whole network of them and what they were were low friction slipways And so they said they put The blocks on some kind of a canvas on some kind of a Thing they had mastered low friction They'd figure out that clay and a layer like a micro layer of water on it Creates a hydraulic system that you can move massive tonnage on And so they built one of them using the same clay from the same quarry up the Nile They made one they brought all these Cairo University engineering students out They're probably mechanical engineering and they put like a multi ton block on canvas on this track And these guys pulled and they were able to get it up to some speed of like 10 kilometers an hour So this is how they moved the volume of the blocks Wow amazing Incredible And it's probably started out You know they've been building pyramids for a thousand years before that And so there's the famous bending pyramid that's like not collapsed but about two Because they didn't understand foundation Right Because you can't build a foundation for a pyramid It's on sand most of them work And it's like not collapse, but about two. Because they didn't understand foundation. Because you can't build a foundation for a pyramid. It's on sand. Most of them were. And by the time of Giza, they mastered it. You fill the area with water. Like you basically pack sand down. Huge area acres and acres. Fill it with water. And then a team's would go on, they would pack the sand up to the level of the water. Water is flat. And then when they started laying down their first case ons, that would evenly compress the sands. The key thing is massive compressile strength, evenly over the area, so that the thing will not bend and fall down. Wow. And they had to do it so accurately that over 2,500,000 blocks there could be such little deviation to line up at the top. And then they made them incredible. They learned that these guys had mastered a whole field, which we lost, which we didn't even know existed, sand hydraulics. So these guys were literally using hydraulic sand as a flowing thing. It's like water. You have an hourglass. It looks like water flowing down, but it's sand. And so to set keystones, they would have a column of sand, get the keystone to the top, and they would pull plugs out. And the sand would come down. And the keystone would come down absolutely perfectly in the right place. Sand hydraulics. Sand foundations. Clay for slipways. Smart dudes. Isn't it amazing when you said 1,000 years? Like they had been making pyramids for 1,000 years. We can barely comprehend what 1,000 years is. 1,000 years to us is like if you want to go back to 1,000, 14, that's like Genghis Khan times. And of course, the cathedrals took 1,000 years to mask. Right. So think about the fact that they were doing that, making these things for 1,000 years. And even though as far as we know, they didn't have electronics, they didn't have computers, they didn't have any of these things, they still had the human mind. They had the human mind without electricity, without engines. They had contemplative time. Right. And they had a culture that supported it. Well, they also had this incredible connection with the cosmos. Because of the fact that they weren't dealing with light pollution like we are. We've done a really weird thing in our arrogance. I mean, it's not arrogant that we did it. We did it out of innovation, out of this burning desire to continually create new and better things. But our cities, which is the giant population centers, we've essentially cut off our view of the cosmos entirely. It's incredible. They didn't. And they were entirely invested in not just the cosmos, but their positions and the cosmos, the astrological charts and where things lined up and where, I mean, the shafts in the great pyramid that would lead to various constellations. And then the lay lines of Europe and then so incredible. Dennis and I and August were running around Machu Picchu. And he said, we've got to find the observatory. We've got to find the observatory. And he knows this place pretty well. I had a wonderful tour of it from him. And we found it. And it has this rock that has all these angle pieces in it. And it's a star mapper, a big, big rock, multi ton rock. But it's carved. So if you look this way, you're going to position on this star and position on that star. And it had a sort of a portal at the top. And this is what's remaining of Machu Picchu's territory. So it's like all these people have this knowledge. Yeah. As long as people stay alive and they keep innovating, they do it differently than we're currently experiencing it right now. But they figure out a way to do it. And some really intense, very sophisticated way. And if you compare, what is that, Jamie? That's the observatory thing. Is that it? That's probably, yeah, that looks like. Wow. And the star man for a while. Thousands of years ago, right? This is like at least 1,000 years ago. There's a lot of Machu Picchu. 1,600, 1,400. OK, so less. Less. Yeah. Wow. In fact, the Inca Complexis of Dennis and I and our group were running around a lot of Inca Complexes, including P-SAC and the other places. And those dudes knew how to cut rock so perfectly. I mean, when you know how they did that, it's not known. They could have used ropes. Haven't you ever watched Ancient Aliens? You know, I've never seen that. I've never seen that. It was Alien. Everything's Alien. I'm a born skeptic. I'm a Canadian. So Canadian. Canadian. Canadian more skeptical? Oh, much more. Less religious. Is that what it is? We have basically armchair views of America. So I grew up watching all Canadians sort of watch America with exhilaration and horror and admiration of your porch. From our porch, well, you know, they say there's a joke about North America, which is there's it's a three-story apartment block. In the middle apartment is this out of control fricking party and beer bottles and crapping and throwing. That's America. In the bottom is Mexico and all the beer bottles and the crap are falling on that apartment. And up above is Canada and Canadians are leaning over the balcony saying, can you keep it downy? So that's that's problem. This is Toronto has Rob Ford. Oh, Toronto has Rob Ford. Yeah, so that's changing. He'll be getting more American. He'll soon be exported. You think so? And we used to have him on the show. I would have him on the show. Absolutely. I'd get him high. to get a high. He's a little crack cocaine. I would smoke crack with him just to get him to do it. Right here on the show. Like he has one drug that he can go in trouble. You helped Graham break his fast. Well, he wanted to. He kept talking about it. I'm like, you want to try it? He kept looking over his way. Come on. He was great, though. He took a little baby hit, another little baby hit, and then he was off to the races. You can see it. Like the cannabinoids are receptors firing and all the words flowing out of his eyes. Yeah, he became like Terence well oiled. Yes. Well, it's back to the subject. It is amazing when you think of it, the fact that these people did have these incredibly sophisticated societies. We just don't recognize them as incredibly sophisticated because they didn't have electricity because they didn't have the combustion engine. Those are our benchmarks. If you don't have that, you guys are dopes. But meanwhile, the reality is they had some stuff that we still are perplexed by, some structures that have taken decades upon decades of some of the greatest archeologists, geologists, and engineers to try to even get a theory as to how they put these things together. And that's all we've got. I mean, we've got some pretty good information on a lot of things like we're talking about the San hydraulics. But as far as the ability to go out and build one right now, good fucking luck. Well, like at one of these ruins, so soon as the Spanish arrived in the Incan lands, what they did was have the Inca knock down their own temples. Oh, God. And then those stones were carried down, fucking white people, to build Catholic cathedrals. The next earthquake happened, the Catholic cathedrals were flattened. And the Incan complex were fine, because there's 12 to 14 degree angles on all the windows. It's built to survive earthquakes for 1,000 years. It's incredible. And the water channels that there's been no maintenance for 500 years, there's still pumping out billions of gallons of water for all these farms. Amazing. Amazing. And I stood there in awe of a 30 ton block. You could see this was above Cusco. And this block was carved like doop, doop, doop, doop, doop, doop, and then- Oh, that mean doop, doop, doop, doop, doop, doop, doop, angles, we were angles. But flat faces. And then there was a block. Next to it was perfectly matched. I mean, no gaps. And then the one down below, I said the stone mason, stood and studied a pile of rocks. And in his head, because he was such a deep, profound, present engineer expert, he saw the pattern of these rocks and how they could fit together with the least amount of cutting. And with perfection, these guys had this in their heads. They could like, boom. I know, cut that one. That's going to be on the center. And they had to lift them. And they had to cut them first. And then left them into place. They had to be perfect. So this guy had three-dimensional, a mental acuity that blows our minds. I mean, any kind of world of work craft player couldn't navigate that space. The three-dimensional acuity of these people. Yeah. It really is incredible when you think of what has all been accomplished long before people invented the internet, long before people were going to the library to get their books on all the stuff. Or maybe they were. Library of Alexandria, of course, right? Yeah. But it's thought of as primitive. We still think of them as primitive. And when you compare the work of John Anthony West and Graham Hancock and Robert Shock and all these geologists and people that are pointing to all these erosion marks going, we might be dealing with some really ancient civilization mixed in with some other civilizations that are like, everyone wants to date Egypt around the same time. But there's a growing movement of people that are saying, you're dealing with some pretty significantly different structures. The age of the Sphinx, which I know Graham kept covered in your show with him, your last show, which is fascinating. Yeah. Thousands of years of rainfall erosion. And the last time there's rainfall in the Nile Valley was 9,000 BC. And did you know that when I was visiting in the Sphinx about 20 years ago, our guide said, did you know that this thing has been for 10,000 years? But in the last 15 has been so damaged by Cairo City sanitation department raising the water table. So every, he said, every toilet that flushes in the city of Cairo is taking a chunk out of the interior of the Sphinx. So we are pumping in paraffin wax to keep from coming apart. So I mean, look at the destructive power of our civilization just haphazard. And the archaeologists that gave us this tour of the Giza Plateau excavation. They, he said, look, here's modern Cairo coming up over top of our excavation site. We can excavate under that. Notice the war in of chaotic streets and bad planning and bad everything. And on top of this beautifully thought out, fully functional city of artisans and construction people, how have we evolved to tell us? Yeah, he's fascinating that this really wacky city is over one of the greatest ancient cities ever. Like Cairo's crazy, crazy, gotta place another example. Yeah. So how are we evolving exactly? Well, we're doing something because the Mexico City during the Aztecs, if they knew what we know now or the Incas, they would have known the Cortez was an asshole and they were shot them. And they would have never thought he was a warrior that was part God on a horse. They would not have any misconceptions about them because they would have known what a horse is. They would have had the internet. But they know what horse shit is. Oh, what a horse shit. But yeah, literally and figuratively, right? So here I want to propose you a theory that's kind of captivated me and it's partly woo and it's partly science. But it'll really. That's my favorite stuff. It's favorite stuff. I like half a woo. So half a woo. So yeah, you got a t-shirt that has a woo on the front, and a woo on the back. So you turn around your woo, woo, but. So the Aleucinian mysteries, you know about the Aleucinian mysteries. Yeah. So they ran for 1700, 1800 years. They ran. They started out before the Greek civilization. Explain people what it means. What it was, it was a kind of like a burning man or more serious than a burning man was an initiation ceremony that happened at Aleucis in Greece. And as run by women, sort of high class women, they were kind of a monopoly. And when they finally got this thing cranked up, because we don't know much about the earlier history, but you can go to the temple of Aleucis today. It was destroyed in the fourth century by characters that I want to bring up later. This is why we might be still in the culture of the people to destroy the Aleucis. So they built this thing so that the fully powered up Aleucis theme park transformational experience was a thousand person buried temple could could house a thousand initiants buried under the ground so that people couldn't see out. So they were totally an in internal process. The initiants came from all over the mandatory and they included Roman emperors, philosophers, et cetera. And you had to go to Aleucis once in your life, because the thought was you then became a human being. So they came off their boats, they landed, they wore the same garb, they had a fasting diet sound familiar. They said had a fasting diet. I'm a Ramadan. It sounds like what I would say today, it sounds like people who are doing initiatory practice. I wasca, for example. People were going to Mecca too, same time, the wearing the same clothes. Exactly, bring them down. And so the initiants would walk through villages. And the villagers would come out and their job was to cat call, to swear and bring the people down. Say, oh, you've got a big nose. So if it's a noble person who's a lot of wealth, they're getting screened at by villagers and they get knocked back to knock them, they're, they're ego out. And to dissolve them, basically a boundary dissolution exercise, they were walking next to fields which had wheat, which had tiny mushroom like purple. It's a perpilla, a brain is shot today, but it was basically a rust that would grow on the wheat that was used to make the kayakian drink that would be given to the initiants after nine days or eight or eight or nine days. So this is like some ergot base thing or got bases in ergotamine sort of an ergot base. How do we know this? Because I thought that was like a giant mystery as to what they were taking, like some folks thought that it was so aside then some people felt it was an ergot beer. So some sort of an ergot beer. I mean, Hoffman's book he talks about it, probably being an ergot beer or some sort. Right. But there was definitely an initial potion that was extremely powerful. But what makes you think that it was what you're saying? Because you can find this, you know, in the area of elusive today, you can find and I'm no expert. I mean, you should have an expert on this on the show. Right. I read a number of books about this. But when I piece this together, so this is a fantastic book called Psychodelia Bipatrick-1 Borg that came out last year, he passed away, unfortunately, the author is quite a young man. But in the first chapter, he details this. And what he says is the initiants would come in, they would go into the temple, they were on this fasting diet, the temple, the people who were running the temple, it was sound in music, it was all factory, smoke, color, and they were driven to this intense state and then they were given the Kaikian. And I think they, you know, philosophy, Greek philosophers, and others have written about their experience at alusis. And they would emerge really in an incredible, maybe they got incredibly high, maybe their boundaries would dissolve, but they emerged with visionary coming back with vision. What to do? What to do in their world? And when they went home, they boarded their ships and whatnot. And they went home, and what did we see happening in that period? Greek theater, mathematics, the academy, road construction, hydraulics, the idea of a city, organizational structure, the republic, the idea of polity, the idea of representation. And the Elisinian mystery school was just one of many that were going on, but Elusis was a big deal. Elusis was destroyed partly in some periods and then a Roman emperor would reboot it. And finally, and I think it was the end of the fourth century, coming in from the north, we're sort of the savage Germanic tribes that were basically taken out the whole Western Roman Empire. And guess who was coming in from the east? Black-robed Christians were described as cranky fellows with a real obsessive perfectionist, reductionist kind of negative. They were described as really nasty characters. They formed this compact. And together, they destroyed the temple that Elusis. So my Wuhu theory is, are we living in an inferior culture that has no initiation, replacing initiation, powerful initiation with what? All these other structures of abuse and user-y church structures, corporate structures, commercial structures, are we juvenile? Are we made juvenile? But the fact that we didn't have a powerful initiator experience that dissolved our boundaries that opened us to vision that made us human beings? I certainly think that's very arguable. It makes a lot of sense. I mean, if you compare our resources to their resources, what we've accomplished and what we've managed to fuck up in comparison to what they managed to create with no combustion engine, with no hydraulics. Of course, of course they had slave cultures. And there were a lot of, but here's the other thing. And you should ask Graham when he's next on that. I'd love to hear his response to this. What did you have before the rise of civilization, especially in the Mediterranean? You had the upper paleo, the thick, you had village cultures, tribal cultures, had quite a bit of conflict, but quite a bit of advancement. But that was thousands and thousands of years. And then suddenly, and for sure, they had some kind of initiator experience for their youth, especially for young men. Because as we know, in cultures that still have an initiatory practice. I think that's a very important part of life, having some very clear graduation process. Exactly. And we have it throughout schools. We have it in grade school. We have it in martial arts. Martial arts is important. Yeah, do you just sue in martial arts as where we're bringing it back, right? Strong initiation. Yes. Because you probably see this. Because the people that haven't had that, they've think through other loss. And the ones that have been very pampered and helicopter parenting, we all talk about this. And they now talking about the hoop jumping circus, train circus pig kids that upper middle class parents say, jump to this hoop, jump to this hoop. They're three or four years old, and they're jumping through these hoops because why? Because they're being prepped to get into top-level universities. And so they jump through all these hoops. And there's a professor at Harvard written the book about all this. And he said he's watched in his incoming classes of these kids that are really good at achieving the goals, but they can't deal with ambiguity. They can't deal with irony. They can't deal with creativity. Creativity. They're just living outside the box. Right. So they're going to jump to the investment bank. Or, but they're not very functional. So because they've not had a practice of initiation, they've not have a leveling practice, a boundary dissolving practice. They've been in this programmatic evolution. And it's dangerous. Yeah. I think that there should be some sort of graduation process for various stages in your life that sort of established the fact you've learned from your mistakes. You've grown, you've achieved, and you've gotten through some, you've overcome some adversity in your hair. I got it through scouting in Canada because we had a total wilderness situations where we, a bunch of us, almost died a couple times. We're out in 45-belief below cracking cold January. And we were in a snowshoe hike with 60 pounds of birch bar vlogs in our pack packs to toughen ourselves off. It was just a little bit of an adult. And we were climbing over a mountain range. And we, this, the cold snap came in. And I remember, like I said, we are this close to hypothermic somebody dying in our group of like six or eight of us, or 14 years old, whatever. Because I went out to take a leak one night. And you can imagine you're wearing jeans. I mean, this is the 70s. And we don't have proper clothes even. And I took a sat down on this rock. And I took a leak. And then I came back past in the next day. I mean, my pistol is freezing on the way out. And I realized it's a dead stallion. It's frozen solid, wild horse, frozen solid, dead. And those are rock. I thought it was right. I was sat on it. And we saw wolves and they were really skinny in the distance. And we realized we are really close to this is, you know, and somebody goes into hypothermic shock in that environment. You're done. You're done. And another time we were hiking on the West Coast trail in Vancouver Island, we made a wrong turn. And the whole group we found ourselves in this, you know, this rock outcropping with a tie coming in and storm surge. And we had to like cling on to this thing all night. And we couldn't set up any kind of camp. And it was like those were important experiences. Yeah, right to passage over come in adversity, all those different things. I think they should probably be engineered into our cultures and our communities. I have a theory that goes along with your theory. I think your theory is probably absolutely correct that, you know, we are a in some ways less sophisticated or less advanced society, at least less. What will, we were most certainly more materialistic, right? We're certainly more dependent upon the internet and most certainly more dependent upon computers, technology. I have a theory about people. And it's a very, it's very shaky. But here's my theory. My theory is I think that everything is natural. And I think that all behavior like wolves chasing out the beta and the alpha taking over, I think like, you know, birds of prey, feasting on other birds and bears eating salmon and all these complex ecosystems that we see all over the world, we just accept them as being natural because they're a part of the world that we didn't alter. But ourselves, we don't look as natural because we've altered ourselves. But I think we are entirely natural. And I think our society and our civilization and our, as fucked up as it is, it's also natural. And I think the purpose of it serves is we live to give birth to technology. Marshall McLuhan said that human beings are the sex organs of the machine world. And I think that what we are doing right now by our obsession with the newest greatest iPhone, Elon Musk just released a Tesla that goes zero to 16, two seconds. Oh my God, it's amazing. I have to have it. And by continuing to be obsessed with acquiring the latest and greatest gadgets, we push that innovation further and further, we fuel it with money. And that eventually it's going to give birth to an artificial life form. It's inevitable. And I think it will give birth to the next thing. And I think we are like a caterpillar that is becoming a butterfly and we have no idea what we're doing. We're just in the middle of doing it. And we're just like, oh, it was so much better back in the old days when we chopped wood. And the reason why we think that is because we know inevitably that we are, we're not going to last. We know that it's just a matter of X amount of time before we're outdated. Well, here's something I'm not good to add. I believe you're right. And here's a nugget to add for you. That goes back to our deepest history. This goes to my practice. I do what I call endogenous visioning. Sometimes in science it's called thought experiments or gedonkin experiments. But I can close my eyes mostly, close dies, and I could go into worlds. And that's what I've been using to design the spacecraft for NASA and origin of life. I work in the origin of life field. And I'm sort of visualize molecular storms and flows and all that stuff. Because I have this practice of just doing it and I'm not taking anything, just doing it. And what happened about two years ago, I was reading an article in science that all it was an article was about is, like we found a femur bone that was this small. Just a few, you know, a portion of a centimeter, a few millimeters, it's like quarter of an inch long. And it's a femur bone from our ancestors. All monkeys, primates, lemurs, all of them. All of us, dudes, it's our common ancestor. It's 55 million years old. And then they had an artist's conception of this thing that would have been about two inches long. And they said, well, our ancestor lived in the forest canopy in eight insects. We were in sectivores. So I closed my eyes and I said, okay, I want to go back there. I want to do an endogenous thought experiment in science to see what comes in from the ether. What was our life like then? Because that's a big clue of who we are and where we're going. And I had this go into a kind of a dream state, a sort of meditation and breathwork and what I go into the dream state. And I see this branch at dawn and this a ball, a ball of us all clumped together. Because in sectivores, they protect each other by going close, warmth and all that stuff. And I watched as this young protoprymate pull herself away from the ball. So story always comes to me to do this kind of shit. And she's creeping out on the limit dawn. Why? Because she sees a glistening globule of something. And why is this important? Because that's sugar, it's tree sap that comes out at night. And the diet of these insectivores are leaves and flowers and stuff and catching like a dragonfly, which is a major kill for protein and sucking down tree sap. So it's like fries, burger and a shake diet. That's our diet. That's an insectivore diet. And she's creeping out on the limb and she's sucking down this globule of sweet. And when I is looking back to see if somebody in the community notices her, because she'll get busted, sound familiar. The other eye is looking forward on the limb and it sees this very trippy scale pattern. This trippy pattern of color. She doesn't know what it is, but what it is, it's a tree snake. And the tree snake was this sole giant predator that survived the impact in Mexico, that killed the dinosaurs. And then we rose after that, although we may have been earlier. The tree snake is on the branch waiting for her, waiting for her. And she's getting high on all this sugar, because we still get high on sugar. Here we are drinking our coffees. Right with our sugar. And she's watching that. And that tree, that pattern of scales is evolved to mesmerize her. It's totally there to captivate her. Why? Because the head is under the branch. The head is about to come up. If she doesn't snap out of it and leap back, it will snap her ass down. So this happened for tens of millions of years. This is coevolution. What I believe from that vision that I had was, I said, oh my God. This is why we're mesmerized by screens. We're the only animal that's mesmerized by the screen of a phone or text your patterns, movies, moving images. It's totally hardwired into us. We're also terrified of snakes. I mean, we have a hardwired circuit in our brain that if you see something that looks like a snake, you just jump involuntarily. That's in there too. I thought that serpent on that limb, that coevolved our brain to vision, that gave us color vision, that gave us 3D, high acuity vision that we were talking about, the ancient peoples. Because we could see incredible pattern. Why? Because we evolved for 30 million years with those guys. We had to solve that problem in evolution for 30 million years. That's a lot of time. It's a lot of programming. It's a lot of brain development. Because the ones that got snapped down weren't as good. and it's all good old fashioned, our running evolution. And I sometimes have these conversations with what I call the Mondre. So I mother nature or the guy in planetary plant bolus. And I said to her at one point, I said, you use this technique to evolve us, to evolve our vision. So we could drive cars and we could create media and all this sort of stuff. But it is now coiled around the planet. Technology is coiled around the planet. Squeezing out the lifeblood of the planet. And I asked her, does this bother you? And she said, no, as long as you do the prerogative of my prerogative, a life's prerogative, find me a new home. I must make a copy. So what life does. the prerogative of my prerogative. A life's prerogative Find me a new home. I must make a copy. So what life does This planet is a womb and it's a tomb. Okay. This is all just a crazy vision. You have this crazy vision Okay, it's a womb and a tomb. So finding a new home. You're talking about space travel It's their planetary space travel. Yeah, and what we've done is a species in it. So I do a lot of this work for NASA of designing Strange spacecraft and what exactly does your educational background when it comes to that stuff? That stuff It was you know it was started out as good old USC Trojan You know graduating in electrical engineering in the 80s, but of course it was hardly any software out at that time And I was trying to do artificial life in 1987. Can you imagine this on computers at USC? Connected to the arpinet and it was too soon So I restarted it 22 years later and I made a project called the evil grid But I was too freaking soon, so I so you're kind of like the like the virtual reality people were also too soon they were and in 1993 94, you know, we all read snowcrash and we didn't read a new romance or all those sorts of things and we watched you know minority report and all that sort of stuff But I actually started organizations to kick start virtual world on the internet in 94 95 we had the first conference I wrote a book called avatars and help to network together and get all these people in the same room that were building avatar cyber space and three dimensional You move through and you see objects fish and people and whatever and they talk to you and Etc. That's how I get connected with Terrence Terrence McKenna this Terrence was fascinated by that and I was the go-to guy So he came he came to the farm and said it or Little table and I put him into these virtual worlds But it was an amazingly powerful medium and then we spun that medium into all this work for NASA for 12 years Using virtual worlds to model the surface of Mars for example and a rover and how it would work the rigid body dynamics of wheels driving and bulldozers on the moon and stuff like that and how do we build moon bases? But we could use 3D graphics, you know the serpent again Our ability to create these worlds to figure out how a vehicle would work on another planet before we built we built bent any metal But it turns out coming back to the life propagation thing if you go to the curiosity rover or the two rovers on Mars and you put you take a screw gun If you were there, you know Hopefully the vehicles are dead. So you're not caught on camera, but you drop the belly pan off of them Inside there's a dozen species of bacteria that are just There for the ride. They're inside the vehicles. They can't be knocked out in any clean room And they're they're dry, but they're alive So there's life on Mars. This just happens to be in the bodies of our spacecraft. So there's no way avoid to avoid that Really no way there's no way to and there's certain species of bacteria that will always be present and in fact the JPL Vacuum chamber and where they do the final prep for some of these missions They found that because they had created the vacuum chamber and the clean rooms Certain types of bacteria evolved to be good at living in those So they're already good at hitching a ride So of course they're inside the vehicle and they're on Mars Now outside of the vehicle there's radiation and stuff that make it impossible for them to really spread and get into soils and stuff Well, there was a fascinating podcast from radio lab about the Galapagos Island and about How many invasive species have found a way to the Galapagos even from just the heels of people's feet Having seeds ground into their the pattern of their shoes And that sometimes these seeds will get into these Grounds and then these invasive species will start growing and Jeff Goldbloom and Jurassic Park and he says life will find a way out Yeah, something like that. What they were trying to say is that there really is no clean like And this idea that you're not going to That a human being Entering into some particular environment is gonna not leave a footprint like it's not it's not happening Yeah, they just by virtue of you being there your bacteria your diseases are carrying around in a single cell organisms bacteria to help us digest food and stuff and that The body load of that stuff out numbers the number of humans have ever lived right, you know, it's in we're just In some sense, here's a joke for you. So we come we rise We don't do the deed we don't create life off the planet. We just sort of go away Planet goes on runs down five billion years from now the sun is a is a red giant and it's expanding and We come the earth comes and it scrapes the outer corona and it starts breaking apart because that's probably what'll it happen And the crust comes apart now across we know that bacteria can survive in all these crustal rocks and maybe travel to other Solar systems, but my prediction is the surface bacteria will say Hey guys in the ones that are of five kilometers down or three miles down said hey guys listen around a billion years ago or 600 million years ago there was all this surface gigantic plants and Lales and dinosaurs and stuff and there was one species that did technology and even Took it out a little bit and then they just blew it and went away and the five kilometer deep Bacteria will see you're kidding that was going on no one told us You know that that all was happening on the surface were we used to just being bacteria on planets that never go any further than just the Bacteria phase well the primary idea about how life gets moved around about the galaxy is asteroid Olympics right like the idea of panzpermia like that Much of what is Life sustaining exists on asteroids like amino acids and water it was it was a theory put forth I think in the 70s first it was initially sort of panned But what now we're discovering meteorites that have come from Mars and landed on ice caps on earth and go in and realize no It's quite possible that things hitched to ride and that Mars would have cooled sooner had a liquid ocean sort of more stable Environment sooner than earth would have so if life arose on Mars and got some impacts and blew off some crustal material Then we could be all Martians. Yeah. Yeah, that was the idea right well if that's the case I mean isn't the rover just a very microscopic form of that I mean it's not an asteroid, but it is a plant of something It came from one body and is now occupying another body and it has life on it So here's the other part of the story so perhaps and this is all woo-woo But the bacteria in the Mars rovers are communicating with the Mars bacteria and saying listen You know We got life started on the earth We went up to a certain point where we had trilobites and we had deep swimming things and they weren't really evolving So we ordered an air strike Knocked him back and then we got things on land that crawled But they just basically all that it was eaten shit You know and they got big and whatever but they weren't going anywhere So we ordered another air strike Kill off the dinosaurs And now we've got this new thing these primate things But we don't know if they're really going to go anywhere So we just might order one more air strike and start with the rack mids Let's do spiders the next time we got a we got a fine one that's going to do the job of getting life spread You know So you think that that's where our primary objective is to get off this planet and spread life throughout the galaxy I think that life life is so powerful I mean life It pushes into new environments You know it went from Early thermal springs on volcanic islands and it figured out This is the work I'm doing with my colleagues at UC Santa Cruz and NASA and elsewhere So try to figure out a model of how life started and those volcanic springs In those early we've come with a model We've just actually submitted our paper this week on that model But life pushes its way in Life had to learn in that model to survive in the oceans And then it could spread these little bubbles that are like pre you know early life really fragile and don't have much of a genome But they can persist long enough they can get to the next island You know life will find a way like Jeff Goldbloom said but look at where life has gone I'm just incredible as you say if we are the spreading wings of the living system We're a magnificent creation of that. I mean we're we have the potential to spread life everywhere And one of the other projects I'm working on is asteroid capture and retrieval No, if you want to hear about that Yeah, sure. That's a mechanism to actually spread life in a large scale You know even though it's indirect so You know nobody's gonna fund a project to spread life into the solar system. We're not so visionary You know we're pretty pedestrian and we do things for business reasons or whatever So there's this whole new space movement that's come up You know SpaceX Elon Musk All these private entrepreneurs They're proposing how to get to Mars and stuff Right NASA's still in the game even though they can't launch people you know They're gonna be using SpaceX in a few years So NASA's put out this call for well, let's see what can we do with the human crew? Well, we can Back in 2007 When they were gonna shut down the shuttle program And that was on the books I worked with a team that worked with headquarters to design what's possibly the very first You know we can even bring up that video How to get people to an asteroid? How to land a human crew using the hardware that NASA wanted to build which is called constellation at the time And it turns out it's a tricky thing, you know Who is it the movie the deep impact movie You mentioned Bruce Willis he had wanted the other one was Morgan Freeman There was two there was a deep impact and then there was a comic-and-game So what we said is you know that's all well and good But how do you really do it and it turns out that an asteroid even that's a half a mile long has almost no gravity So you're not you're not actually going to Is this your video that this is it Jamie's put up here Jamie has put it up so there's almost no gravity So it's very difficult to land on so that's a really big object, but it's going what like 45,000 miles an hour Something like that it's rotating and it's you know, so it's spinning and it's moving and it's moving so here's our craft Coming down it's like a football it's like a space potato So here we're coming down and we're using our radar to try and find a spot that might not be so crumbly because these are often rubble piles And this is gonna be people going So this is a this is a human mission. So let's see the ring of airbags That allows a soft contact The vehicle's under thrust and it's watch this here comes Penitrometers coming out. There's a penitrometer. It's like a boom penitrate On the edge as of a rope and the penitrometers are to try to grapple the surface You've got tension if you got tension on three or four of your lines like a rock climber You can you got stability So it actually digs into the surface dig into the surface like an anchor And here are the guys coming out notes. They're floating. They're coming out on handrails. They got nice earth flag there So looting this is our design from 2007 Which was done for an acid headquarters study for the administrator actually and Anyway, so that was done I Unimbarred it so it was so controversial at time because the whole bush agenda was to go back to the moon And this was like another target I thought you know we need to go somewhere else if human beings are going to ever go to Mars Why don't we go to an asteroid? No, this is this was running around the community. They're sort of an asteroid underground And you know our center director was one of those dudes I was sitting in his office and he's up to charge general. He said well, you can You can go public with it because you can't get fired. You know, you're not a civil servant So I did so I lined up space.com and cenet and You know popular sciences on the cover of popular science and we put that out. We said here's our study Here's how we grapple, you know, we dock with an asteroid and we get a human crew etc etc And that kind of goes into a black hole because you know NASA sort of got that kind of institutional thing where they do a lot of studies But we had done it in public and it actually shaped it pushed the space industry as I forgot about it 2007 I said oh, you know, it's out there if you Google humans on an Destroyed it'll come up but turns out people were watching that. I'm looking at that We just put it out there and a guy at I think it was JPL Saw that back in the day and then he designed the next mission Sort of an outsider the student at the time and he said wow This is really cool We should be doing it as an agency and he came up with Couldn't we bring an asteroid closer to the earth so the crew doesn't have to go so far Wait, what? Like pull it closer to earth That sounds like a disaster where you didn't happen small one Small disaster or small asteroid Well, you can land on it. You could you could go and sample it like a geologist with your hammers How big are you talking about when you say small? Oh Literally pretty small between like 12 feet and 30 feet long and you could land on something 30 feet long You couldn't land on that you can do what we just saw Right, but the human crew could park What would call proximity ops yet? It could park way downstream turn off its hydrogen jets and send astronauts over to To sample it, but how do you how do you move something like that say to the orbit of the moon? Which would be a safer place put a moon around the moon So NASA had initiated that challenge based on This work which bounced off this this guy who said we need to bring an asteroid in the moon and they now they have that as a direction so a colleague in Me designed a whole system to do that a system to put an asteroid in orbit around the moon and here's the neat thing about it We figure here's here's the problem. You got to one of these asteroids It's a rubble pile most most of the ones that we're really interested in for science right for sampling They're five billion years old. They're four billion years old. They're collected rubble piles of pieces of the early solar system So they're they're fragile and why do we know this the asteroid that came in over Russia? The asteroid that came in over Africa last year broke up at a certain altitude So we know what pressure took to break it up So we know how much you got to push it to break up the thing up because the atmosphere did that and then it comes in in pieces and Rains down But isn't the concern that you can't predict what happens when you break them up And then you might deal with a bunch of giant rocks hurling towards earth Yeah, and that's why it's really hard to do asteroid deflection by some kind of explosive and you're really to arrive into that They want to just be able to push it or put some kind of a webbing on it It changes the but if you put a rag right if you put a webbing on it They may just come apart You you can use something called gravity tractoring which is developed by rusty shui card and I'd lose it And a separate separate work that we were doing with them this idea of flying a spacecraft alongside something and gradually The gravity will change the orbit. What is the purpose of going to an asteroid though or especially a human mission? Like what would be the benefit of having people go as opposed to having some remote Vehicle because it seems like as we get better and better with remote technology It would be like a lot more efficient. It would save lives and Well, here's here's the we we were grasping that same question So initially NASA said we want to do science We want to take samples off of something that says old as the earth or older because then for origin of life research Which I'm involved in I get I could get a few pounds of this material Out from under the space crust that's on it That has protected it for five billion years or four billion years that materials precious because it was what was raining down in the skies of the early earth It was coming down to the little ponds where life may have started It's like spinning a refrigerator all this time. Right. So it's really precious for science and figuring out how the solar system came together So our design was to go out to the to the asteroid up to a thousand tons. They're all rotating They they spin one time a minute something like that half a rotation a minute Put a balloon around it. Just extend this air beam. I don't know if you've ever done any helium balloon. I can't altitude flight There's no harm. Oh, they're incredible. I mean Julian not lives out in Santa Barbara Perhaps the greatest designer of these kind of balloons and he's on our team for this proposal and he said look What you do is you you extend these air beams You know like the the balloons you have at circus as the guy just like blows up a long balloon and makes a dog out of it for your kid Air beams they're the rigid part so you literally go out to the asteroid Using xenon gas you fill these air beams and they pull your fabric out And on there's a there's a folder of a bunch of images of a synth called shepherd And and it will capture The asteroid here. It's kind of come out there. We go you can see that it's hard to So so this is a balloon. This is literally a balloon captures the asteroid So the asteroid is now inside it and it's tumbling uh-huh It's rotating and there's the air beams those blue things is how they capture works And here's the air flow. We may leave it on that one and we can explain what we're doing It turns out that if you inject gas into this balloon You will gradually slow the tumbling of the asteroid to stop it. Now. It's stopped They've solved one of the big problems of capturing asteroids is to get rid of this spin And tumbling because if you can't there's all these powerful forces if you tried to put a net around that It would just come apart or tear your spacecraft to pieces. Okay, so you put a bubble on it you capture an asteroid now What now what is you'll notice in our little drawing there? We start shooting waves of xenon gas at the back end of it Which puts a force on it not not should have a force to break it up and enough force to shove it And then we use the same xenon gas in our motor to to keep up with it as it moves And we can use like sail power. This is like a sailing ship We can use sail power moving gas to change its orbit and to retrieve it and bring its Move it into some other part of the solar system Is this potential technology to avoid gigantic asteroid Olympics on earth or is it just too small? This is too small. So this this is only for examining old rocks for an examining old rocks But it turns out that when we were investigating this further We thought wait a minute. What if we had a piece of a comet? You know comets are coming in the Pleiades meteor shower in the land It's they come in and they give you this nice light show in the summer That's all valve valuable volatiles. Mm-hmm. That's water. It's methane all this wonderful stuff What if you had a chunk of a comet that had all this these gases coming off? You know the Rosetta mission the Europeans are doing right now. They're orbiting one of these gigantic comets That has these geysers coming out. That's thrust. It doesn't like a rocket thrust What if you could capture a small comet from further out put your balloon around it Capture stop it rotating Capture all the stuff coming off and use it for your engine You could then create a moving chunk of the early solar system. Okay outside of What if we did this and what if we did that and you know being able to do it would be cool and everything like that Would be the benefit of getting some five billion year old rock out of space. Oh, here's and again Why would you want to do it with people? Why wouldn't you want to do it remotely with machines? Well? Here's where the people come in Okay, so if you can move a Basically a wet space rock capture all the gases coming out of it concentrate the gases in your tanks a Human crew can dock with it saying you move it to Mars move it to Mars orbit move it to the lunar orbit Now you've got a gas station in orbit you've got a gas station somewhere in the solar system full of Exactly the material you need to get a human crew They dock with it when they get there They refill their tanks. They now have their return fuel to go back to Earth and then they fuel their lander and They go down with they don't have to carry that stuff. You have gas stations. You have a sustainable space flight system That sounds beautiful But if you don't send people out there, you don't need that. Mm-hmm So you're saying you we would do this because when the people were out there that way we would have power But if you don't need people out there You don't need this power and what would be the benefit of having these people out there other than the fact that you could do it I think because we're you know, we're an exploring species. We're eventually going to want to do it Right, but wouldn't aren't we exploring remotely with the rover aren't we exploring remotely with Voyager? Yeah, we're still exploring But like the proposition of going to Mars is so unbelievably unattractive to me like when I hear that a hundred thousand people signed up from ours I'm like well, that's a hundred thousand people that would just drink drain out those are a hundred thousand people that would dive into a volcano If you put a camera on them, right, right, I mean what the fuck are they doing? The Mars is the shittiest neighborhood ever on earth. Imagine going to some unbelievably un- Unpopulated inhospitable environment on earth. Would you go there? Would you go to some place where you're like sleeping on the edge of a volcano breathing cosmic gases through a fucking giant mask Because you can't breathe the air you have to have this some air tanks and you have all this gears keep you alive You'd be like fuck no. Why would I do that? When I could live in Hawaii right, why would I do that when I can be in San Diego? You wouldn't right? Why would you go to fucking Mars? Except that there are some people there are some crazy people that really want to see this new shit the people that pay the right $20 million to go to the space station There's gonna they're gonna be hitting 50 million at some point to go around the moon Mm-hmm. I mean if you talk to the people who went that was gonna cost per person 50 millions other I heard it thrown around but only rich assholes are gonna be able to afford going around the moon Mm-hmm. Well, it's like in the days of great exploration I mean rich assholes fund a Darwin's is it gonna be like cellphones where it starts off with rich assholes like Michael Douglas on Wall Street with a big brick phone. Yeah, but huge on that eventually on the miracle my all shows Yeah, you go to third world countries and everybody has a cell phone Exactly like that. It's gonna be like that Is that true though? Because it's very disturbing to me that people aren't more up in arms about the loss of the space shuttle and But the loss right lack of funding that was that was crazy. It's so it's but so confusing because every movie From when I was a kid or even television shows do you remember space 1999? Yeah 1999 right we were living in space 1999 you fucking nine you know what happened What is it? 2014 and we don't have an active space program We don't and because there's fundamental problems with the economics like even space X so space X what they did What Elon did down and also gondo here he said okay What we're gonna do is make a low-calist launcher We're gonna have the same engines on the second stage as we have in the first aid not two fricking types of engines With Lockheed Martin and Boeing's launchers like they're so complicated Why because they're government contractors? They're gonna build a lot more money? They're gonna overbuild the government for a meeting. That's what it was. Oh, it's incredible So it's stifled innovation the fact that they're getting money from the government. Yeah because it's government contractors So what the government did in the 1920s when aviation was just starting out They gave these contracts of these little fabric air companies to run postal mail They invented air mail and so they said well We'll create a new kind of mail called air mail for the post offices It doesn't go by horse and buggy or train or whatever and these little companies got enough Finance from that that they started running air mail around and they became continental airlines and United Airlines and All of them came out of that thing by moving it to private enterprise So it NASA did and it's great wisdom sometimes it has great wisdom It created a program in the 2000s in the aughts to do this So you got SpaceX now and you got orbital sciences and at least but what they're they're not inventing much in the way in new tech They're inventing a reliable low-cost launcher just like the Soviets had in the 60s and still have proton You know low-cost made it an assembly line You you look at the air an air gimash factory in Russia that makes the Soviet boosters and and how they make this the Soyuz craft is like Henry Ford's assembly line low-cost high reliability You know, so we had lost that culture and now it's coming back with SpaceX's but the economics are still really rotten So it's coming back because of private funding in the private sector the private sector And because of competition because of competition and innovation coming from Silicon Valley and other brains than people who You know work for large aerospace companies. So it's kind of another Example of bureaucracy and government sort of getting in the way of progress Well in this case they got out of the way of progress and they said well we're losing the shuttle anyway We'll create this small program relatively small where we'll fund the winners of the competition So somebody is kind of like the X prize right this idea of challenges and prizes in the DARPA prize and that's created a huge amount of Innovation that's really work. That's been a government thing that worked Because they said well, I cured a new astronaut glove or self-driving You know robot that can track the edge of the highway, but so much military Like technology came out of the Apollo missions. I mean so so much From the space race between us versus the Soviets so much innovation came out of it so much of it was was very valuable As far as military And I don't understand why that didn't continue it seems like that would be a no brainer Like that would be a very important part of what the military would want and who gets more money than the military the military gets Ungodly sums of cash they get on the guy. They're really really inefficient at delivering programs, right? They have a high cancel rate and when they cancel a program It's a hundred billion dollars of loss, but they seem like they've just stopped and And what the military has done but the DOD has done the same thing NASA is doing the public sector chip manufacturers everything from laptops to whatever are so much more advanced than what the Pinning on or NASA can make that they just use off the shelf. It's called COTS commercial off the shelf and so they're not innovating They're just using laptops, you know, and they're using standard stuff they're getting from industry because industry so far ahead Back in the 50s. They were ahead right in 60s now industry is overking far ahead like Tesla's batteries I mean who can nobody's gonna create something as superior is that right? Or not anytime in the near future. Yeah, there everyone goes by those standard parts Do you think that there is a way that we can kind of get back on track because of the private sector being involved in space travel And we can really start seeing man space travel like we really can we can't like make up for that hiccup Where we thought we would be Reusable and then we'd only cost 50 million. I see original movie alien. What year was that based in 82? No, no, no, yeah, it was 79. What was it based on it was based on not that far in the future right? Right based on like 2020 or something cool like that, right? It wasn't it and you know blade runner was supposed to like 2019 Los Angeles raining and yeah, you know Cyborgs and stuff. Yeah, you know, we're well isn't that still possible? We were talking about before about the creation of artificial life and the exponential growth of technology if you factor in those Those things it might not be 2019, but it might be 2029. I mean they very well may have artificial life that's indistinguishable from you or I in another two or three decades. That's that's very possible, right? No, no, it's not it's really not I've spent at least ten years trying to figure out why technology and biology are Counterpose systems why one doesn't do the other very well. So for example I do a talk now and then at the Singularity University I haven't been there for a couple years, but my talk is why the idea of a singularity is Really not possible and I can show not possible not possible with technology we have now Yeah, but what does that mean? I mean when you say not possible if things continue to go along the same Exponential rate of progress right if it continues to go it it sort of I mean has to reach some sort of an end point Right I mean it has to continue to integrate continue to grow as long as we have progress right if it continues to go it it sort of I mean has to reach some sort of an end point right I mean it has to continue to integrate continue to grow as long as we have the physical materials right here it's not that you know terence red a lot of science articles and other science journals and I remember sitting with him in his house in Hawaii you know up half the night trying to explain to terence why this idea was not feasible why is that well terence you know you see we just done a whole virtual world thing I said terence the virtual world that we just were in is just it's a it's a cardboard cutout there's nothing in it it's just polygons rendered in a scene by a serial processor that's getting bits from a server and it's all extremely fragile it looks realistic to us but it's a complete cardboard cutout and on the other hand here's if you look down from terence's house down a captain cook and you looked at the Pacific ocean I said you take a glass full of water from that ocean and what heck is going on in that glass full of water in computational terms is just mind blowing it's a computational super power in fact that glass of water could not be simulated accurately by all the computers we've ever built all running at once not today but couldn't it be a thousand years now is not possible we continue to stay alive and innovation continues to push the boundaries of what's possible as far as computing me can only imagine what's capable of 100 years now but the thing is we're building what we're building say for instance the steam engine right mm-hmm the steam engine was a large bore diameter pistons right starting in 1820s and whatnot they got smaller and smaller and better and better so we got motors we got low commotion we got gasoline right but the piston and camshaft model is still what drives your Tesla maybe not because of that pistons right now that's not a quarter but it's a thing it's a beautiful thing it got miniaturize it got better and better but it's stuck in a rigid framework of what its limitations were computers are also stuck in that framework so for example John von Neumann when he designed the von Neumann machine and at in Princeton in 1948 49 and they built this first really reliable no patch cord registers and memory and vacuum tubes and drums and shit they got all working by 1952 and then they gave the plans away well von Neumann the creator of this wrote this is a contingency architecture this is just to get something to actually work and not break down in 20 minutes and do something but it is in no way a strong architecture especially when it comes to dealing with natural systems quantum computing that's that's all I'm not sold on that at all I think that those are extremely specialized very very small processes that we don't really even understand what's going on but doesn't it open up the potential me if you go back to the invention of steam engine you compare it with a Tesla and you look at the X amount of 100 of years put a plus of innovation that led to this incredible leap in technology when you just extrapolate and say like what we have today you can't possibly say like flash drives and three gigabyte processors the end all be all if we can't do it with that we're never going to be able to do it isn't it true that perhaps in the year 2050 there will be a computer with a serial processor maybe lots of like they might have 1000 CPUs or more but it's still doing the same thing why because it's tied to legacy it has to be it has to be what was it have to be doing the same thing that it's doing now if quantum computing really does turn out to pan out Microsoft Word why does it have to run Microsoft Word because that was the forces that are driving evolution sort of but I mean like Microsoft Word today is almost no relation to Microsoft Word of Windows 95 I mean it's barely connectable it's actually a slower it does a lot more though right it does more yeah I mean you know where but where so in I've got a 1990 first 386 computer running Windows 3.1 and the first McGuire had one of those that shit deep into the 90s man why had it like 97 9080 kept that oh my god Windows 3.1 I booted this up the other day it comes up bam it's so fast and running Word I'm running every I'm doing email in AOL like so quick and then I go to my my monitor machines is 10,000 times more powerful it's like oh my god another processor glitch has happened in the the wheel of of Windows are painting slowly because it's this bloat layer upon layer upon layer cray you really have that much of a heart what would you run are you running those are you next or what do you run ridiculous I mean I'm running VMs like I run different machine so much you run like windows on top of a Mac platform on the Mac and I have tweaked and I go into all these forums and it's like oh you know Windows 7 not on a VM has all these incredible problems with the search index or with you got to stop this because it'll totally choke the operating system you got to stop that you got to do this so you have to it's like an automobile in 1910 where you had to be a mechanic to keep it working efficiently this stuff is so bad but you're running some really complicated stuff though if you're running virtual machines well I'm running running you're essentially running a heart you're running an operating system then you're running another operating system on your operating system that's operating simultaneously and that's a lot of resource but it's using the same hardware right but what it exposes is the incredibly how incredibly poor we are as a species that writing software that's good and it stays stable so this is just super duper complex I mean I don't have a problem with things crashing I mean if you compare it to like what Windows 95 used to be like when Windows 95 you get that blue screen to death all the time my favorite story is if we're halfway between earth and the stars you know we're half a Delta Centauri and the 3000 crew are in their deep sleep and suddenly they're all woken up they're getting out of their vessels and they go and they look at the screens on the bridge and they're all blue and it says press control all delete you will lose all data and we realize we were running DOS underneath all of this technology layer upon layer you'll be doomed you know I'm a really confusing about your your idea because you you seem to think the things were better off when they were like really clunky and they couldn't run as much software and the software wasn't as complex for example Windows XP like when they discontinue your support of XP oh my god you found out there were millions and millions and companies that were just totally depend on saying this is so robust this is so such good software and since the next XP that course they went to you know this though which was a disaster and Windows 7 was sort of a recovery and then Windows 8 was sort of a disaster and now of course the evolution of Mac OS is maybe a little different fantastic fantastic Mac OS is so much better than it ever was back in the you know the days the pre-intailed days yeah the before a rap sitting in before mock and Unix yeah it was it was just a cluge you know the Mac OS didn't have print a multi-task game no memory production no memory protection all that stuff I stayed away from Macs until the Unix got on yeah the ten when ten came along with a lot but if you look at how can we be so bad and we're spending the maximum amount of cash and only one or two companies and one or two OS effort efforts make something that's good right we're not really good at software actually you're talking crazy this is you're like a extreme pessimistic attitude towards I've grown up in the software business and I'm not well you know seeing how things actually get done and then you meet a futureist or popularizer who comes up with this wild thing and you say no one's working on the project for one you know there's no investment going into say putting consciousness and computers and does that I always ask the question to those putting consciousness in the computers we're talking about a completely different thing now that's talking about software development first and you cited well software writing creating you cited one excellent operating system Mac OS which exists right now we are we are you need to say no one is writing it but it's there I'm honest right now it's fantastic but it's doing stuff that has been done for 35 years in different operating system of different ways but that's one of the big things that happened when the transfer to OS X came is that there was this big you had to get rid of all the old software because all the legacy software was no longer useful you couldn't use it because it was running on a completely different platform so that right there sort of makes your idea doesn't it but the thing is if you talk to somebody say in 1990 right well you know where will software evolution be in 2015 they probably would just like your disappointment with the space program right it's disappointing in the software business is the software business is grinding away this is what Jeremy linear talks about he wrote this thing called half a manifesto about 10 years ago which is like we are so burdened by legacy and we are so and for poor practices that we just add we're building a guitar or a battle sometimes works well sometimes doesn't we have layer upon layer upon layer without thinking so we're not building great pyramid is a quesa we're building some kind of a tower of a battle of technology that's really patch work together maybe you know more about the night do because when I look at it objectively as someone who's not involved in the industry all I'm seeing is continual innovation all I'm seeing is things getting better crisper move better boot up faster well when you went I agree with you and that when we went to say the iPad and mobile devices they could throw away all that legacy just say just throw it no more compact disks yeah throw it in the trash no more files and layers and then we'll build a brand new operating system running on flash memory and get rid of the crap and we'll even have new ways to do applications when that happened it was like a huge breath of fresh air is like oh there isn't 500,000 features to my mail program it just does mail and we maybe dumbed it down we made it super simple to get away from our natural tendency to so the space stations a good example like space stations so complicated right it has it's 15 days and it's a huge cost it's a huge burden to keep that thing running go back to skylap you know you're old enough to probably remember skylap was a tin can does an upper stage of a Saturn five the beautiful Saturn five most reliable booster in history thrown away so one of the last ones they launched the upper stage as a tin can space station solar panels super simple huge interior space guys could run around it remember how they could run and you know a beautiful model of a space station that didn't require more than 30 per hour a beautiful model of a space station that didn't require more than a 30% of crew time to sort of keep maintenance going on the international space station the crew are over well with maintenance chores it's so complicated so we built something and I asked a friend at NASA I said what if you put boosters on the space station and senate try to send it to Mars to carry a crew said they'd be dead in a month because we're constantly have to send up parts and repair shit that's breaking is not a sustainable platform currently currently without a huge amount of maintenance and resupply and constant management right but I'm like an offer you by your your pessimism though because it seems to me that if you do it want to like nitpick and focus on this blip in time is one blip in time where there may be peaks and valleys in innovation ultimately it seems to be sort of inexorably moving towards progress or moving towards complex right would you agree with that but the progress say forward having something as good as biology how biology operates operating in technology is a big challenge yeah technology is this I mean the biology of a cell and how a cell metabolizes products how it manages this energy as it's feedback you know cells like a huge city skate working it works 99.99% of the time otherwise you'd be just much flowing on the ground but this isn't are we talking about biological processes like processing proteins and things like lines and yeah exactly that won't necessarily be necessary if you have something artificial silicon based something that's running on electricity and technology and lithium ion batteries here's the problem it's based on two week of a model of physics. what what what so here's here's here's the matter for that I use and this is why computer people hate this idea life what idea the idea that life is based on probabilistic events. So here's here's how you digest sugar say you take a nice big bowl of sugar into your body. You know the sugar molecule will come into your cell at some point somewhere it will hit this molecular storm of ship going on mostly water molecule it will ricochet around the cell. hitting just about every other molecule that it can in the cell for a second second half two seconds until it hits exactly the right place on a molecule that has a pocket the sugar fits in perfectly. and that thing will cause it to ban and go click click and make it into a polysaccharide which is an important valuable thing. but it's all done through this what is known as a probabilistic stochastic process it's completely nuts but that's how nature is. and so when you compare that process to the way a computer would work so computer designer would say well I'm that's dumb that's a whole lot of wasted. you know steps in computation I'll just build a assembly line will take that sugar in and along the semi line and will hit my thing it'll digest it immediately. well it turns out if you do things like that they're so rigid that they break almost immediately in real world in nature. but this isn't this if you're imitating biological synthesis or biological life and why would you do that if you're creating something artificial all you need to do to create an artificial person and have it behave think compute react like a person it doesn't need to process proteins. I mean these are all that's legacy isn't that like being tied to legacy what do you throw away from what a person is how do you define say consciousness or you like what I don't think you'd call it a person at all. why would you call it a person I mean not throwing it away what I'm talking about is creating something completely unique. it wouldn't have to be a duplicate of a person all would have to do is look like one. right but then we're building cardboard stimuli cry again that really aren't the real thing if you sent that person in the New York subway system that robotic entity. it would be soon overwhelmed with stimulus and programs and unless you know before it unless you put it less you built human being 1.0 and you found the flaws and then built 2.0 and found the flaws and keep going the same way we described already with operating systems from 1995. a mere blip in time to 2014 in the massive amount of progress has been made since then if you did that with computer generated or or electronically generated whatever you want to call artificial life forms that we've created. I mean it just stands to reason given enough time no asteroids no super volcanoes no Ebola humans are going to get there. I think it's a harder problem than we can suppose like turn right now it's it's really hard because we don't understand how basic biology really functions we don't understand for example. Well here's another example of the neuron you know 10,000 connections and the body and the sodium channel and there's all these things that come out and you know. the neurotransmitters are generated into this pool and they carry the signal and everything the neuron is so frickin big. I do something called molecular dynamics simulation our team has done that where you're just simulating a molecules wiggling movement right. and they're doing this now for protein folding where they get 10,000 atoms all range in the right place in the simulation the computer so that it behaves like a real protein would do. Which is fold into all this weird geometry so they have to simulate the protein being slammed by water all the time it's this crazy process. It might take those guys a month of computation on a computer a 10,000 processors to simulate a couple nanoseconds of that action. Because otherwise the simulating protein just doesn't behave like it really does in nature it's that hard right so I think we're in agreement that replicating absolute biological process would be insanely difficult and may take forever. But my question is why is that necessary to create something new that can think for itself. Because here's the problem if you created something very small for example not a human walking around the New York subway system but something. Where what world does it live in you know it words it lives in a if it's a robot say it's a little insectoid robot. What world does it have to live in? What do you mean? Well if it lives say on a factory floor. For example factory floor robots are really getting good like they can carry shit around they can track spots on the floor. Right. And they can do all kinds of shit. But if they ever go out in the parking if you put them out in the parking lot. You know where they're out of their very controlled they're in a virtual world when they're in the factory and they're they see tape and marks and barcodes and all kinds of things that create the mental model inside the robot. But if it goes into nature and the chaos of the natural world and vehicles moving around and stuff like that. You know the DARPA Grand Challenge which is all these great teams making robots are self driving they found out real fast. That we're you know this is hard. Currently hard but but isn't the new Tesla D you could phone home with this thing and it literally drive to you. And I heard a rumor by the way this is maybe a Google car in a self driving Google car that on the 880 there was a Google self driving car scene that had an Irish setter sitting here at the wheel. You're a dog owner right. Right. It was sitting in the passenger seat there is no one else in it. And the cops were told about this people were calling this this is car this is Irish setter is driving this car. The cops come up and there's a Irish setter sitting in the seat and there's no else. And they follow it and it goes to a veterinarian's office and the door opens and the dog let it goes into the veterinarian office. And this is the rumor that I heard was somebody just didn't have time they put the car the dog in the car and they send it to the vet's office. You know which was totally in violation of you know any kind of. That's not that story. Doesn't that story itself disprove this notion that it's too difficult to do something like this when you're dealing with the real world and all the variables and all the moving parts. And you just talked about a dog driving a fucking car. I mean that's kind of it right now and this is only 2014. But you know in Vupertal in Germany in the 19th century they were doing remote control trains. They were doing trains that would go on the track track to an electrical signal stop pick people up. I mean this stuff is actually pretty easy. Okay and but that's not we're talking about a road though it's not a track. But there the difference between that and the living system is those are fixed function algorithms that are doing edge tracing on the edge of a highway saying where is the right line and where is the yellow line. and they're getting a GPS signal and if you look at the code it's not very big. You know if it was a very big and complicated it probably wouldn't work. So these Google engineers have made something pretty elegant. There's fuzzy logic and everything they've got it to work. This has been tried since the 1930s with the radio control cars that had radios on the front and back control of distance. And they've they've got it to work. But is this anything close to what life can do? No. But neither was the initial combustion engine even close to what the Saturn 5 rocket was. Like neither was the original model T in comparison to a Tesla. And I mean doesn't that just stand a reason that constant innovation? I agree with you except that when I see really sci-fi things come in that are just because I'm an engineer, fundamentally when I see stuff that's like oh my god I can't even imagine how to get there because they're not even defining where they're turns. They're not defining their terms and no one's working on the project. So I'll give you one example of how hard this stuff is. So Terrence and I have these conversations about what he called novelty. You remember he used to say can crescent into novelty. So Terrence left us in the year 2000. You know, saw the millennium if you define it as the year 2000. People say it restarted 2001. But Terrence was talking about all this stuff and I would say that's pretty obvious to myself and things get novel. How do they get novel? And for years and years I worked on this project called the evolution grid. What we did was try to say let's simulate actual chemistry inside the computer and see if we can see novelty creating and how does it do it? And in 2011 after running a year of simulations, partly at UC San Diego and up in my barn, if we can believe that, with old servers all wired together, we found this staircase formula that was a way that nature forms structures. In this case bonds form between these virtual molecules and doesn't break them. They don't just all go back to mush and it was this staircaseing thing. I said, oh my god, you know, this took eight months of computation. I find this method by which perhaps the universe accretes not only and holds onto it. So I sort of did a virtual call to Terrence. I said, we found the formula I called the cosmic wiggle. And he calls this stuff like the cosmic giggle. And if you remember from some of his talks, I said, we found the cosmic wiggle. But in the process of doing that, what I learned was holy shit, the basis for life, which is this massive huge engine of stochastic probabilistic storm that's going on that literally ratchets and rocks everything from jujitsu matches to the jet airplane, the powerful system. It's not at the basis of computing. Computing is this delicate little thing. Like we'll take a number and we'll do a thing with it and we'll spread it out here. But nature is this massive machine. So perhaps the future, and this is where we would come together, is a merger between computing and natural systems. So this is a project that I'm calling the Genesis engine project. And it's having a computer control trillions of chemical experiments all going at once. And looking at them, selecting them and saying, these are more powerful experiments. And it can just search through molecular space. I just talked to a guy from Google about this and he was like, oh, molecular search, we're interested in that. We're not just limited our searches to the best bread recipes. No, we would like to search in molecule space and I talked to our neighbor and we have a place in New Jersey. And he's like a head researcher at Glaxon. He said, this is incredibly valuable. If you can actually use molecules to do the walking, run a trillion experiments at once and pick the best ones and then run a trillion more experiments and walk through chemical space, we can figure out how to make a pharmaceutical in the least amount of steps. You can simulate, you can create new materials and we'll have a hybrid digital and natural analog computer for the first time in this 21st century. Now you're really confusing me because now you've you seem to think that innovation is going to reach some new plateau. If we do that, if we're able to hybridize, I think we're going to make the leaps that you are talking about. Joe, if we can do this hybrid, if we can harness the way the geodes are. So what is your pessimism line? I'm an engineer so I know what it takes to build these things. And so I don't want to really oversell that by a certain date, we're going to have a singularity of some sort. of, I think that certain date stuff is always a goof. It's a good thing. A rate occurs while I want to do it now with 2045 and the 2045. It's a 2045. Yeah, I think they're being silly by doing that. And I think it's it does the whole idea of exponential increase in technology. It does the whole idea, disservice by like pretending that anybody first of all, nobody's ever fucking predicted anything. Right. Nobody's ever nailed it. I mean, there's been some fascinating HG Wells predictions that sort of came true. But no one said like on November 19th, 1972, there's going to be a telephone that does this and it's never happened. It was never a half. Like that's what that December 21st, 2012 drove me fucking crazy. Drove me fucking crazy because first of all, it was intoxicating and then it was maddening and then it became ridiculous. And then the day rolled around, I didn't end of the world show. You did. I just never came first 2012. I was like to go listen to the end. Does Dan Hope and Joey Diaz and my friend's Honey Honey, he does band and we did this show. We did it live at the Wiltern. It doesn't exist anywhere. Oh, you just did comedy show. Just a live show. It's just a comedy show. Yeah, we just thought the asteroid was going to hit or the mines were to come back or the aliens were going to the land or whatever the fuck was going to happen. Nothing happened, of course. Well, you know, I was in the down underneath Grand Central station in New York City with a friend of mine who's a kind of a psychedelic comic. And he does this. What's his name? Oh, what's his name again? What kind of a friend is this? Oh, brain is fried. He's a absolutely wonderful guy. Yeah, we're just fucking name. No one's going to find him. Seven billion people in the body. Seven billion people. We laughed our way through the day. Like you guys were doing at the Wiltern. Until jokes and we said we got to get less serious. Well, it's just this idea of picking a day. So goofy, like I had Daniel Pinchback on the podcast once and he was saying that it's definitely going to change the world. I go, do you know that's December 21st, 2012, something's definitely it's absolutely definitely going to change the world? Like what are you talking about? No. What are you fucking, how can you say that? You can't say that. You can never say that. You can never say it. But here's, Joe, here's a real cool one for you. I have some of the last Terrence McKenna papers. You know, Terrence's archive was destroyed in the fire in 2007. Yeah, what happened there? That was his, it was, he lives in a rainforest. How the fuck did a fire destroy? After he died, the papers went to Esselin where you just were on the big circles and they stored them at their in town office in Burner. In Burner. And a, in a Quizno shop sub shop. I kid you not had some kind of electrical issue burned a whole city block down and the Esselin office and Terrence's papers. Oh my God. But didn't, didn't his place in Hawaii burn to? No, no, it's still there. Oh, okay. Yeah. Who owns that? You know, I know, I think it was sold recently. He's just Christ who bought that fucking thing. God damn, I would love to have that place. But in, so those archives were lost. And as soon as that happened, I heard up somebody called me and I called Lorenzo. Lorenzo Hagar, your dear friend, love that dude. I love that dude. And I said Lorenzo, the elves have removed the incriminating evidence. Again, that's hilarious. We have to rebuild Terrence McKenna from extent material. So it's like a grateful dad show thing, send in your cassettes. Well, his, one of his most problematic theories was that novelty theory. The idea that December 21st, 2012, there was going to be some point of infant novelty and he thought it was going to be a time machine perhaps. And based on the each thing. Yeah. Well, in, so I got a packet of papers in the mail that I came through another archivist because I'm also handling Timothy Leary's, the remnants of Timothy Leary's library right now that are, you know, we're trying to scan the news. Archive and whatever, but this packet of material 15 years of letters. And there was a time wave zero edition, you know, and a little binder, whatever with Terrence's little writing on it. And there was a post it note. in years of letters. And there was a time wave zero edition, you know, in a little binder, whatever with tarences, a little writing on it. And there was a post-it note that where tarences writ scribbled something and then at the bottom he says December 21st. Yes, yes, yes. On the bottom is post-it note, 1989. And so I scanned that sucker in and put it online in December of 2012, that here is the nefarious post-it note where tarences finally settle on this date, at least for tarences, you know, are guellas. So say our guellas had been involved in this too on the course. But it says it comes down to this post-it note. And I wanted to put that up to sort of so the absurdity of this as a guy that doesn't really, you know, tarences wasn't a technologist. And, you know, he was a visionary thinker. We love him. I mean, he was an amazing dude. We love to listen to him. But I think you're right. I think he was off the rails on trying to... He put too much into that, that one thing. And not only that, didn't he move the goalposts? Like at one point in time, it wasn't December 21st. It was like November something. They changed it. He changed it. And he was trying to fit the data of the curve. But he wasn't re-in expert in trends in history. And how can you match tarences in history to anything anyway? I would listen to him talk about that. There's a one thing that I had to shut off. I've listened to pretty much everything that he's ever done. All the Lorenzo archives, all the stuff that Yannir and put up way back in the day. Listen to podcast 316 in the salon. Because that one, we kind of take this thing of heart. And I met with Ralph Abraham. We meet, you know, once a year kind of thing. And in 2011, I was setting up to do a program called Terrence 2012 about the life of Terrence McKenna. And I met with Ralph. And I said, tell me, Ralph, what was going on in the late 90s? Because, you know, they're the trial algorithm. Rupert, who is just on your show. Ralph Abraham and Terrence. And Ralph said, we kind of were getting fed up. Because Terrence was just spinning these stories. And we didn't think they had any basis. And so at the 1998 trial logs, you know, the trial logs were they all matted. And they talked to you. They're a UC Santa Cruz. He said, if you listen to that, Rupert and I set a trap for Terrence. We trapped him over and over again. And we basically, for an hour, he was squirming and he was pretty, you know, pretty uncomfortable. So I pulled out our cassette tape of that. And we had digitized it and sure in behold, and you'll hear this within podcast 360. And what Rupert says, it's, Terrence is talking about, you know, the internet will come to consciousness in 20 minutes or less. You know, it will be an AI that will no longer need us. And so Rupert was ready for that and said, Terrence, I've heard, you know, Rupert's voice who had him here. And I've heard 10 versions of this story. And then the last version, it was an AI coming out of a time portal. You know, because they're not going to let him get away with this. And Terrence is such a good Irishman, right? He's such good on, you know, storytelling and he's good with, and he says, and that too, but at the end of that, it's very, very heartfelt and kind of because Terrence realizes his friends of kind of drawn a line on the sand. And the last thing he says in that trial, August, well, we want profits, but we don't want false profits. So, you know, I think the story was the thing at that point. So do you think that he just got carried away with it? Like, as it means, obviously, he, like you and I, like everyone we know is flawed as a person. And he also, part of the reason why he was his visionary sort of out of the box thinker, this guy who had this really incredible way of describing potential possibilities was that his mind was prone to going on these little weird journeys and took a lot of chances and maybe might have been married to a few of these chances that maybe shouldn't have. Dennis was in the introduction, I think, to the second version of Invisible Landscape. Dennis is writing, you know, this is what we went through when we were in our 20s and we've learned something since then we don't really, you know, I don't believe this anymore. And, you know, I think it's almost like, and this could happen to any of us, we get attached to story. It's our schtick, it's our comedy act, it's our thing we do, you know, it's our conspiracy theory. It's a thing that brings people into the seats and fills the theaters. And if it's paying your bills and it gives you self worth and whatnot, you can get really attached to that story. It's very unfortunate, you know, because the rest of Terrence's ideas were so fascinating, compelling and to listen to him talk about the positive benefits of psychedelics, what he thinks, the potential that psychedelics hold and what he thinks about psychedelic culture and there's so much fascinating, absolutely fascinating. I love him, I love him. He was Terrence for me, I can tell you, and I only knew him the last couple of years. We didn't know he was on his way out, frankly. You know, we did this whole fantastic thing with, we brought virtual world-stose house in Hawaii office satellite, his dish, and he was placed into a world and he became his own ghost, the Avatar was fantastic and I was looking forward to a long association with him and we were planning to do an excellent workshop where he and I could do pieces of the same puzzle. Like I could do like the deep tech and weird ideas and stuff, but it was based on science and tech and some visionary thing and then he would come in from his history side and eluisis and all that stuff and we were going to just go on the road and then he had a grand well seizure two months later and was horrific and we saw him last in September, 99 and it was like a goodbye event that was held. If he was around today, is there sufficient medical advances that would have helped him? You know, a glioblast dillamomultiforme is they're so rare and they have a really bad prognosis. I mean he had gamma knife surgery and I think it was November. I mean Eric Davis is last interview, the interview, Eric Davis is wonderful from Hawaii, right? From the, from, yeah. Actually it might have been on the mainland. You hear a lot of dishes in the background. That wouldn't be the model for, he might have been in Occidental during that one after the surgery, but he's so beautifully cogent and coherent. I mean he's a master. He's so in his heart, he's so brilliant and you know he's on all these anti-seizure drugs and everything. One of the things he does say, which was, he said, you need to rethink this thing because I'm in altered spaces because I'm on massive medications because I have a brain disease because and there are people walking around that are certifiably in altered states and we shouldn't just privilege, you know, psychedelics. There are so many avenues into alternate realities allowed us to see the world and I'm just experienced them and that's part of what my mission in the world is to say don't privilege these substances because then they become crutches. You can, Terrence used to say you can't do this on the natch, you know, but I've since met a lot of people that are going to profound spaces through other means. Yeah, I think he was a bit, I think he was a little hasty in his, his proclamation that this is incapable. This is impossible under natural conditions because I have a friend who has had psychedelic experiences. He's not averse to it. He's a regular marijuana user and he's also a Kundalini expert and he's become a Kundalini expert since I've known him. So over the last 10 years, he's been practicing, I've known him for about 10 years, has been practicing Kundalini very, very intensely over the past four or five. And since then he says he goes, I have deep DMT experiences while doing Kundalini and I have no reason to doubt him. I have another friend who does a different type of medication. Some sort of, it's not Kundalini, but some sort of meditation. And he also says that he's like, I have legit full blown psychedelic experiences. Yeah, and I think I'm starting to research this and I'm actually going to be working on a book on this thing because I keep running into these people and I call it and, you know, we tell endogenous. So I'm using the term endo, endo beings or endovoyaging or whatever, using your own endogenous ability because I do it. I think it's just unbelievably difficult to do and I think some people are just lazy. I think that's really a part of it. It's also physical effort. There's a lot of people that are investing in tremendous amount of time and thinking, calculation, postulating, but the physical effort of meditation is beyond them. And that's one of things that McKenna talked about. Yeah. Terrence talked about all the time, how boring meditation was. So it's incredibly boring. I just had a flash inside Joe to come back to the original theme that we're talking about. Why did the ancients could do this amazing stuff that we're now discovering that's like, currently high tech because they weren't distracted. What could they do? True. No internet, no Twitter. Yeah. Check their Facebook every 10 minutes. They could, a guy could look at a pile of rocks and see the full structure of the pyramid in his head or her head with water flows and they perhaps because they're not so distracted and they're stimulus response, cortisol being shot in and interrupts and, you know, to do lists and whatnot just massively distracted. Those guys were using full power of this endogenous power. And maybe elusive was unlocking that. It's also possible that they didn't have the like predetermined limitations that we have when we consider like what normal states of consciousness exist. We have this idea. Let's exist. And then if you want more than that, you got to take it out. So if you want more than that, you got to get on Prozac. If you want more than this, you know, you have to be drunk, you have to be this, you have to be that. So we have these preconceived notions about alter-ceasing consciousness. Brilliant insight. And we're so channeled and managed in technologically driving, like driving here. I mean, we drove down the back of California from Santa Cruz, it's almost some of those beautiful landscape and gala and I were looking at this glowing light coming off the ocean like what you saw at Big Sur. Those dudes, I mean, we get a little snatch of it, but we don't have the full experience. We're not standing on the shore, smelling the plants in a full body of health being impacted by those photons coming, giving us in light and states because we're driving past it and we're watching our time and, you know, our gas levels and whatnot. And we're out of tune. We're not present. I've talked about this many times on the podcast. I had a really life-changing experience that had nothing to do with drugs and it was, I went to the big island. I went to the Keckham's inventory. Wow. And it just went because I was on vacation with my family there and we went to the, there's two levels to the observatories, the Manobes inventory and then there's the visitors area and the visitors area just have a bunch of telescopes set out. It's pretty cool. But it's so high that it's above the clouds. The clouded area was clear. It was a totally close cloudy below us. It was just fascinating. We were bummed out. We're like, oh man, we're going to hit clouds. We're not going to see anything. But we actually drove through the clouds and because they have the diffuse lighting all over the big island to protect the observatory from light pollution. Man, the view was stunning. The Milky Way was so bright and clear. And there were so many stars in the sky. And it was a perfect night. I went back recently and I made a mistake and went back when it was a full moon. It was actually a super moon. It was awful. It was like the August super moon. August, it was the moon. It was still beautiful and amazing and still like, wow, that's a planet floating above us. But nothing like the first trip. And that trip's being there and seeing those stars. You got to think that is what early man saw every day. They were just a wash in the mystery that is the sky. And they paid attention so much. They knew it's shape. They knew about the wobble of the earth. They knew about the procession of the equinoxes. They had it mapped out. I mean, there's so much that they had figured out that the equinoxed procession is like, what, 26,000 years? Somehow, another of these people had figured a lot of that out a long time ago. And it may have been just total presence and that they built the model in their head with their own DMT if you would call it that or in Dodgens. Who knows? I'm sure they took drugs too. So that was a part of it. It was that as well. Here's another good one. Her friend Andrew was commissioned. He's an incredible painter and he was commissioned to paint the caves of Lascaux, a Andrew Johnstone, a complete reconstruction of an like a surface that was the same rock face. But it was for like a restaurant or something. Oh wow. And so he got all these, you know, different. You can't go in there, right? Because it's people's breath will destroy it. But he started to paint this. You're going to really tune into this. He started to paint this inside this restaurant with a rock face and he was painting the copy of it. And he would go out at night because he had to paint at night because the restaurant was in business. And he would just, you know, have his break and whatever. And he started to study the sky. And then we go back and paint more of the bowls horns and the running missing that. And he would go back and after all this time, he started to wait a minute. I'm seeing Lascaux in the sky, but it's a little different. And he would go back and look at he was reconstructing Lascaux from the lowest detail. And he said, this is a freaking star map. This is a star map. And he actually submitted a publication to an archaeological journal. I don't know. How is it reviewed? You know, I don't know what happened. I think he wasn't reviewed well because I don't think that it's in the literature and I'm not seeing it. Now, of course, the stars are in a slightly different position, right? Those constellations work. But, you know, does it, it's fucking powerful. But listen to one of those things, we can kind of see patterns if you want to like, oh, I see a poll. I mean, we have, there's some patterns like the big dip or like, oh, it's big dip or. But when you see all the stars behind it, it can't just make up your own fucking patterns. You know, the big dip or represents to me is like an established pattern that you know exists. So you can call it the big dip or and say it's a dip or. But what it is is just, oh, that's that. There's there they are. And if you, you know, oh, I see a bull. Well, you're fucking painting a bull, dude. You know, of course, you're seeing a bull in the sky. Right. Right. Could be a good. Plus you fucking sniff and paint all day. You're out of going outside your delusional. You're tired. Right. There'll be a lot of things going on there. I wasn't reviewed very well. Maybe not. They blew his wig and started writing a paper on it. And everybody's, okay, how much paint you use? How much paint are you using? How close you do this paint? Then we get we run into the reductionist mind of science. Yes. Of course. And it's born to critique. Right. Has to, right? It has to. You know, so much fuckery you have to. You have to. Because it's it's one of the only human enterprise that is making progress. Think about your friend that you were talking about that was in a fucking cult that thought that aliens made the pyramids that led him to actual science. The science actually set him free from the cult. You did. You did indeed. Yeah. That's what mean that's the whole reason why I asked a question everything. How I asked to go, okay, what did you see up there in the sky? Yeah. Well, you're sniffing paint pal. That's right. You know, the cults can waste a lot of minds and a lot of lives and that's charismatic leaders are very dangerous. You know, especially when they want to lead and also, I think that the intoxicating nature of being that leader. What do you think of, you know, think talk about sociopathy and psychopathy and that that's a certain percentage of the population is lacking a brain region that just doesn't have it when they put the fMRI system together. That's there's no empathic part of the brain. Right. Do you think I'm asking you on on the air? I mean, this sounds like a eugenics kind of a thing, but do you think a future society or future earth ought to screen people when they're young kids when they're young to find out if their potential psychopaths and sociopaths and give them different trainings and not allow them say to run armies and countries and stuff like that because they're just not going to have the empathic response. Like if you had poor vision, you shouldn't pilot an airliner, for example. It's a physiological thing that makes you kind of not suited for certain kinds of jobs. I think if it can be proven that this is like there's an undeniable correlation between this particular area of the brain and lacking empathy and that you cannot be a good leader or you cannot be a good about there's so many factors like saying that someone can't be if they lack empathy, they can't be a good leader. But what if those same factors that led them to lack empathy, also led them to lack a certain amount of ego that would kind of fuck up being a leader or they lack a certain amount of need to be charismatic or desire to have all these people follow you like certain high functioning autistic folks have incredible skills in a lot of areas that maybe people that have extreme connections to emotions or to social interaction might not develop. So I don't necessarily know that we understand all the potential possibilities when it comes to human interaction. There's just a weird range of what is a person and to say that there's also people that have taken those psychopath tests and they will technically I'm supposed to be a psychopath. Meanwhile I'm a functioning rational normal member of my community. I'm a loving father and but a husband and everything's great. So what the fuck? Why does this test say I'm a psycho? Right. I don't know. I don't know if we really have it nailed yet. Really the problem comes when we get psychopaths doing really terrible shit like dictators and stuff like that and we can't get rid of them. You know and then the damage isn't being done and we can't do any. And what makes them a psychopath in the first place like a perfect example is Sodom who's hands children who were notoriously evil. Like what Uday and Kousay were the names were two of the most horrific human beings that we've ever seen come out of the brood of a dictator. I mean he developed some unbelievably evil children. Now why is it that they were evil? Is it the environment? Is it in the future? Is it nature? Is it genetics? Is it epigenetics? Like what is it that is it just being unbelievably spoiled because you have ultimate power from the time of your child and you're essentially royalty? What is it? What causes that? You know it's it's possible that our survival as a species is going to come down to how well we and healthily we manage our children. I mean ultimately if we're if we're not doing that then like like if for instance you were building a Mars colony was going to have 250 people in it and they're going to have children or whatever. You know that if you get one kind of crazy revolutionary leader that does the whole charismatic thing and whatever and then there's a shooting thing it's going to shoot a hole through the dome and everyone's going to die so you can't ever afford that so you have this careful management of human psychology within that colony to make sure it's healthy and watch those processes and it to some extent the Scandinavians did this a thousand years ago. The Scandinavians, the Vikings when they had their war parties the leader of the war party that would go in in VADI, St Anglai are all the way to Greenland, Labrador or whatnot. They call these guys the Berserker Kings and these guys were put in charge and they would go and they would do terrible shit. I mean they would terrorize and murder and whatnot but when they settled East Anglia when they built York, Yorek, right they were excavated it. Well the Vikings are now settled so they took the the the Berserker King thank you very much you've done your job. You get the nice little grass hut for the edge of town and you're off duty because we can't afford that now. We have to build a community. So what do they do with him? You did retire them off. Retired them off and how you keep them from killing people. I'm going nutty. He just nobody would follow them as the rules. It was the it was the way that they did it so when you look at how sane Scandinavians today maybe they got all that out of their system. I don't know. That's a funny that's a very funny thought. Who knows right? Who knows who knows. I think it's also there is a potential for technology to play a part in all this. I think that one of the things that's coming out with technology is access to information and access to information not just current information but maybe even future. The ability to read minds to read thoughts to read. Look FFMRI Although it's been widely criticized has been used to convict people of crimes. In India there's a woman who was convicted of murder because she had what they described as functional knowledge of a crime scene. And this has been widely discredited and it's very controversial. What a half. I don't know. I don't know the whole story but it was for a television show that I was doing for sci-fi. We interviewed a neurologist or a neuroscientist and she was describing how this in our country would never work. But in these other countries where maybe they don't have as much of an either as much of an understanding or they were able to manipulate their courts into thinking that this was far more definitive and inclusive than it really is. But the point being that this is just the tip of the iceberg. And if they continue to get better at this and if this human technological symbiotic relationship takes place, the point where we essentially are memories especially, they're pretty piss poor. But if we can turn our memories into some digital archive that you can access it will, then we're going to know I'm going to look in your head and I'm going to know what's going on. To be able to tap into it, we'll be connected the same way we're connected with Wi-Fi. The same way our cell phones are connected to the cellular network, they'll be some sort of a network of information, exchanging all people. And if that's the case, deception will be almost impossible. Motivations will be crystal clear. And you're going to know who's full of shit. That's going to be a fucking bad day for a lot of idiots out there. There's a lot of households out there that have been leading along idiots and they believe in these people, you know, whether it's cult members or whatever. You remember in Kubrick's film 2001 in the beginning when there's the pre-hum monkeys and they're sitting at dawn and they're sitting like in this kind of cliff area and they're looking at each other, right? They're looking at each other. I never forgot that scene because it's a scene before they get attacked by that other group that but they're looking at each other and they're non-verbal, right? They're not communicating. They don't have like two do lists and emails and shit going on. They're just there. And to me, like Kubrick was trying to show that they're in a group intelligence that just by eye gaze they could tell what the state is and then they share that state. Because if somebody in such an intense environment, I mean, if you have nefarious purposes or, you know, you're going to look away and you're like that hopefully. So maybe that's the way we were before we came into mind before all the stuff came in, civilization mind to do lists hierarchies and whatnot, we were there was no way for us like we're looking now at each other. We're really connected. Maybe peaks and valleys of perceptions. Maybe the pre-communicative apes, whether they didn't have verbal communication or language maybe they had this sort of intuitive sense of each other and then that was all lost with email and Twitter and then it'll come back with some new technology that takes it to a far deeper level. And what I think, and this is my Wuhu theory, is it a loose, wuhu, wuhu, yeah, Wuhu warning, you know, it loses by packing those thousand initiants into that buried temple and subjecting them to sound and music and you know, some kind of a sense of a wave. Yeah, it was like intense, but these people were fashioned. They were, they were fashioned into new beings from in that experience. It wasn't, couldn't it have been a group mind-fashion, couldn't it have been, you know, returning that and when we sit in medicine circles today when we do jiu-jitsu, when we do, you know, group yoga or intense things or intense ordeal things that people are seeking out now for deep connection to, to remove isolation from other people, meditations, all these practices are this yearning to get back to where we were, you know, you didn't feel isolated from others and that we had an in group mind and that's the future of evolution of our communities and we may need the shaman to come around, you know, in the upper paleolithic, you know, those communities were pretty helpful. That was a pretty functional world. I mean, you know, coming into, you know, the karnak and the stone han and the ley lines and the incredible world of even Celtic Europe was incredibly together. There was Celtic Europe is like the European Union now. Celtic Europe had medical practices and common laws and the druids could come and if there was a battle about to occur between Celtic peoples, the druids had the power to walk down that line and decide whether the battles should happen or not because there was an authority so this whole idea of the civilization of the European Union after, you know, 2000 years of Roman interstasine war, barbarian warfare, Christian religious and whatnot as they've returned to the Celtic model. They've returned in sense the upper Paleolithic model of civilization, of civil societies and not beating each other in and doing and of common currency, common exchange, common health, so maybe that is coming back. That is returning and we're, we're shucking off the culture that came and destroyed eluces. Well, I think there's definitely a feeling amongst a lot of folks that the standard model, the cubicle life, retirement of 65 is not just unappealing, not just under rewarding, but it's surfed on the old surf. Yeah, it's slavery. It's a form of slavery that's voluntary. I mean, you're connecting to a machine, you're giving your body literally, you're giving your health, you're giving your spinal fluid. Your soul, your creative creativity, your very essence, your body literally is like giving into your chair and your back is being compressed, your discs are bulging, your feet are going numb. I mean, your body is being sucked down into this, your mind's turned into a stimulus response piece of yellow. And I think that's what a lot yoga, this renaissance of meditation that a lot of people are experiencing, especially yoga. I mean, yoga was never this popular known as right. It's incredibly popular now. And as the rise of technological connection, electronic connections with each other has also facilitated the rise of like, and you know, a false fit. These people want to do things that are physical. I on Friday, I did a pretty long float in our, we wonder, by the way, they've offered you a free float if you come up to the Santa Cruz mountains, our friends. That sounds like a long trip for a float. I got one of my basements. You got one there. This is a beautiful, flotation today. What's the name of the company? You're a cloud nine. Okay, I've heard of them. Yeah, it's great. It's great. Jay and Shanti. And that's pretty amazing property. And I went there for a float and I tell you, you know, it's incredible because it's like doing, you know, a psychedelic in that or doing deep meditation or doing, but the flotation tank is, I think, better because I process all my brain shit. Like for the first hour or something. And this probably happens to you, it just grinds through. And it's like, I'm having these repeated thoughts of my mind on the ego's grinding through and grinding through and finally it quiets. Finally, it's quiet. And I don't have stimulus on my body because I'm in a flotation tank. And I maybe have my head held up or whatever. And I start not knowing my body where it is. And I'm free. I'm liberated. And then I can do the deep work. And my God, I mean, the next day, this is why I was able to finish those two scientific papers because I floated and I lost all that 2000 years of, for me, it was a month and months of being in my head. I mean, I it's such a powerful tool. It's an amazing tool. And it's really bizarre to me that this was something that was kind of forgotten for a long time. I didn't understand when I first discovered the tank. Well, I first saw it in all their states when I was in high school. That an amazing movie was William R. Where he turns into he drank ayahuasca and became some free ganamom. Crazy movie like really does not hold up. Don't watch it. And yeah, we'll try to watch it in 2004. It's a piece of shit. Oh, it's so bad. It's so bad. Like people have watched it and laughed at me. Like you fucking liked this movie. My crowd was 14. Okay. So long time ago, but point is, I didn't experience until 2000. Watch it and laughed at me like you fucking liked this movie my crowd was 14. Okay. So long time ago, but point is I didn't experience until 2002 and when I first did it Others to place in Burbank called soothing solutions. I was a place where did it the first time I did it I wanted to do it forever I found a place they had it and I was like how is this not popular? And then when I started talking about it everybody's like wow you're always talking about this thing like you're the guy who talks about the tank I'm like how are you hearing about this from a goddamn comedian? Like how is this not that how's the president not on television saying we need to create a more introspective commerce society and one of the things we're gonna do is we're gonna wheel out isolation tanks all over the nation Wow, I mean there will be a beautiful thing bring them to high schools community centers Universities this will accelerate thinking if it's one of the best tools for personal evolution I've ever experienced for it. I do the exact same thing as you said for me It's the first X amount of minutes is all just going over my own bullshit It's slowly but sure because I do it so often I've gotten quicker with that. It's like gotten down to like 20 minutes But it's just I get in there and I go here We go I gotta go throw this stupid shit. Yeah, yeah, clean all this out. Yeah, but perspective enhancing like you know Like no matter how effective and weird my life is when I get into that thing and then I get out I'm like, it's all right. It's okay. Yeah, you're like The best hippie of the 60s saying it's beautiful. It's so important for me because I'm always juggling like five different job I'm doing million things too. Yeah, and you know my back. I put my freaking back out So I go on to float and it's like the first hour. It's so painful. It slowly like separates relaxes and it's like I Get this barely do this and then barely put my hands down and then then I say wait a minute My body can take any position So I let my body take its own position It moves itself around until I'm not in pain anymore. Yeah, and then Out the pain was down like 80%. Yeah, it's it is an unbelievable tool And it's just weird to me how Uncomited it as as taren says how do they keep the lid on this stuff? You know the other thing that taren says the man sometimes people do the man's work for the man Like no one's putting keeping the lid on isolation tanks. It's just no one talked about it for whatever reason It's just life is a bit tough people have mortgages, you know they have Student loans. There's a lot of work that has to be done the the lawn has to be Mode yeah, gotta raise your kids lot of shit going on. It's hard the servitude Do we were talking before the podcast about chairs this weird chair that I have this saddle chair Do you use an ergonomic chair when you when you do your writing? You know I my neighbor and I made this chair We took this body-built chair from the plug free from Texas. It's used by surgeons by brain surgeons It tilts forward. It has incredible support and we made an extension arm that holds the keyboard above my lap and the mouse Exactly in the right place. So just right. We are arms hanging right when I was hanging and then I can roll back from the screens I'm much farther from the screen so I don't get that myopic kind of early vision vision wash. That's me. I got that shit Yeah, yeah, it's I've been using that chair for 20 years But now what I'm finding Unfortunately just even reaching for the mouse is creating repetitive strain injury for me even gonna get one of them helmets Around the eyes Unfortunately, I'm back on a laptop where I don't have to do any motion until my friend told me he says you're an idiot You know I have a friend and hassle. Yeah right away you're an idiot. I'm I'm an idiot He's an asshole, but I have my own podcast called the levity zone And I do lots of editing, you know, I know that you just go straight out But I'm like a craftsman. I we have different musicians in each episode for the levity zone levity zone. Oh Say it again levity zone or levity zone dot org. It's it's the world needs more We have plenty of novelty. We need more levity L E V I T Y zone so you're in the zone when you're listening to these shows levity zone dot org and so I do tons of editing and He said you fool you need to get a Kensington track ball So you're just moving your thumb not your arm Mm-hmm all editors are using track balls for buttons and I finally got religion and I'm finally not using well now Mac has a they have like a key like this track pad yet It's a larger version of this what I use it's amazing. I love it to move the tracks back and forward Okay, and then I use the other hand on the Kensington to go cut pace cut page Okay, you're doing great. Yeah totally great. Yeah. Well, you also have probably have keystrokes like pre-programmed on that thing and buttons Yeah, that helps cut to be based marks. Yeah, you know collect the tracks. I love the track pad once I switched to it on a On a home computer on an iMac. I would never go back to a mouse. Yeah, I'm out except for gaming, but I can't get by the way Digi Barn Museum. We got a new artifact Doug angle Bart's mouse, you know who's Doug angle bar he he and Bill English created the mouse and the first online system in the mid 60s and they Doug had something called the mother of all demos which happened on December 9th 1968 and it totally Revolutionized what computing was gonna be he was like in this hall in San Francisco Using a mouse and a curse was going on the screen. He was opening windows and clicking Oh, so it's like the first graphic user interface was 68. Yep, mother of all damn Mouse, and I don't have that one, but I've got a If you look up mother of all demos You'll see the one that came into the Digi Barn looks exactly like the one that Doug is using in the demo Now there were several of them made so we don't know but this it has the round buttons has a great big case on it and a Key set so that see he had he didn't have to go to the keyboard. He had this this cord keyboard Look at that. Yeah, they're there. They're there. They're are. I had three buttons. Me. Well Apple had one button Actually that deep into the two thousand that's probably from my collection, but that's an alto mouse from the 70s If look at seventies, yeah, do Doug ain't do mother of all demos And you'll probably find the the video of it is it true that it was Xerox created the user interface in the apple copy Xerox and then ultimately Microsoft copied Apple it was it was kind of passed from one to the other so for example SRI Stanford Research Institute did this Doug angle bar at NLS Fantastic demo and everybody watching go. Oh my god And this totally changed computing into a human thing rather than data processing and batch and you know it became notes It's visual. We're visual. This is a tool for our minds. It's a tool for This is it now and a half long. Yeah scroll around and you can see Doug you can see Doug other is Oh wow, I see that thing what he says see that in sixty eight sixty eight so look at that That looks exactly like the mouse that's at the Digi barn right now. That's remarkably Similar to what a lot of people used to day and look at the keyboard and I think steel case or somebody did that thing in the key set allows you To chord key movements like Accelerated things Wow and then on screen he has clickable text. He's got a video window that a guy appears from SRI Transmitted live video look at this. Look at this. That's him. Yeah. That's one of the engineers at SRI So he's got live video on a screen. Yeah, that's insane And this is this is 68 and this is a live video on a screen. Yeah And this is being in a big auditorium in San Francisco at a conference and everybody in the audience is going oh My god, this is computing. This is this is interacting with people and he's clicking see the cursor You can just sort of barely see it. He's moving around. He's clicking on things. They're pulling up data. They're doing searches And that's a rest of the lists and so everybody looked at this and said oh My god, and so Xerox Palo Alto Research Center kind of had a bunch of people from Doug's group And then they built the first network personal computer of the ethernet and all that stuff in the 70s And you're right, you know in walks Steve Jobs and And then the group and they kind of went oh my god That's the future computing and they created the Lisa and the Macintosh and Bill Gates and the company looked at the Xerox Star and Alto and and Gerald Simone who was at park came to Microsoft and created Microsoft Word Based on him creating the first word processor at park Wow and then made a billion dollars, right and everything But no, I mean Xerox really did invent the future under Bob Taylor's leadership in the 70s They just created the future right. How do they drop the ball and go to copy machines? Well, you know, it was such a dummy company full of copier heads and understand what they were looking at And so it walked out the door, but don't be came out of that Well, how about everybody in IBM in the 19 whatever it was when they said no one is gonna want a computer in their house Here in their house. Yeah, fuck up. Yeah, it was like the biggest bad call ever Right, I mean there were all these predictions that yeah completely ridiculous Irriticulous in retrospect and restress but how could anybody know that's isn't that always the point is that like Like we're talking about you can't predict a 2012 or a 2040. Yeah, you're just not going to not going no one's gonna see it I asked people gonna have some ideas, but the ultimately the thing itself like no one Ever thought the internet was going to be like you big Facebook or message boards or you know Twitter Social media interaction the way we we experience today. It's so unbelievably bizarre this connection that we have to each other It's so intense and and and no one's not coming like for instance Just yesterday morning. I got up in the holy shit I'm gonna be on Joe Rogan. I'm gonna just at least post your beautiful Redface logo into my Facebook page and put it on a bunch of groups. They're a lot of mugs available on a mug So I just put this up. I put this up just on Facebook I only got three or four thousand followers with this thing just went Bing Bing Bing Bing Bing Bing and people You know, there's probably a ton of listeners that there wouldn't have been just because of one little thing I did Yeah, yeah, I'm sure. Yeah. I'm sure well. It's one of those things too that I Love the fact that someone could Listen to this and go hey, you know Bruce Damer is on this podcast You got to check this out. Here's a link and then boom and then boom and then someone retweets it and it gets retweeted a thousand times and sent to Facebook and someone sends it an email and It's yeah, it's I mean it's a little like we're back. We're back in that little group of 2001 8 Looking each other but what we're looking we're spending we're sending the whole of our culture and technology in each gaze Right, it's amazing. I mean if you could be some kind of super being and watch the mind of humanity for more of it and study it Oh, yeah, as a thing that's coming alive and it's moving and it's getting connected I mean it'd be better than any trip experience. I mean just Truth, you know, I'm looking up at the night sky or doing the work in origin of life I'm looking at molecular streams and looking through microscopes on lipid chemistry I was like this is the most amazing universe of just lipids moving around on a slide and then look at the internet This is the greatest time in the history of yeah, I mean and you know the people talk about rare earths, you know how rare is Are we you know the the Drake equation which shows? Solar systems that would have planets and the planets that being the right habil zone and and the develop intelligent life And we had just the right in asteroid impacts to come in and spin the disk and say start again do it again Mm-hmm and and we we rose. I mean what's the chance of? Usness being out there how many of them are there why isn't that the ultimate? Mind fuck the concept of infinity because the way I've heard it describes that if infinity exists and they believe it does That means the universe is so huge that everything that's ever happened on earth in the exact same order It's happened an infant number of times somewhere else. Well, I had I once had a kind of a conversation with the universe And I I asked it so I I went through a thought experiment where I went through the origin of life You know, I just loaded my mind with everything I could do and I went through and sought I was like supercharged on all this stuff of my meditation and my thought experiments and I came out screaming You know I came into the division of the first proto cell and while it was happening I looked around and I saw all this crazy molecular stuff going on which gave me the vision to work backwards To create the model that we're just publishing now But I felt and this is kind of heretical, but I I couldn't see that it was all mechanical You know it seemed like there was something doing it. I mean it was so complex So in this thought experiment I sat up straight and I said I want to ask one more question If this if there's something before life There was if there was intelligence You know, did this can I see it? You know, this is I think when you ask the ineffable these questions ineffable Just get pissed off with like questions sometimes and the ineffable what it did in my consciousness is I was looking out into the the night sky into the darkness and it resolved into a starfield and those starfields have resolved into gas clouds and galaxies and then the whole thing came rushing into slammed into my consciousness and sort of knocked me down And what the answer was is you silly monkey The universe is big enough to have agency it grew big enough from the big bang It grew along the probability streams so that this happened That's the answer there's one concept that I I can kind of understand infinity I can kind of understand a lot of the the concepts of the cosmos But the big bang just I hear it It goes in one ear and it goes out the other and it's just some words It's just some shit that's typed out It's just an idea that someone has that I can't conceptualize It doesn't my brain is too fucking dumb. It just doesn't I? Isn't process it I got a vision of it because it's it's hard for me too I mean the vision that I got I was sitting there in bed asking the question Can I see back so I wanted to see back? And what came in my head were three buckets and Inside the three buckets were three blobs and eight one of the blobs is super low probability of ever happening A probability buckets and the others are kind of like ordinary Robles and there's a third bucket second bucket has a super pro low probability blob and the third bucket has the low probability block and the Intelligence that was communicating to me to teach me said watch me Bing Bing Bing so when you say this though, I'm sorry. I didn't interrupt you So the what the intelligence showed me because I was asking the question getting thought experiment back was saying I can trigger the lowest probability of hands one after the other after the other and I said well Okay, and said watch me I will rotate them towards you so the buckets are all lined up and you say you see the path through the low problem The events so yes, I do he says watch this and the path went all the way back to Cosmo Genesis and I went oh my god, you know this energy was pouring through super low probability and then the entity said watch this and I was pulled back and I saw trillions of these tracers coming from From the Singularity from the big bang and the answer was that is the power of the power to trigger the lowest probability events in all directions and that is the power You know a way from Mondainity, please, but you're saying that you know your community came with an entity and you're saying you know this thing That's communicating with you. This is more likely your imagination, no Well Sometimes it is imagination on steroids sometimes this stuff comes in. It's like your friend you were talking about stuff comes in I don't know where from you know I Einstein for example used to do this Einstein would be having his coffee and in his Swiss cafe pondering about Can can light go faster? You know is there a constant in the speed of light and one night he just sort of sat down Close his eyes and suddenly he was in this endogenous world and you can read about this he called a good Duncan experiments Thought experiments. He would say I'm going to try to understand this But he would open himself to anything and what came into Einstein's mind was he became like a train He was like mounted onto a train and there was another train coming down the track and they each had beams It was at night and the light was streaming out and they said but How can I be the photon going toward that other photon and the photons are going twice the speed of light relative to each other And then he had his credible insights about no It's possible if you have different frames of reference. It's possible is Space change you know the whole special and general theory of relativity came out from these thought experiments that he did That he didn't quite know where they came from they just sort of poured into him Then he had to interpret it into mathematics in a testable theory Well, when where do any ideas come from now really? I mean why why consider the possibility of coming from entities? Why not? Why don't you think this is your mind your imagination? just contemplating possibilities and and here's where I think No, this is a really big woo-woo model. This is woo-woo on the front of the t-shirt here I think that somehow our minds when we're open and we're in a state of Not distraction our boundaries have dissolved and we're in a clear state that our minds are big enough Computational engines to resonate with a whole lot of shit non-locally So for example you believe non-local intelligence you think that like perhaps there's some sort of a universal intelligence out there that you can tune into I think that in some way like for example if you trace all of the neuronal pathways down all the synapses and across all the gaps backwards and forwards in your mind and you can look this up online the number of those Tracers those unique strings is larger Or equivalent or larger than the number of subatomic particles in the universe No all countable objects in the universe. It's this huge the common tutorials are huge because the brain says this is network And it soon it ramps up so your brain if you it's like an informational system a coding system that If you could activate this pathway and that little variation of that pathway and that will it's actually bigger than the universe And of course it's in the universe too. It's not bigger than itself but Then you have the idea of non-locality Where everything talks to everything non-locally You know and instantly this is Bell's theorem and all these sorts of things and so Could it be that there's some and this is a total who hand-weighty thing? It could it be that your mind really fully activated really fully present through your filters So you're training with your Roman Catholic or your a skeptical whatever you stuff can come in that's resonating from some field another intelligence objects patterns stuff in time and history beyond what what our little reductionist kind of mechanical thinking Gives us that could we be resonating with real shit that's out there? That's beyond what our training is, but it'll be filtered throughout training So all that you start sort of tapping into some incredible ultimate potential like some also potential for accessing information and and possibilities for for possibilities as far as connections possibilities as far as like putting things together in your head and proposing Various scenarios that maybe wouldn't be available if you impose limitations on where they came from if you tried to figure out With your training in your two to list and your algorithms you'd never get there So you literally have to blow your mind completely open you know Graham and Hank how gave it fantastic example on your show within last month, which was a Telescope remember that needs to shape change the shape of the lands in order for you to resolve and see stars and galaxies Right, so those people who never use telescopes say well you shouldn't have to perturb the mind to see what's out there Well, they've never looked through a telescope right so We should as a species realize we need to perturb our minds I always have a huge problem people to say you shouldn't perturb the mind because I don't see the negative impact of perturbing the mind And I see a massive amount of positive and then I see these people saying you shouldn't perturb the mind and they haven't perturbed the mind So I'm like well, what are you talking about like you anyone who says that like psychedelic experiences are not valuable and hasn't had psychedelic experience? I'm like, okay, we're just going around circles here. We're talking crazy like you don't know whether their value You're just totally They've never floated yeah, or they've never done a mutation But the what I think the beauty of psychedelic experience the the actual taking of a psychedelic is is that it's undeniable I mean mushrooms work on everybody DMT works well some people some weird freak people Apparently don't have DMT experiences. I don't know the problem is it's so illegal and it's so it's so difficult to tell I don't think stress when had any people that didn't find And it hacked for the intravenous DMT studies that he did at University of New Mexico, but I think that People that say it's not valuable and haven't experienced it. You're discounting Just thousands millions perhaps of people who have had incredibly valuable experiences doing it and you're saying you know Need it like you know you're scared you're scared all these tribal cultures That needed to use that to initiate people into humanity to human being And I think from then then your idea of endogenous access it becomes becomes very attractive and it also becomes more plausible because people know that these states are reachable Because I think without knowing like I remember the first time I had any psychedelic experience the first really big one was a Five Emmy or I had a small mushroom experience, but the five Emmy O DMT experience like after that I can remember really clearly thinking well now that I know that this is a possibility I have to kind of re-thraint rethink my spectrum everything and so then One could see reaching these incredible states through some sort of endogenous method that maybe perhaps you would have never even Given it the chance before and I think you know if you look in African communities that used I've again as an initiatory Experience an ordeal or initiate our experience. They're trying to take those unformed youths Then think they know everything right and they're exposing them to something so massive that forces them to challenge their own internal state and come to terms with fears or other things and Broaden themselves out. They're weaving their weft as a human being when they come out of that They're a member of the community and they're trustable and they look each other in the eye and they had the tips They're not children anymore not juvenile anymore and and this is perhaps it was stolen from us when we lost our Initiatory rights and was taken away by priests it was taken away by Corporations or oh maybe it's just a blip. I mean maybe it's not taken away Maybe it's just in our context of our lives. We look at a thousand years being so long But in the universe it's nothing it's nothing and if the state is said that you look to the life of the earth It's nothing so we're like it's been taken away from us like now we're talking about it. It's not going anywhere It's not going anywhere back. We're yeah, we're we're celebrating its return. Yeah, listen We're how it's hot. But this is an amazing conversation. We could have a hundred of these I think we could we could go We could take the what if train to the end of Mars and back And I would like to come back and bring you a bunch of artifacts Yeah, that original mouse that you can you can play with on the show. I would love that I would love that and I Where could people find out more about you? They may come er.com and Facebook Facebook I'm Bruce Damer Twitter and be Damer on YouTube Bruce digie, but it's all there and levity zone.org. We rebuilt the site just for you Joe Really? We kept all new WordPress theme. Oh, you were worried about the impact. Yeah Service should add that website right now. Let's crash And if anybody wants to reach me, it's easy Bruce at damer.com. You just made a huge mistake That's a tremendous mistake appear for a tsunami of dicks coming your way and who knows what kind of photographs Could be disaster could be done. Yeah filter those out. You might she she had slide. I should have stopped you Anyway, so the podcast though is available on iTunes Everything everything and soundcloud and one more time the name of the podcast levities on Levities on dot org Bruce Damer ladies and gentlemen Podcast jenismic. Kind of so right about you. That was awesome. Thank you very much. Really appreciate it. Thank you Joe A lot of podcasts this week folks Paul Stanley on Wednesday from kiss we're gonna have a lot of fun and and more and more see you soon