Is this some of your new stuff? Oh, it's so good. Geez nicotine problem. This is this is this is life of her heart You're not bragging but I feel great at 55. I'll just say I'll just say that Okay, sorry. You ready? Okay, so there are so many Unfolding stories swirling around that give the attentive person anxiety and anyone is paying very close attention to what's happening Now is anxious about it. I will say that but there is also a Lot to look forward to and a lot to be comforted by yes, and I just want to go through with you if we could since you were right in the middle of this election Yep working on behalf outside the campaign button. I'm correct on behalf very hard project of reform and on behalf of the country really You know the answer to this question What are the things that you're looking forward to? Over the next four years Well first of all stop to the madness I mean there was no way we were gonna last another four years with the insane idea that was going on So we got to stop to that at least for the moment. I think the most one the most exciting things to me is But can we suppose for one second? I think that's not an overstatement. It's not I mean if that's all Was I'm gonna be disappointed if that's all we get, but if that's all we get That's a serious step in the right. So just name name three trends that are Well, I guess when still president There were have been in progress the last four years that we could not sustain for another four years. I start with immigration. Yeah I mean this is insane. I mean we're seeing What we've seen over the last four years not only the wide open borders. We don't even really know who's Come in now. We know there's tens of millions of illegal sort of come in millions of getaways I still I still don't understand why we haven't had a deeper conversation about the tens of thousands of Chinese national Males that have come in over the southern border like what the hell is going on with that Whoever else has come in at the same time conversation about the fact that for four years They've been importing new voters I would hope that every Republican regardless of where they are on the spectrum because again We know that not all Republicans are cratered equal That even the Chamber of Commerce Republicans understand over the next four years for their own self preservation They should be wholeheartedly behind Donald Trump's deportation efforts We start with the hard criminals. We start with those illegal's have criminal records and we keep right on going and Deporting all of the new democratic voters that they've imported over the last four years for the sake of self preservation If you want to have a two-party system instead of a single-party state the immigration has to be fixed and I would argue to the point of If we do not have if Donald Trump does not unleash Tom Holman and Stephen Miller To go all the way to actually Deport everybody that is needed to be deported to fix the southern border It calls into question who we are as a country. Yeah, I mean this to me is one of the things that again If you don't have a border, you don't have sovereignty. You don't have citizens What does it actually mean to be a country? What does it mean to be a citizen? What does it mean to be America? What does it mean to be an American citizen? What does it mean to have a constitution? We're very unique people. We have a very unique way of life and With everything that has been taking place in regards to immigration if it was to have continued for another four years Again, I think all bets are often who we are as a people who we are as a country. Yeah, for we're done. So immigration first thing foreign policy I mean that to me what are we even doing on a whole host of France in regards to Ukraine that that whole mess is still going? We're still apparently sending billions of dollars over to Ukraine before they you know shut the lights out on the Biden White House but but the foreign policy again getting a point and also the weakness that we have demonstrated on the international stage for the last four years At a certain point that was gonna cause even more serious implications if it was another four years of that and and I don't know where it would have ended Obviously Donald Trump showing up this week. I mean as if he hasn't started enough wars I mean it started all kinds of wars. People aren't I mean we're in battle with the Houthis right right now, right? But Biden just announced That in the final couple weeks of his administration is gonna start a war through Iran with with Lindsey Graham's full support That this this to me is at some point At some point. I hope that we can Restructure the Republican Party in the primaries of 2026. That's another topic that would love to discuss with you But yeah, at some point Donald Trump won on an America first message Right, it'd be really nice of the rest of Republicans File online with that and understanding that the people voted for change and the change is what they want with America first and that includes Donald Trump's approach on foreign policy that does not include more shooting wars with Iran and others across the globe at the same time There is a certain approach. I think Donald Trump brings to foreign policy that brought us peace. Yeah, I mean four years of no new wars peace He has the ability to do that and it does not involve starting new wars or foreign intervention So I would say that's one of the other topics One of the other issues that I think has been a blessing for us with with Trump winning The economy I mean can you imagine if we had another four years of this economy where we'd be that when they tell us they gas lies and tell us the economy's fine inflation all these things are Fingments of your imagination everybody's doing just fine and You look it and that's what I do with the American majority. I work with the grassroots. I'm out there with everyday people It is not fine and I couldn't imagine another four years of them being devastated economically Where we would be so those three things immigration policy economy inflation. I know personally Someone close to the other day just told me middle-class person solid, you know, we make Higher than no, I mean, I don't know probably makes one sixty a year if I had to guess Was used to be considered pretty solid pretty darn good. I was shocked when I made a hundred grand a year. Yeah When I was in my thirties, but anyway I worried about food prices. Yes. No, I know it's kind of shocking when you realize that people that are making What would be considered used to be considered pretty good salary? I don't know. Yeah. Yeah, we're feeling a little pinched here Yeah, okay, so sorry. I just wanted to I because I think it's just a way, you know Stopping the destruction or slowing it down is itself awareness. You noted exactly. Okay, but then the next step becomes Well, I Donald Trump to me Listen nobody's perfect. I will have many imperfections and nobody's a perfect person But I think Donald Trump's a man for the man for the hour. He has shown and demonstrated political courage I can't I cannot even begin to imagine The last four years of the political the lawfare that has been put on him Used against him the incredible pressure to try and destroy him And I've told people this and I'll say it here Donald Trump knew what he was going up against He didn't run away from it. He ran at it That to me is one of the most amazing parts of this story in some ways I think back to the story of David and Goliath and there's one of my favorite stories out of out of scripture If you go back and look at it David didn't run away. He didn't kind of slowly approach Goliath He ran at him and that kind of to me is Donald Trump knows exactly what he's up against He's up against very powerful forces. I mean we as much as we despise the administrative state and the deep state and the corporate Propaganda and all these things these are very powerful forces and they can do a lot of damage to your life He didn't have to do this. You could have been enjoying a very good life somewhere else in the world playing golf for the rest of his life every day And the lovely spot in the world he ran at them and he took and probably Pressure incredible body blows kept running at them and in many ways triumphs Over these people who are trying to destroy him and now he is back in a position of power to be able to implement I think a vision for this country That will begin a restoration but this is I don't consider myself conservative necessarily because what are we actually conserving? This to me is one of my great frustrations with the conservative movement writ large Explain to me again what we've actually been conserving over the last 40 50 60 years I'm more interested and it's very it's a very reactive term to conservative I'm far more interested in restoration in being a restorationist in restoring the Republic and restoring a constitution Republic in restoring a government of Bion for the people that actually promote the interests of the American people which Kind of the premise of the American Republic right all power flows from the American people from the people to their duly elected representative So they make the stewards of the power and money given to them to put together a government that actually promotes and protects the interests of the American people every day on every issue And we've kind of lost sight of that and Donald Trump's the great temerity of Donald Trump back in 2016 Was that he kind of showed up and said hey? I think government of buying for the people should actually promote the American people and their interests And that's why I think he was considered such a great threat by permanent DC of the administrative state whatever You want however you wanted to find it this to me is a moment in time Where we have a shot? Where we have an actual shot of restoring the Republic of restoring a government of and of form by the people to the people to promote the people to protect their interests That to me is one of the most interesting things over the next four years But it's going to require someone like Donald Trump with this political courage Instilling into others political courage to actually do the right things. I'm a little nervous about Mike Johnson a speaker I have my doubts about John Thune But I think if he can actually instill the political courage necessary into Republicans on the hill But also into his various nominees who I think will Actually have what it takes to do what they should be doing in the various departments and agencies We could be in for a singular moment in American history in which we look back and go This was the turning point where we actually began to restore the Republic Um so many threads before we get get to know no, I I Think it's a great overview Will all of Donald Trump's nominees be confirmed by the Republican Senate? I feel pretty good about a lot of them. I would not be surprised if Pete Haggzeth gets 52. We'll see Let's feel so way. Yeah, it feels like he's gonna get I'll be a lot more specific They don't like Tulsi Gabbard. They don't like Tulsi. I think RFK's got some problems But you I feel good. I feel good about Pete. I feel good about Russ vote I think Russ is gonna be one of the more great. It's gonna be one of the most important Nobody really talks about omb outside of DC I'm telling you one of the most important vehicles that Donald Trump will be able to use to deconstruct and dismantle the administrative state is omb And you got to have somebody like Russ vote Ed Martin's gonna be the chief of staff Bishop as his has his deputy and then I'm hoping he gets Eric Ulin and his deputy director of management That's a rock star team at omb Marty McCary FDA amazing. Yeah, that'd be huge Paul Atkins at SEC I think feel I feel good about that So I think a lot of these people are gonna but you can't I think he's gonna get overwhelming number of them through without too many problems. I think Tulsi and RFK are gonna be question marks If I'm being honest, I don't think you can tolerate that. I don't either Because it's one thing to get like and I don't want to I know I don't want to attack anybody this hasn't even started But you know there are some nominees who are just like whatever they're like everyone They don't have usage or consistent with what Trump ran on that's a fact And so if the Republican Congress rubber stamps their buddies Whatever right, but I'm sorry. They're not in charge of the Republican Party They're a lot less popular than Donald Trump, and I don't understand if you're you know Bobby Kennedy's point It's like really important. He's not a perfect person, but we have a system that is killing people and he's a step in the right direction Same with Tulsi. Yeah, she's not perfect person. No one is but our foreign policies insane and it's hurting the United States So like why wouldn't the White House call over to Republican senators and say You get in our way. We're gonna crush you. How's that sound? I mean it no I propose this to certain people behind the scenes. Yeah, like let's go. So we're not gonna put up with that Well first of all the agent of change people voted for Donald Trump. Yeah, I mean this was a very clear election you get choice H voice be very different Approaches to government and to the future There's no there was no real illusion about like there's no confusion about what people were voting for and they voted definitively for Donald Trump You know first first Republican to win the popular votes since 2004 First Republican to win 311 electoral votes since 1988 first non-consecutive presidents and square of a Cleveland. I mean this is a historical election he wins agent of change agent of change gets his change agents in the various departments and agencies Oh, yeah, and the Senate gets to advise and consent. They don't get to say no We want our buddy or we don't like this person. So we're not gonna give you this person Donald Trump won Donald Trump won and also by the way I would make the argument help get them the Senate and The House so you have majorities because of Donald Trump Donald Trump won Donald Trump would like these people to actually be in these departments and agencies and unless they're a criminal or unless there's some You know terrible thing in their past that is disqualifying you get to confirm them In the story, let's be honest Tulsi Gabbard and Bobby Kennedy are opposed by lobbyists. That's what opposes them right Bobby Kennedy is opposed by farm in Agelobius Tulsi Gabbard is opposed by a lobbyist acting in behalf of foreign countries. That's a fact. Yeah, so There is no reason that lobbyists Should take precedent over the population of the United States And so why wouldn't you say to a cop I could think of it. Yeah, but then you're acting so but DC You've you've been in DC. I've been around 25 years. Where's the cleansing sort of justice where you call up certain senators I'm not gonna name good and say not only will we primary you and make sure you lose your Senate seat Well, make certain you don't get a job after you leave the Senate and then we're gonna one leash Some of the toughest people in the Republican Party take a really close look at you. So I propose we're gonna do to you what you plan to do to our nominee I have proposed to some people behind the scenes The Donald Trump should have a very honest conversation with some of these senators. Yeah, you have friends and family and associates that would like to be involved in this Administration Some of you have primaries in 2026. Let me be very clear here if you will if you oppose or vote against any of my nominees I will find primary opponents for you in 26 Also none of your family or friends or associates will ever find a job inside of this administration And I will become one of your worst enemies But if you're gonna attack the care if you're gonna sit back and allow people to call Bobby Kennedy a nutcase Right and Tulsi Gabbard an agent of a foreign power really I mean I'm thinking of one senator in particular from the Northeast You know whatever without even getting in right these are people who are vulnerable Yes, really we're gonna look into Bobby Kennedy's behavior. Well, how about we look into yours? I think they're using I'm sick of this. I know I think they're trying the carrot approach right now, and I'm well We need to find sort of justice of the certain I'm usually the stick approach first. Yeah, so I really like the big stick to come out Let's see how these hearings begin and really just a couple days How they start to play out? But I think there needs to be a conversation behind the scenes of you know We'd love for you to do the right thing and if you don't they're going to be serious cons. It's actually because most most of these elected officials This is one thing that I've noticed about DC having them there for way too long They are experts in self preservation. Yeah, they want to come back about right They want to come back in two years as a member of the house They want to come back in six years as a member of the Senate Let's have a little chit chat about what your political future looks like if you don't want to actually give me my nominees Well, especially on the basis of no good reason on the basis of like the most corrupt motives Pressure from lobbyists to oppose and I just want to be clear. It's Bobby Kennedy and Tulsi Gabbard We're talking about it. You're absolutely right and they're going to impune their characters This is this is how DC is operated for way too long That's a gabbard has never had a sip of alcohol in her life You know that call her a bad person really the the the corporation that the corporate lobbyists and all of these various interests Have way too much say in how a senator actually or congressman actually operates instead of the people that actually voted them into office And you and I both know this because the globius are in there every day Pressureing making sure there's a lot of money coming in for the reelection campaign so they can get re-elected the idea of self preservation It's it's a pretty I mean there's there's a whole host of things wrong with our system today But this is one of them what what the the bell that rings that they respond to is not the right bell It's been over a decade since Edward Snowden who is a hero Exposed the US government for spying on its citizens. He didn't commit the crime They did but he of course was punished now You would think that the information that he brought to the public would cause permanent Washington to pause reflect Apologize for vitally in the constitution to the United States the privacy and the rights of American citizens But that's not what happened no Ed Snowden is still in exile And in fact just this here the house of representatives extended the rights of government agencies to spy on you This is happening in public. It's infuriating to watch American citizens have lost as of today the battle with their government to have privacy and freedom you're being watched So what can you do Congress not gonna help you? Well, you can actually do something you can use express VPN express VPN returns privacy to your life It's an app that rerouts a hundred percent of what you do online through encrypted channels That means nobody can see what you do online So if you want to protect yourself from corporate and government spying and we do go to express VPN com slash Tucker and if you do that you can extra three three months of privacy That's express VPN.com slash Tucker and you get an extra three months free It's worth it privacy always is so J. D. Vance said something I thought so I'd never have forgotten that during The election and he said we the Republican Party needs to be like a legit opposition party and needs to oppose The other side like we need two parties, okay? We need to be in balance and one of the things that the other side does in this This is the key to police, you know, closely as I kind of an idiot But she's really tough yes like actually tough and she said people down and just I've you know Daughter of a mafia mayor like she knows how to do this from Baltimore, right? And just like let's be clear about what's gonna happen if you do that and I don't I don't know a single person on a public Party who will do that this is what concerns me a little bit about the current Republican leadership in both the House and the Senate of I Wouldn't mind politically speaking. I want to make that very clear politically speaking It's okay to break a few legs and just say this is the reality what's gonna happen a lot of moist handshakes Yeah, public and leadership and so this is this is a bigger frustration with the Republican Party People give you power political power to use the political power to enact change I think too many Republicans have come to DC. You know like isn't this a lovely experience It's gonna be a great career. We have a lot of careers who are enjoying the the fun career in DC and Democrats like by God we have political power we're going to break you to achieve what we want to achieve to Fundamentally change and transform this country the religious zealots and we're all sitting here going Oh, that's kind of mean. We should probably shouldn't do that if you have been given political power You should freaking use the political power given to you by the American people or they might start to question Why did we give you political power in the first place because you don't know how to use it? Yeah So I've watched this like for decades right it's driving me slowly. It's right. It's totally driving me crazy But why isn't there like an outside group like a 5 1 C 3 of some short Or see for I guess to to do this to say it's like then one of my arguments on dot org It's like we're gonna extract a cost if you don't serve Your voters that super simple. You got elected on a program right? Ignore the program and the people who voted for the program in favor of lobbyists I can't do that you want to hurt you You know the RNC is never going to be that even though you would like our team on it doesn't even write anymore You want Charlie Kirk or have replaced it. So I get it We need a Significant and it's not minor. It's not tens of millions right? You're talking with hundreds of millions every election cycle to have an it proper Enforcement mechanism of you said you were going to do this. This is what the people voted for if you do not tow the line on this We will find a competent credible Primary candidate for you and it here she will be well-funded and we will crush you That doesn't exist right now well and it's not just that I mean I look at people including someone leadership Clearly have had a hard conversation with someone It was like we've got your online porn records Or we know who your boyfriend is or you know you got right and wasted on a coda to Croatian acted like a pig and we know that I mean clearly Riser people who are being blackmailed like I can think of one in particular clearly being blackmail and I'm against blackmail, but I'm also in favor of serving your constituents of Restoring democracy to the United States people vote for something they should get it and I they're not getting it and they never get it and I'm just the republic is in the balance Yes, I would make the argument one of the arguments I make in American Leviathan is we're not really a cuss who's from Paul anymore we gotta you think we got a shot at restoring it The republic is at stake freedom is at stake liberty is at stake the future of your kids your grandkids future generations is at stake We are in a cold political war. We have been in a cold political war for decades with the Un-American left at some points are you going to figure out the reality of what time it is? Republicans in DC before it's too late and If you understand where we're at in our in our nation's history in the singular moment that we have and what is it stake? I would hope they would find it somewhere within themselves to go to the mats and to fight with everything they have for their future For their children's future for the grandchildren's future and understand it might make you feel a little queasy in the moment Like this is really hardcore. We're using some pretty brutal tactics Freedom future of the country. There are a lot of things at stake. We and not only for this country For the world. I mean think about who we are for the rest of the world The United States. We are beacon of hope. We are really the world's last great hope. We are if we fall There's nobody coming for us. Yes, for sure If there's there's absolutely no one that will come and save America Even as a decline where even more important. I think is the last free place We have to think of the stakes not only for our country But for the world as well. I agree tear God find a backbone and Understand we're If it's street-style brawling tactics that are necessary to win I think it's justified in doing that because For God's sake, they just tried to abuse our entire legal system And justice system to take out Donald Trump quite frankly others as well Honestly, if they had won I think they would have gone after some of us that are not at ndc But are considered somewhat prominent in the conservative move. No, I told people I told my staff And I told others that I was working with this last year and you know pretty significant project There is a sense of urgency coming from me specifically and there should be urgency from other leaders of organizations because if they win again The next people are going to show trial and lawfare are us So we better freaking win and if we don't win we've got problems I don't think that's crazy at all. No, I don't and and and I think we actually have to have that conversation about where these people on the left are They they're deeply un-American. They are antithetical to freedom. They're antithetical to liberty If they had the political power to do whatever they wanted to us I think they would. I don't think I'm overstating that at all And so people have asked how do you think we get back to normal with this un-American left in this country In my argument to them has been we beat them into political submission and send them into the political wilderness for generations That's the only way you get back to normal But you have to frame the entire you have to build the entire conservative movement Around political power with the right people achieving political power maintaining political power And keeping it for long enough that you can actually achieve all the reform while putting them into the political wilderness And I don't think we're actually organized or structured that way at all right now um, I do think A lot of meaningful reform will come from outside the party. Yeah, as it has on the left They've been really effective and thoughtful in building up outside organizations that fund Their party and it keep it, you know aligned Keep it on the track that they think it should be on. Of course, I find that you know, I find their goals repugged in but I Think they've been very clever. I'm a great admire of the left in regards to achieving political power and how they structure themselves and their How they have structured themselves to achieve political power for all the wrong reasons all their policy ideas are terrible for this country But they have they have structured themselves to achieve that and in fact I can based off all the numbers and statistics I've seen the left is in the minority in this country and yet they have an undue influence in politics and the various Institutions because they have structured themselves to achieve power in the institutions and politically How they've invested their time and money into doing that. We on the other hand I mean, I know some people love a good white paper and like some of the things that the thing tanks do We are not structured correctly to achieve and maintain political power and I think that's one of the things That I hope that I can achieve over the next four five six seven eight years Whatever however long it takes for people to understand if we do the right things in The field in the various states we can achieve and maintain political power for years to come But you actually have to be doing the right things Yeah, and have the right the right goals. I mean power is never an ended itself. It's you know It's harnessed in service of right fighting corruption and improving the lives of the people who live here and restoring So preservative democracy So with the caveat that in the end all politics is disappointing because the point of life is not power politics. It's you know It's God in my yeah, it is but um You always be disappointed the closer you get to the political process than what horrified you're gonna be that's you grew up around it I should say I mean your father was yeah, he was in the house for 10 years. Yeah Famous congressman so you know the system better than anybody and I think people who don't know it once they get a glimpse of it They're like oh, that's repulsive. I want to go back. Yes So like it's just inherently disappointing. It's where ignorance as bliss comes in handy But it doesn't mean that one outcome is not better than the other one. I don't know better than the others so with that In mind Now that we've lowered the bar a little bit Let's just start what are you excited about? What can this administration achieve in the next couple years? What can they achieve? What will they achieve? What I hope they will achieve? Uh I want Donald Trump. I'm not interested in trimming this government. I'm not interested in making it more efficient Yeah, I'm interested in shattering this administrative state into a million pieces Yes, I think Donald Trump has figured out who the enemy is over the last called nine years in which I think he truly showed up in DC January of 2017 As the duly elected representative president of the American people shows up in DC and goes I'm the duly elected president. I get to decide a lot of the foreign domestic policy And ran into a system of government that said yeah, we don't think so We think we decide and I think it was a startling it was a startling moment for him when he realized I thought we were Constitution Republic representative democracy And then folks in DC are like no, we're not really that we're an administrative state They don't like to be or a crads and they're allies Where the ones that actually decide these things a lot of these things were settled years ago Foreign policy for example. This is the crazy part to me Donald Trump's one of his great sins Was showing up and thinking I won an election people voted for change one of them was different approach and foreign policy So we're gonna actually enact that like now we already settled that years ago You don't get to decide that at all. It's already been decided by The smart people of the State Department by like Victoria Newland And I think that for him was a moment where he realized we have a real problem And then of course he became a target of Zone governments The DOJ and the FBI and all these people Trying to take out the duty like to present United States with fake flies of warrants and fake dossier's and all this stuff and he realized We have a serious problem here. So the do they like to present United States with fake flies of warrants and fake dossier's and all this stuff. And he realized we have a serious problem here. So leading up to now, and then the four years of lawfare in which on the most spurious of charges, they literally, I don't know the exact figure, but I have to guess it was hundreds of millions they soaked out of his campaign in regards to legal fees and not only like trying to destroy him as a person cash out of him. I think he's coming back this month and being sworn in for another term and fully understanding we have a form of government that is running this country that has nothing to do with the Constitution Republic. So I hope I sincerely hope that he understands who the enemy is that he has to go at them. They've already declared war on him. This is not about him declaring war on the administrative state. They declared war on him years ago. And it's him responding in kind and going, we are not going to take this sitting down. And I hope on day one, I've got a few thoughts on this. I'm glad you asked that he would go out and fire hundreds of thousands of federal employees day one, GS 12, GS 13's just pick out random names, fire them. Federal employee unions are going to sue back, stays. They're going to go back and forth through the courts to get to the Supreme Court, probably 18 months, two years, to ask a fundamental question, does the head of the executive branch, the duly elected president United States, the article two branch head, get to hire and fire whoever he wants to inside of this branch? Is the question, is it yes or no? And I would hope this Supreme Court says yes. And at that point, Donald Trump becomes the demolition man for the administrative state because that's where most of the administrative state resides is inside the article two branch, the executive branch of our government. Donald Trump goes for broke and he starts firing people. My hope is that he's also told some of these new nominees that are going to be secretaries. You're going to go in and on day one announce, I'm Linda McMahon, I'm the new secretary of education. I'm going to be the last secretary of education because by the time I'm done here, we're going to shut down this department. And then on top of that, we're going to not only shut down this building, we're going to implode it. We're going to raise it to the ground and we're going to build freedom parks over this. I mean, that's that that is the approach that has to be taken by Trump day one of going right at the administrative state. I'm not interested in making it more efficient. I'm not interested in cutting regulations. I'm not interested in cutting spending. Those are all an effect. The cause is the state. You have to shatter it into a million pieces. So that's that's my biggest hope. And I think he actually has the moral and political courage to actually do that. My hope and prayer, quite frankly, is that all of his various nominees have the exact same political and moral courage to do the same thing because that is the issue. I'm telling you, Tucker, every issue that we are experiencing today in this country, in DC specifically, but in some ways in other aspects of the country comes from a deeply unconstitutional administrative state that I think has nothing to do with advancing and promoting the interests of the American people. That's the fight. That is the issue. That is the thing. It's a big ask. It is a cabinet secretary because in cutting your staff, you cut your power. Yeah. That's my concern. Yeah, capture. Right. No, my concern is that these secretaries, these new nominees who are going to be confirmed to secretary is going to walk in and go, oh my gosh, I'm secretary of this department has this wonderful. And then how can I be as effective as possible as the new secretary of this various department and all the power that I have to actually enact change? No, no, the whole point is for you to make this thing go away to make it end to make it cease to exist. I have questions about some of them. Um, doge, uh, not part, these are not federal employees. Right. Elon Musk, we've made growing with Swami. They're going to become federal employees, but they're going to oversee what they're saying is the most transformative effort ever to shrink government to do to the federal government. What Elon did to Twitter? I hope so. I would work. I think they're going to run most of it through OMB. Right. Right. They're going to run through Ross and his team and advise strategies, you know, plans. I'll be completely honest when they say we're going to declare victory and say we're done in 18 months and July 4th of 2026. Uh, that's insane. Good to have a deadline though. It's nice to have a deadline. It's also an insane one. Why? Um, the administrative state started 112 years ago. It has been building. It has got so many reinforcing loops inside of this massive Leviathan. You're not going to absolutely just, yeah. First of all, I don't think you can get the fundamental question answered about does the head of the executive branch get to once you're in 18 months. I think in probably two years, I've actually talked with Sean Davis, who's a good buddy. He's like, dude, I think you're lucky if it's answered in two years. I think there's some fundamental questions and things that have to be answered and done that are going to take some time. I don't think you can declare victory in 18 months. This has been 100 plus years in the making. And there are so many people with so many vested interests in the status quo. Various people in in governments outside of government, the entire system, they're going to fight tooth and nail to make sure that this system of government does not go away. So you're going to be up again. I think we're going to be involved. If Donald Trump goes down the path of I'm going to destroy the administrative state, it could be that the previous nine years of the craziness that we have seen as a warm up act for maybe one of the coldest political wars we'll see in DC ever because of what to stake. I mean, you're talking about regime change politics here, where I mean, two very different governing philosophies of how you approach government on a whole host of fronts from basic human rights to how government actually operates. And there are a lot of people invested interest in maintaining the status quo of the administrative state. And they're going to fight tooth and nail to make sure that it doesn't go away. So I think in some ways, I love the fact that he has put brilliant minds like Elon and Vivek to do this with an outsider's approach. I just don't think it's going to happen. I don't think meaningful fundamental change that is long term and lasting is going to take place in 18 months. And I'm being realistic having been in DC for 25 years. Well, 2024 is a wild year who knows what 2025 will bring. But one thing a lot of people have realized is that member thoughts and prayers people made fun of that. No one makes fun of that anymore. Prayer actually works. It's just a fact. Every society has recognized that from the beginning of time until recently, and people are starting to realize, oh, wait. Prayer is essential every day. So if you want to serve something new that's good for your soul, easy to maintain and will last for the rest of your life, check out Hallo. It is the world's number one prayer app. I heard about it from my wife, not just once, but every night at dinner, that's six months. She loves it because it's easy to use and it is life changing. It builds a daily habit of prayer and allows you bit by bit to grow closer to God every day of 2025. There are over 10,000 guided prayers and meditations on how you can check out the daily scripture readings, nightly sleep prayers. And a daily minute, if you're short on time, there is all kinds of stuff on Hallo all designed to get you to grow closer to God. So start the era of right by putting a relationship with God first and pray with the help of Hallo. You get three free months of Hallo when you sign up at hallo.com slash Tucker. That's Hallo dot com slash Tucker that is sincerely endorsed from personal experience. They've both of them, as you said, are smart and capable. Very smart, very guests. Generational. Yes. And both have put their prestige on the line. Yep. So they're highly motivated to show results by. I don't want worth 20, 26. But I don't want cheap victories. I don't want them to go with cut. I mean, first of all, it'd be great if they cut X number of dollars of spending and cut X, you know, hundreds or thousands of regulations, wonderful, wonderful victories. Again, those are the effects. The cause is the state. All of the stuff that we see in the out of control spending, the out of control growth of government, all of these things are because of the administrative state. It's in the DNA of it. Right. Now, I mean, the progressives who founded the administrative state viewed the state as salvation. Salvation was to come into every aspect of your life. It exists for its own benefit and it grows in the DNA of the administrative status perpetual growth. So if you, if it continues to grow and you're just trimming right here and like, oh, we declared victory, it'll continue, it'll grow right back. You have to cut down the tree. The branches will keep growing. So I don't want them just trim branches. I need them to tear up by root the administrative state. So that doesn't return and continue to grow. A quick way to to parent, I think pretty significantly would be to cancel the security clearances of the contractors who work because the federal government is, you know, it's employees are just a percentage of its overall workforce. A lot of them are contractors twice. Last statistics, I saw there about twice as many federal contractors as there are federal employees. Exactly. And a huge part, all of the all of the contractors attached to national security state, which comprises the entire economy of St. Northern Virginia. Right. Where I'm from where you're from. Yes. Exactly. These are the riches zip codes in the country because they're all federal contractors. And you could end their employment tomorrow by canceling the security clearances. I mean, they can't work there without security clearances. They can't answer the building. I am for all of the above in whatever approach it takes in the short term to stop the madness. I talk about this a little bit in the book where you've got system dynamics and inside of this massive sprawling system, you've got these reinforcing loops. Yes, they continue to grow and grow compound. It's almost like compounding interest and then just explode in size and strength. Yeah, I think you've got to start stopping these little reinforcing loops like revoking security clearances. So I think there's a whole variety of American Leviathan. American Leviathan. Leviathan is a sea monster. It is, but also the second definition is a massive sprawling bureaucracy that borders on totalitarian. Yes. But the Leviathan is described in I think the Joe and Isaiah. Right. Yeah. In the Old Testament. Yes. As some sort of not quite defined, but terrifying sea monster. Yeah, quasi, quasi, demonic sea monster that got eventually conquerors that Yahweh eventually conquerors. But the second definition is definitely about a massive sprawling bureaucracy that tends to be authoritarian and totalitarian. And that's what we have. I mean, this is the one thing that I just, it kind of started dawning on me years ago. Like there's a serious problem with how DC operates. I mean, I was at the White House, George W. Bush don't hate me for this. I wrote for him, which was really interesting experience. You know, whenever you get to write for a president, he's signing your stuff. That's awesome. While my dad was in the house voting against all of his major pieces of legislation, yeah, which was pretty when you go, when you're young and you go to DC and you're kind of new to what you think all Republicans are created equal, all the red guys are good guys and all the blue guys are bad guys. And then you start to realize, like I said earlier, not all Republicans are created equal. There's definitely like different shades along the way. And I remember my dad having to take some pretty strong stances in the house and voting against a lot of these major initiatives from George W. Bush because he strongly believed they were not conservative at all in the least bit. In fact, one of the biggest ones was Medicare Part D. This is one of the, my dad is a prescription drug benefit. Yes. The prescription drug benefit, I think it was 2003, right before the 2004 election. They really wanted it because they felt that it would help the senior vote. And there were about 24, about two dozen holdouts in the house in the Republican caucus. It said, we're not going to vote for this. We were just not going to, they brought them down to the White House. They had Dick Cheney and all the senior White House staff kind of have a little chit chat with them. They all came back. They were still not voting for this. And then Bush was overseas and started lobbying them directly. And I remember him calling my dad and say, I really need this vote. And my tell's like, you know, you don't have great job representing this overseas. Sir. Jim, I really need this vote. I'm not giving you this vote. Click. That was it. There's the end of the conversation. And yeah, my dad fighting tooth and nail to try and prevent that from passing it actually passed by one vote because they kept the house floor open for additional, I don't know how many hours. And eventually got someone to switch their vote in like 3 AM, 4 AM hour. This was a crawl road project. It was. Yeah. You realize compassionate conservatives, conservatism is just another name for big government. And this is, so this is the other thing too. I make this point. Remember people treated Carl Roblick and genius. Yes. The thing, the thing that- The thing that- The thing that's that Donald Trump again and why he's viewed as such an existential threat by permanent DC is he rejects the premise. Yeah. Nixon and Reagan rejected the premise that the administrative state was legitimate. And I think actually Watergate is really more story of that than anything else. And when you go back and look at the story of Watergate, Richard Nixon had just won 500, 520 electoral votes, biggest victory in American. He's 49 states, one by 20 million votes, and the popular vote was massive. And he talked very clearly about what he intended to do in the second in restructuring and dismantling administrative state. And then lo and behold, Watergate happens. And there's a lot of questions about what actually- Not questions or answers. The deputy director of the FBI was- Mark Felt through. Yeah. Mark Felt goes to his corporate propagandist, Lord Worden Bernstein. And Woodward was a former naval intel officer and uses them as the mouthpiece to then take out the duly elected president of the United States. Who was an existential threat to administrative state? It was look inside the coins, Russia gate. Yeah. Same thing. Because the first Republican president since Reagan to reject the premise that he made administrative state as legitimate, Donald Trump. George H. W. Bush, George W. Bush, George W. Bush, we'll be like, we're okay with it as long as we get to run it. And this is what always worries me a little bit about Republicans. He's like, well, it's okay as long as we're running it. No, it's a poisonous tree with poisonous fruit. Can I say, do you cannot reform it? Richard Nixon should have held, I mean, he was an institutionalist in a lot of ways. Nixon, he was like, too responsible for his own good. But if he had just held a prime time news conference live and said, let me tell you what's actually going on here. CIA and FBI have colluded to kick me out because I'm a threat to permanent Washington institutional power. And that's just a fact. And here are some details that you might like to know, you know, that five out of six of the Watergate burglars are actually CIA employees like exactly. And the guy this reporter from the Washington Post was actually worked in the White House. He was sent over by the Pentagon to work in the White House as enable intel officer two years ago. It's guys out of reporter. Bob Woodress on a reporter when you look back. Yeah, you look back. Why didn't Nixon do that? I don't know. But that but that shows you who Donald Trump is as a person right now. You're right. I mean, Nixon, Nixon could have done that. Yeah, he didn't. Donald Trump basically has no, no, no, no, that's not the truth of what's taking place. The right. You're tiny stood up. And he said, this, this is completely politically motivated. They're trying to take me out because I'm a threat to them. That's such a smart description of the difference between Donald Trump and Richard Nixon is that Trump said aloud what was actually happening. And I think that's why they tried to assassinate him in Butler Pennsylvania among other places. So thank you for that. Let me ask about some of you alluded to, which is can I say something really quick? Of course, please, the amount occurs that it simply took to say something out loud that people would consider for Bowden. Yeah, that's part of Donald Trump's great power. He'll say stuff out loud that people you shouldn't say that or you can't be saying that. But he needs to say and he should say it because the situation's like this where he has the ability to say it. And sometimes, you know, he says things that, you know, maybe not the most helpful, but a lot of times he says things out loud that in the past, people have said, you can't, you can't say that. But it does raise the question like, why can't you like, I know why can't you know what else said that? Right. Why is no one ever explained what the UFO program is about or what why killed Kennedy or what happened in 9 11 like just the obvious things. Nobody why does no other president, not that Trump has revealed the truth about any of those things, but hopefully someday. So yeah, but I think we're getting closer just to knowing what the government's been doing for the past 80 years. But you have to wonder about all the other presidents, like the amount of things that every American president has not said, right, the amount of things that people just very obviously lied about like why? What are they so afraid of? You just got elected by the population, right? The most powerful country in the world. Why do you care? You got your army behind you? They're your voters. Why, why can't you tell obvious truths about things? Like what are you afraid of exactly? That is, I mean, if you want to understand people's behavior, right? Look at it through that lens. What are they not saying? What are they not doing? What are the limits that are imposing on themselves and why are they doing that? What are they? What exactly you're afraid of? You control the panic on on the FBI. It's not like you don't have bodyguards. Right. You've got tens of thousands of bodyguards. That's a great question. Donald Donald Trump again has said, I reject the premise that I have to be quiet, which I think is a very refreshing approach. And the question is how far will he go? And I hope he does go. I totally agree, but it would be interesting to know what the control mechanisms are. And if you last thing, I'll shut up. But the last thing I would just recommend anyone watching is to go pull the audio of Richard Nixon in the Oval Office, speaking to the then CIA director about, among other things, the Kennedy assassination and the fear or the sort of difference that that Nixon has is very striking. Nixon is a pretty brave guy in a lot of ways. But like, you know, it's you're talking to your employee. You're talking to your house, kids, like you don't need deference. What? Answer the freaking question, pal. Or I'll fire you. There's none of that in his voice. None. No, I know. Because you've got employees. Would you tip toe around when you talk to them? Like, did you finish the assignment? Are you embarrassed to ask that? No, they're your employees. Because the power structure has been constructed over the last 100 years. How do I, there's a couple of threads. I want to go down. His employees are talking to us. He's not talking to us. He's not talking to us. He's actually actually. Yeah. He's talking to the real decision making of the fight of our government, which was the whole point. It's crazy. No. I mean, in American Leviathan, the people have to understand progressives hated the constitution. They wanted to destroy the political moral authority of it. They wanted to do away with the machinery of the republic. They want to do a separation of powers, all of these things. And in its place, put in this massive administrative state, this massive bureaucracy filled with unelected bureaucrats who they thought our elected representatives should sub delegate governing and legislating to because they thought the bureaucrats should actually be doing the business of governing and running the country. So people, I think people are a little perplexed when they see behavior like this or where the unelected bureaucrats like Chris Ray. Remember that hearing with Grassley with the oversight committee hearing and Ray informs him, Hey, I got to go. I got to get on my plane. I've got an important trip to be at. It was a family vacation, by the way. He told off the Senate that was supposed to be providing oversight. I have to leave. And he goes on the FBI jet to his private vacation home to enjoy a little downtime. He was telling off the people that were supposed to be providing oversight because it's not really how it works anymore. But that was the always those people never threatened. Okay. But that was the point from day one. Chris will defund you. I mean, why is that? This is what I say. So we're not going to build you a new building. The whole point was for these unelected bureaucrats to be doing the covering, to be doing the decision making. It'd be nice. If Congress said, you know what, we hold the purse strings, we're not going to fund you anymore. We're just simply not going to fund you. Speaker of the house sign off on a new FBI building. Great question. Like, what's that? Can we just, okay, let's just be totally bought now. What is that? The Republican Speaker of the house who strikes me as like an out of the closet liberal out of the closet liberal. More than more than weak working for the working for the other side. I mean, that he's the best speaker Democrats could hope for. So what? In not a fan. And I kind of understand some of the political dynamics of why Trump is pushing for him to avoid what was it? 17 votes or whatever it was. Let's get down to business that we had last time. So I kind of understand some of that. At the same time, I mean, could Democrats hope for a better speaker right now with them being in the minority? I don't think so. Mike Johnson is one of the best things they could hope for right now. He gets in whatever they want to. I think I think this recent spending bill, the initial version of it really shows the true nature of who someone is that allows something like that to go to the to come out and be in public of this 15, 1600 page monstrosity. I think that was the true illustration of how weak he actually is. But yeah, I mean, these guys have been performing political law fair inside of our government against not only the president, but out argue members of Congress and for years. And you're going to go ahead and reward them with, I can't even remember the cost for new FBI headquarters, but it's not millions. It's hundreds of millions, right? Of course. Why are you rewarding these people that have badly abused our system? Who, by the way, I don't think right now in the current iteration, the DOJ and the FBI, you know, we always considered them the guardians of the rule of law and one of the basic pillars of our society was rule of law and the equal enforcement of justice that all stood equal before the law and the DOJ and the FBI were going to enforce that and make sure that happened. Now they're just a Victorian guard of the administrative state. Why are you funding them? Why are you rewarding them for this behavior in which, quite frankly, I would go back to self preservation. If you had, if you do really do believe in self preservation as a party and as an opposition party, because the DOJ and the FBI and the various parts of the administrative state are protecting the administrative state. And they view Republicans for the most part as a threat to that. Why are you funding them to continue doing more damage to you and trying to destroy you? Are you insane? Makes no sense. What's the answer? I think they're weak. I don't think they understand what time it is. I don't think they fully come to the clip. I don't think they want to maybe fully examine the reality of what is. They seem afraid of their enemies, but not of their friends. They seem more eager to please their enemies than to please their allies. But what it, it hopes that they'll get eaten last. This to me is at some point you have to wake up to the reality of what's going on. And if you don't, it might be too late. And that's why I think Donald Trump being reelected is a huge step in the right direction of he's going to flee. He can instill a little bit of a spine. Is it going to pardon backbone who is Trump? Yeah, going to pardon? Well, I hope they won. It's all the January 6th. I think that's right. I mean, listen, that was, there are so many different questions that have now risen. I had questions when it actually happened. Like what this, this, something's wrong here. You can't, I mean, the whole, all the chaos, there's something wrong now. He just knows it's just to set up. It was a set up. Yeah. I think he has to go out and not only pardon them. I would hope that they get good lawyers and they get massive settlements from the government from all the abuse they've taken over the last four years. Significant. And I hope that the media people I used to work with you, he did me for saying that apologize because now never will. They haven't apologized for rushing it. No, they didn't apologize for using a fake dossier and saying this is proof of Russian collusion when quite frankly, I think a lot of them. Well, some of them didn't because they're not smart enough. Some of them knew that it was fake. They just viewed it as a useful weapon to take out someone that hated. I think someone actually believed it because they're dumb. So he pardons the J6 to Amen. I think he will. He said he will. Yep. Immediately. But I mean, I didn't just pardon a bunch of murderers, including people murdered children and drug dealers. So I mean, there's a precedent for big pardons. Do you think there's a lot of people are getting a pardon? I hope so. I mean, I couldn't give you a list of names, but the victims of warfare. Yeah, I would think that he can go through and just go for the last four years or quite frankly, eight years. Everybody that has been abused by this political lawfare who's been abused by the DOJ and the FBI and every other aspect of our government full pardon. And again, go back to not just the pardons, not only do you get you freedom back and your lives back, but I hope that there's significant settlements. Yeah. I mean, I hope that these people get paid out significantly. And I don't like to see more taxpayer money being sent out to people. But in this situation, I'm all for it. Yeah, I am too. Speaking of spending, so you said the goal has to be to uproot the tree, not just pared down. It's a trick. Right. The American Bifon. This is the tree. If there is a debt crisis, and I think everyone is whether they say it or not really concerned yet, you know, what are we 36? Right. And by debt crisis, I mean, specifically the reluctance of other countries in institutions to buy our debt, right? You know, because that, that, you know, then we're really hamstrunk, could a debt crisis, which is probably coming at some point, be used to to uproot the tree. Because it's like very expensive to have a government this big. It is. It's unsustainable. Right. I mean, this is at some point, and I think we're coming to that. I think we have come to that point. I think we came to that point a long time ago, actually, but now it's becoming unsustainable. I mean, one point this last was it last year or two years ago, we were growing it by a trillion and a hundred days, every hundred days or something in the national debt. It's just, it's exploding. I think Trump thinks he can grow us out of some of these situations. I don't think that's the only, I don't think that's the solution at some point you have to address the underlying of what are we actually doing with this government that continues to grow, that the DNA and its DNA is perpetual growth, again, going back to if you believe government, if you believe the state of salvation and it should invade every aspect of your life, well, until every aspect of your life is saved, government will continue to grow. You have to completely destroy this to stop the spending, to stop the growth. So I think he has to go to a path. Yeah, we can, we, you know, growth in our economy, but at the same time, the underlying cost for the debt, the spending has been this state. And I think we have to have a conversation. This is, this is the one thing where it feels like the American people, we never actually had a conversation with the American people about what form of government they wanted. It was just a slow moving regime change. I would argue slow moving revolution against the Republic of the last 100 years. People are under the illusion. We have some representative democracy, constitution, republic, when in fact we don't. What is the government that we think best fits that is best suited for a government of buying for the people that to provide the most, you know, amount of freedom and liberty in the most amount of prosperity for the American people. And we've really, I don't think we've really had that conversation over the last 100 years. It's just kind of been slow moving. So and also we wake up to find ourselves in 2024 2025 now going, I don't think we ever had a conversation about this. This is a country's rich in as long as you're rich. No worry about and the economy was growing and life was great. And we're just going to continue on. This will never end. But that's not that's not how history works. That's not how at some point the music stops and people have to have hard conversations about what are we actually doing to make sure that we this is sustainable in the future because it's what we have that is not sustainable at all on any level. Are you ready to make getting a good night's sleep your new year's resolution? That's a worthy resolution. Cozy Earth completely transformed the way we sleep and it's made the difference. Everyone on our team agrees. They got bamboo sheets set. It sounds weird, but it's awesome. Ask anyone who works here. They love them. Cozy Earth sheets made from 100% premium bamboo derivatives are soft and breathe. One thing you better with every wash. Again, sounds weird until you try it in which case you are hooked. Cozy Earth also prioritizes quality and care with 100 night sleep trials. So that means you try their sheets for up to 100 nights. If you don't love them, you send them back for a full refund. We're not going to ask what they do with those sheets, but you get your money back so there's no risk. A good night's sleep is essential. Visit cozyearth.com slash Tucker. Use your exclusive code Tucker for up to 40% off. And if you get a post purchase survey, mention you heard about Cozy Earth from this show would be grateful. You were a backer of cash per tell for FPI director. Yeah. I mean, I lobby Trump on it. Why? And what do you think? What do you think? You were a backer of cash per tell for FBI director. Yeah. I mean, I lobbied Trump on it. Why? And what do you think? What do you get? Good idea that he's going to run the FBI. So I was deeply concerned about, you know, people somewhere somewhere inside of Trump world, someone was pushing micro-adchers, which I thought was a terrible mistake. Who's my crotchers? Former FBI agent was running for Senate. Was a member of the house, former FBI was a member of the house. I think Intel committee. Then was running for Senate this time around lost narrowly. And then someone was pushing him to be FBI director, which I think was the wrong take by like country mile. You don't need an institutionalist to go in and run, but I think is one of the most corrupt institutions in our country today. And I told Trump as I was like as much as you need a loyalist running DOJ times it times a hundred running the FBI. It's a pit of fibers. And you need somebody like cash per tell. We talked about Rick Renell of the cash per tell, but you need somebody that's going to go in there and be fearless to say, we're, we are not doing this anymore. If I would kind of like, I know Cash has said this again. We'll see what happens, but you know, he said that day one, he'd shut it down and turn it into a museum for the deep state. The FBI in this current form is current iteration, these deceased to exist. And I think cash per tell has not only the intelligent and the skills who's going to commit the current tax if we don't have an FBI. Yeah. I know this to me. I think we have to what has been the point of the FBI. They started what 1908 I think is when they originated. What are they actually doing? What is their purpose right now? Besides being a Victorian guard for the Australian state. Right. And looking at potential people like Donald Trump as existential threats and trying to destroy them. And then we continue to fund it blindly. This is writ large with our government administrative state. Well, I find one of the most interesting things about Republicans today and have for quite frankly years. I like me. I'm going to go to DC. I'm going to change DC. They get to DC. They accept budget recommendations from these very Department of Agencies. Go ahead and pass those fund them. Do these four or five thousand page bills send them over to the bureaucrats who would their statutes and regulations actually put a fine point on how this is actually going to look in reality. So they're doing the real governing. So they've not only given them all the funding without an overall oversight, they just give it to them. They've then sub delegated their legislative authority to these elected bureaucrats. And then go home and say you need to send me back. I know those those people at the EPA or the FDA made some terrible regulations that are ruining your lives. But send me back. I'll fight the system and I'll make sure that doesn't happen again as they get reelected to then fund those people again to then send them forward five thousand page bills to then do the statutes and regulations that actually govern us. The whole system is completely bonkers. And it's actually very beneficial to most of these elected representatives. Yeah. Experts in self preservation because they don't have to make the hard choices. They don't actually have to do the really hard decisions on legislating because the statutes and regulations that have the binding effect of laws is what's being done over here in the article two branch by these administrative state bureaucrats. At some point, we do have some hope that we're going to have a chance. Not only Donald Trump at the Supreme Court, the last summer they were a couple cases that I think gave us real hope. Yes. It was not only Chevron with the Supreme Court said for favorite case 40 years. This is a disaster. We're not going to have judicial deference to these bureaucrats. Eat regulations and statutes. I think the other one that wasn't discussed as much that should have been is when the Supreme Court said the SEC tribunals you can't have those anymore. You can't that's you see cannot have its own private administrative law tribunal in which 90% of the time that SEC tribunal ruled in favor of the SEC. The Supreme Court said first of all, it calls into question the idea of an independent judiciary because you're taking the judicial role inside the article two branch, not the article three, and even highlighted seventh or seventh amendment, which is right to trial by Jerry. We're not going to do this anymore. Which was by the way, I mean, you look at some of these things that we're dealing with today and look at where the founders started. They wanted an independent judiciary because they saw what the British courts were doing in rubber stamping King George III and his ministers and parliament edicts that they viewed as very deeply unfair to them, but they were just acting as a rubber stamp. So they said we're going to have an independent judiciary. And then with the administrative state, obviously it's annihilated the separation of powers and you have article two branch doing a lot of the legislative and a lot of judicial. I think Supreme Court stepping up and saying we're not going to do this anymore is another step in the right direction. But at some point, I would hope that members of Congress would find it within themselves to have just the smallest bit of political curse to say, I'm not going to blindly fund this stuff anymore. And that's a step in the right direction. For example, with the FBI, we're not going to do this anymore. We can't do this anymore. For own sex. For the sake of the country, I think it's important for the White House to lead on on issues like that. But it's just how about no, how about no? I would very much like Donald Trump to say the FBI does not deserve a new headquarters. Yeah, that and a lot of other issues, you know, just like the next statements. Yeah, exactly. What happens to Kamala Harris now? Where does she go from here? Where does she go? I know you're not a Democrat, but the ash heap of history. But like, you know, typically you run for president and you lose on the Democratic side and you get, well, John Kerry's or climates are right. And there's always a soft landing for the loser. I don't think so. Not for her. Tell me. I think she was such a disaster. They got stuck. I mean, first of all, they boxed themselves into a corner of their own making. Yes. Right. They knew Joe Biden. They got a DEI candidate and they lived with the results. And then all sudden, realize in June, this isn't going to cut it. I didn't make her like a commercial airplane pilot. Do you? I mean, America got pretty. We did. And I think they got stuck. And they realized this is the only horse we've got to ride. They tried to pull it off. It looked for a couple of weeks. Maybe they've got a shot. And then obviously, obviously, the reality of who she is a lightweight, intellectually, a lightweight, so far in overhead is clear that she's just been going up the ranks as a DEI advancement for her whole life. Yes. I think they're going to be very happy for her to fade off into obscurity. I mean, all this. I saw some chat for it all. I do not at all. I kind of do. Maybe I'm the liberal here, but I feel like she's a victim of self-esteem culture. And I think she's a lot herself to be that though. But she's been a bit of beneficiary of it. She's had, she was vice president of the United States. Well, I'm saying based off being completely honest, based off her talents or lack thereof or her skill says what she's had a pretty freaking good life. No, she had no, you're a great life. But imagine. More of them beyond what she should have done. Yeah. No, you're right. But that's true. But she's also just a vessel for the ambitions of others. Like she's almost like an innocent bystander kidnapped off the street, just just human traffic into her current position. Do you know what I mean? It's like, you just, you just look like the kind of person. I don't know if I've ever heard it described that way. No, I'm not thinking about that. But I just, she's so dumb. And you just kid, what is that phrase that you used in posture syndrome? Yes. Were you sort of know that you're not qualified to be doing what you're doing? And people say they feel that way. But she has life was that. She has no future national politics for sure. So will she be the head of the douchebag foundation or wherever they sort of put people like that? I don't know. I really don't. Right? It feels like she has completely just, even though she's still, you know, vice president for a few more weeks, it feels like she has already been relegated to obscurity. And I think that's going to be the rest of her. She's so hard. Yes. Can be the rest of her existence. I'm sure that somewhere someone will find her a nice gig at a foundation. But I think this last time you're going to see I do this conversation about why to keep her in the public guy like George Floyd. I always like once we remember we declared him Jesus. I don't remember that. I just, we did. I wanted to keep talking about George Floyd. Right. Why don't we have George Floyd day? Right. Like let's talk about, you know, his porn. I think there's drug addiction and his armed robbery conviction. I think they're more than happy for her to just simply fade away. And yes, so I don't think she should be allowed to do that. I don't think they should be allowed to memory whole Carmella Harris. Yeah. Like she should have to explain how her first name is pronounced and why and why she doesn't do so consistently. I think she should be forced to talk a lot more just to like make them, right? Like make the dog return to his vomit. Right. That's what we should make them. We should. The greatest common here is I greatest joy spreader. This is never seen. How did she disappear? I think they will do everything that they can to avoid that. I think they will do everything they can to make sure that you require never have a conversation about. We present of Harvard. I think no, I'm serious. You should take their most beloved institution, the most rotten corrupt, disgusting, overrated. You should. You should start a petition on this. It's real. Like she's such a genius. She's so incredibly comfortable. She's the most accomplished woman who ever ran for president. She should be required to be the head of Harvard. How great would that be? I like that. Yes. Sure. Let's do it. We could start a campaign together. Do you think? Let's do it. But in real life, like she's just going to face. She's gone. Yeah. Yeah. She's gone. What about Joe Biden? Doctor Jill. Doctor, sorry. I'm so sorry. I mean, I mean, I mean, I, I, I, I, I, I have his education degree from the University of North Delaware or whatever. You mean our first female president? Yeah. Come on. I think the scary part, the scary part to me over the last four years is that we knew some of us knew sooner than others. But I think a lot of people knew this guy had early cognitive decline. He was already in some stage of dementia. His sister was telling people I know that from pretty much day one. Right. From pretty much day one of him being sworn in. I mean, this to me is one of the great scandals of, however many generations of political history ever. Yeah. That we had Joe Biden in the White House in cognitive decline, early dementia, whatever you want to call it. Who is actually running the country for four years? I mean, this is, this to me is like, it's a Woodrow Wilson replay, right? Where his wife and his chief of staff are actually running most of the time. Tony Blinken, I think, was running. You think Blinken and I do. Yeah. But I certainly need meaningful parts of the year. And then everybody covered it up. Yeah. I know. Wait. Joe Scarborough. This is the greatest version of Biden ever. So yeah, I don't, you know, Dr. Jill, our first female president, should have a bright future in front of her, whatever she wants to do. And the one thing I always liked, well, they were actually honestly a couple of things I always liked about 100 Biden. I know you're not supposed to say it, but you know, I knew him well. And I was kind of like him. And drug addiction was his real was the, you know, he became a monster because of cocaine and pills as many do. But, um, like he hated her. Really? Oh, he thought she was a screaming bitch. And he said so in person. And he said so in writing on his laptop. Oh, yeah. He said that she was a bitch and stupid. And I think that's a fair assessment. Yeah. From someone who spent his life living with her, like he would, if anyone would know what Dr. Jill is really like, it's a stepson hunter who started dating his dad, but he was like four or something. So, and I don't know why Republicans didn't make more of that. And everyone wanted to focus on the crack and the toe sucking and everything. But Dr. Jill is stupid and a bitch. Yeah. I don't know. I thought that was great. Republicans aren't used again going back to what discussed earlier. They're not used to fighting bare knuckles, bro, style. And they think that would have been beneath them and undignified, undignified. And these people are, these people for four years. And this was not, I mean, I think we have to have the, you know, when we talked about immigration and our foreign policy and the inflation and the economy and all these things were taking place. This when there's a series of coincidences, it ceases to be a coincidence. Yes. It was all systematic. Yeah. Just, we're just going to just continue to destroy this country. We're going to completely remake it with massive illegal immigration. I mean, this to me is why I can't understand these people hate this country. They hate the country as originally founded. They hate the original constitution. They hate the idea of the free born American people. They hate whites, if I can just say. There's a lot of things that they have hated for a long and they intentionally and systematically were seeking to destroy us in our way of life and Republicans, a lot of Republicans in DC are going along with it going, oh, they're really not that bad. Are they? Yes, they are. They truly are. And they would hope they, their goal, I think, is to see this country cease to exist as it once was and to create some new order for this country that has nothing to do with where we came from at all. I think people feel that. But they wouldn't fight. One of the brights, no, they wouldn't. One person who I think is a true bright spot in the Republican party, there are a couple. But the brightest of all, my view is treaty Vance, yes, who has a gut level understanding of everything you just said is legit smart, smarter than I think people understand like actual high IQ character, not a ton of those in politics. And also a decent person, a kind of normal person. So he's now vice president. What does that mean? I have to tell you one of the most important, you've known JD longer than me. I met him when he was thinking about running for Senate. Yes, in the primary, got to know him. I obviously lobby Trump to endorse him in the primary and Senate. Good for you. So got to know him a little bit there. Obviously lobby it a little bit for him to be VP. I know you and Don Junior did a lot more on that front. But it was like, this is this is the future of the country. I texted him. The most impressive part to me is having known him, seeing where he's come from. You get put in pressure cookers like he was put in over the last year. You are the collapse you rise. He's gone next level. I mean, this to me is, I mean, obviously he's an intelligent person. He's very talented. But you get put into the situations you either collapse or rise any rose. And I think he's gone to the next did he he's gone to the next level, which is extremely impressive. And I think the thing that was really important for me in who Trump picked as his VP was the future of what does America first look like after I'm gone. He's got four years. He's done. Right. That's it. And I think a lot of people in DC, permanent DC establishment Republicans corporate, you name it, we just have to all last him for another four years. And then he goes in and now JD's 40, but he's 39 at the time and goes, tell you what I'm going to do. I'm going to pick a 39 year old VP who's going to be the heir to America first. When I'm gone, he's going to be around for a long time. Like this is the I'm pushing all my chips in. This is an all in move on America first. You're not going to just out last me for four years. I'm going to make this into a permanent long-term political movement. Yeah. That to me was what he did with JD. And JD got put into that situation, pressure cooker, rose to the occasion. And I think he is really it's been extremely impressive to me. I mean, everything that he has done. I mean, having done a lot of TV, what he would do on the Sunday morning shows, not one or two, but sometimes three on a given day, going in and dismantling each one of those antagonistic hostile hosts. I'm so impressed by what he did and was able to do and feel the same. Not easy. And he did it so well and rose to the occasion every time, by the way. But you know, I mean, I've done enough TV. Sometimes you know, I'm like, I wasn't the greatest. It seemed like every time he went in and did this. I was just like, that is so freaking impressive. Well, it's a man. I was so good. So it's a good TV. I can tell you that I mean, I don't think the beating something while these people are stupid, like beating George Stephanopoulos or Margaret Brandon or something like that. Have you come to the same conclusion I have that if you're a corporate propaganda, you can't be intelligent. No, because you can't be a free thinker. And you have you have to accept. Right. No self-respect. Right. But what I found amazing is something that for a living my whole life was not just that he won the arguments he smarter than they are. Is that he did something that I could not do, which is remain kind of cheerful, calm, charming, calm, retain, you know, cis and normist self control. And I couldn't do that. I think I could probably beat Margaret Brandon in an argument. I hope. Right. But I would come off as like snaring in angry and anti women or say, you know what I mean? But J. Oh, no, J. D. was amazing. Oh, I could not do that. No, I couldn't either. I get fired up and kind of get a little snarky and little exactly very pugelistic at times. And he's very calm, dignified, very rational, kind of highly intelligent. But I think that that to me is again, going back to what Trump did with him. We're all in on this. A young VP who hopefully we're going to have a very successful four years with Trump. He's going to use J. D. effectively set up J. D. in the future and then all sudden, because going back to what I said earlier, you don't fix what we've been going through for the last hundred years and 18 months. You don't even fix it in four years. I think we need no less than 12 years of political power with the right people in D. C. to actually bring about the fundamental change necessary. So you have to set yourself up for at least 12 years of political power. Four years of Trump, eight years of J. D. And then all sudden, you've got the ability with the right people doing the right things to actually bring about the right reform necessary to restore the republic. Is about going back to you. And I totally agree with you about political power has been the right hands doing the right things to achieve the right ends. But this to me is why we have to achieve and retain political power for no less than 12 years in D. C. If you're still using Verizon, AT&T or T-Mobile, obviously our condolences, but you're going to want to hear this. Our cell phone company, PureTalk, gives us the exact same service you're currently getting from those big companies, but for half the cost, not a joke. There's no reason to spend 85 or $100 per month per person on your wireless bill. Now we can get unlimited talk, text, and 15 gigs of data with mobile hotspots for just 35 bucks a month. You don't have to be a math major. The average family of four saves about $1,000 a year with PureTalk. You enjoy America's most dependable 5G network, support small businesses. We would know that because they are now powering TCAN. It can probably save you money too. So cut the fan out of your wireless bill. Switch to PureTalk by going to puretalk.com slash Tucker. You'll save an additional 50% off your first month PureTalk America's wireless company. Can I just use this opportunity because it can control myself to throw out something that I'm legit concerned about? Yep. Not directly related to Trump or even politics, but I so we've had all these problems with the labor market and COVID made them much worse paying people to stay home so they did. So a lot of the service industry is being replaced by robots like you check out at the airport, at the kiosk and you know what I mean? There's automation there, automation. So I've watched for the past four years as the left systematically is destroyed law enforcement in order in our cities and like who would want to be a cop at this price? It's too hard a job. You don't have the legal protections you had. It's physically dangerous and everyone hates you and you don't get paid anything. So you're going to have a massive crisis. You have a a massive crisis in law enforcement because no one wants to be a cop. That void will be filled by technology. It'll be filled by drones. It'll be filled by other technology. It'll be basically replaced by tech surveillance state that will make civil liberties absolutely impossible. You can't have civil liberties. You cannot in a panomniacone or whatever they call it in a in a world or technology knows everything that you're doing and saying and maybe even thinking. And I don't feel like people are worried enough about that. Like you could make New York City safe with drones. Right. You could prevent any traffic violations whatsoever with robots. But what's behind it? There's nothing neutral in life. What's total control of the population is through technology. So I'm we're moving toward that. I don't hear anybody saying anything about it. I remember having a conversation with a head of a tech company. Pretty prominent one. Molly Heming was there with me talking about the algorithms and how biased man is she a smart chick. She's very smart. And a great person. One of my favorite people ETC totally agree. And we were sitting there talking with this person who goes, no algorithms are neutral. Afterwards, I looked at her. I was like, he just lied to us. Nothing is neutral. Nothing's neutral in life. That to me is one of the things that I think is the greatest. It's neutral. There's no like science. There's it's neutral. So that's that that to me is that there's nothing neutral in life at all. And so the whatever, whatever influences going behind the AI and the technology will be biased in one direction or another. And then you have a situation of who's controlling the controllers. Who controls that technology? What is their in goal? What do they believe about human rights? What do they believe about civil liberties? What do they believe about basic freedom? I'm concerned about the whole AI singularity. Of course, this to me, the Sunsoft Bank guy, soon he's spent tens of when he announces you're going to spend 100 billion to create jobs here in America. I'm like, please go away. I don't want you anywhere near this country. He has spent tens of billions of dollars trying to advance and accelerate singularity in which AI is really truly doing the governing of this world. And we lose a lot of our humans are not running the world. It's singularity. It's AI. It's it's all this technology. It's actually doing it because they'll do it better. It defeats sovereignty and free will and therefore it does. Manatee, that's what I'm saying completely annihilates the idea of humanity. And this is the guy that's been doing it. So I think this to me is I know Elon has said some things that, you know, we should, we need to have a conversation about AI. I don't think we're having a deeper we need to have a deeper conversation about AI. We want singularity and where we're actually headed and what do we want our future? So you can't introduce any massive disruptive change really against the will of the population. You need consent. And the only way you get consent is by terrifying them and making them feel like your solution, while imperfect is better than what they have. We're not giving them the truth, but keeping them angry. What I'm saying is you create chaos, you destroy your cities, you create a state of fear. You do to people with crime and immigration. What COVID did? So Michael Creighton, so they'll accept anything. Yeah, Michael Creighton wrote a great book, State of Fear. I actually cite him in the book. And what you're talking about, the, the political science of global warming and how it's, it puts people into perpetual state of fear to achieve the certain political goals of people what they want to achieve. And but the whole idea of keeping people in a perpetual state of fear to manipulate them into getting what these people want to achieve the future they want what might, which might or might not be typically not beneficial to the rest of the people. But it's fear. It's a tactic of fear. Like COVID's going to kill you all. So you should stay inside your house and wear mask and be six feet apart, which is all made up, by the way. Which is the funny where they say trust the science. And then they go, well, yeah, men can be women, women, men, but you only trust the science. We say what science is, science is what we say it is. But in that situation, it's not. The intellectual incoherence of the left drives me nuts. But that's what happens when you kind of, you when you cut the court to the transcendent, this idea of a transcendent creator and natural hair at rights and something above and beyond as infinite. And then you all just devolve into this theater of the absurd because whatever you say at the moment is right, if there's no absolute society becomes absolute. So whatever society says in that moment becomes absolute, some men can be women and women, and you just make it up as you go along. And that's why I think kind of some of the stuff is being exposed, fouchy, well, six feet. Well, you just made that up. The vaccine wasn't a vaccine. I remember being castigator on a certain network that I think people would have been surprised for saying that I thought the shot at best was a therapeutic shot. And you would have thought I shot somebody's dog. Who, who, who, who castigator you, you know, some network that would have been surprising for people. Um, the network that was requiring vaccines, COVID vaccines for their employees, you mean a lot of people were newsmax, by the way, was nothing is faker than newsmax. Sorry. I have to tell you, I think the COVID tests was, was a test that many people failed on the conservative side of things because they believed the lies told by the so-called experts. It was a test they failed miserably. And I actually got texts from people a couple weeks in when I realized this is not, I have real questions here. I don't think this is what people are cracking it up to be. And they were texting me, what's up with all your boomer tweets? What's going on here? Like this is serious stuff. I said, why do you accept blindly that the CDC and the NIH are suddenly pure as driven snow? One of the last several years we've seen the DOJ and the FBI and other parts of this state be weaponized against and used for political purposes. And now suddenly different branch of the same tree is somehow pure as driven snow. Like I'm sorry, I just think in my, you know, if you think through this in a reasonable rational way, I think you should really strongly question anything that's coming out of the CDC and the NIH, or anything else because I think there's a certain political element of what they're actually and I think that's how you had like I was kind of stunned when so many conservatives fell forward. Like why can't you just step back and go, this is heavily politicized. This is probably heavily politicized. I'm not sure. I don't trust them. So why should I trust I don't trust them either? I've told you, so this is not a thing that I think we need to start really emphasizing with a lot of a lot of us. I don't like think for yourself. I tell my kids all the time question everything. Yeah. Except for me. I mean, benevolent dictator. But when you're the patriarch, that's right. No question. There's no question. But that's how you get to the truth. You have to question everything to actually get to the truth of what is and don't accept something on its face value. Why should I take orders from anyone who pushed the facts ever again? Yeah. Is that fair? I mean, I don't, that seems like I'm pretty just simply. I'm just going to, I don't believe you. I'm sorry. I don't believe you until you can actually prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that what you're telling me is I don't believe you. And I think that should be our entire approach. All the government right now. I mean, this is why the Bobby Kennedy nomination is essential. It's like whatever you think of Bobby Kennedy. I love Bobby Kennedy. Right. Don't agree with them and everything. Of course. But Bobby Kennedy was the opposition to that. And if we can break the hold of big pharma, I think, I mean, that to me is a step in the right direction of what's going on not only it means funny that the people who make Xanax, we should be in prison for making Xanax in my opinion kills a lot of people, destroys so many lives. Those people are lecturing me about how Bobby Kennedy is bad. You make Xanax. Right. And you're telling me Bobby Kennedy is bad. Who, by the way, also started the opioid crisis, all the things that have gone through big pharma over the years. And your opioids are obvious. Xanax is very subtle. Everyone's on Xanax. Trying to get off Xanax, you know, yeah, these people, I think they're criminals. That's my personal opinion. I think I hope that the American people over the last nine years, especially everything that's taking place would have a healthy dose of skepticism about anything coming out of our government and our corporate propagandists moving forward and go, I'm not going to accept you at face value until you can prove be verifiable proof of what you're saying. I think that'd be a very healthy approach for us moving forward. Yeah, I agree with that completely. So just bottom line it for us having spent by the way, when you wrote this book, like, what kind of mood were you in? It must have been felt pretty dark. I was, I was in a mood of my rights as a freeborn American. And the country I was promised, constitutional republic government of buying for the people has been annihilated, has been destroyed. We have an illusion of it. We are being lectured that somehow are better, so are these unelected bureaucrats who are a credentialed idiocracy. Somehow are the ones that should be governing us and ruling us. And I wanted to have a conversation, I wanted to start a conversation with the American people with the book of these people do not have your best interests in mind. They have taken away your birthright as a freeborn American people. They have annihilated the Constitution Republic. They have destroyed the machinery of the republic, which is the best protector of your natural hair at rights. This, and they did it intentionally. I mean, the progressives don't believe in natural hair at rights. They're actually vehemently opposed to our rights based government. Of course, they thought that rights do not, I mean, Frank Goodneau, who's really one of the guys that structured the administrative state through administrative law said that an individual does not possess rights from his creator, but from his society. His society is the one that gives an individual his rights because they believe the state should give rights back to the people if it was a benefit to the state. You can't have natural inherent God given rights because it becomes individual his rights. Because they believe the state should give rights back to the people if it was a benefit to the state. You can't have natural inherent God given rights because it becomes a monkey wrench in their progressive idea of the state of salvation efficiency towards you know progress. All of these things have taken place on this. So we have to have this conversation that then goes back to what I was saying. We've not had this conversation about who we are as a people. What our birthright is, what our rights are, what our God given rights are, what government should actually look like today. And let's have that conversation and then have the conversation about how we get back to where we started. I mean, the Constitution is the greatest document, political document the world's ever seen. And it was written by men who are not perfect by the way, they had their own share of faults. They got it, they nailed it. They realized they were in perfect human beings in an imperfect world. They were optimistic realist though. They realized that God had given rights. They were optimistic that even though we knew they were imperfect human beings who should never have consolidated power, they could form a government that protected those natural God given rights and took none of them away. And it provided for this amazing, small agrarian country kind of on the edge of that Eurocentric world in the late 1700s to become honestly, I would say the greatest nation of the world is ever seen. How does that have? It's not my chance. It's because these guys knew they understood human nature, they understood, they fully understood, the transcendent creator with natural and here at rights, we're going to create this Constitution Republic. We're going to create the greatest amount of freedom as possible for the flourishing of freedom and prosperity and the progressives completely fundamentally rejected that turn of the 20th century and said, now we don't believe in that. We don't believe that that has the answers to the 20th century. We believe we should put together this massive bureaucracy filled with these unallicked bureaucrats who through applied science will lead us to a greater future who truly believe in the apotheosis of mankind. They believe that history was on this upward linear progress at the end of history would be the perfection of mankind dead serious. No, so these are some of the poisonous ideas behind what's taking place in this country today. They're also hilarious ideas. They're like so dumb. They're so dumb. Rantings of deluded madman is what I describe in the book of Will Dro Wilson and Herbert Crowley and Frank Goodneau and all these founders of the progress John Purgeus who by the way was the founder of political science in America, vehemently rejected a rights-based government and he's considered the father of political science in America. So we should probably have questions about the whole exercise of political science. Yeah. So yeah, I was writing this book and we are called deplorables and they're redeemables and disruptive simply because we're asking for a restoration of our rights. We're asking for a restoration of what we had in some ways that and that's why I consider myself a restorationist, not a conservative, but going back to what the founders were trying to do during the American Revolution, they were simply asking that we have our rights as Englishmen restored. You have taken them away. We want them restored. And I think we've kind of come to that next, we've kind of come to that same situation today where I am demanding another's or demanding we want our rights restored. We want our government restored, our Constitution Republic restored. We want a government that actually benefits and promotes the interests of the American people on all fronts every day. And we're not treaters in afterthought. We're not treated as the ATM for the ruling class. We're actually treated with the respect that is due to us as a freeborn American people. And my sincere hope is that we actually have enough leaders in DC. I think we've got to start, we're going to need more with the political courage that understand the stakes and go, we're going to fight for this. I agree with that strongly. But we're going to have to suffer to get there. We are. Like I said, I think if what I think could happen over the next four years, we could be in for one of the more interesting periods in time that that makes the last nine years look like a a warm-up act. But it's worth it. The fight's worth it. Good right. Thank you. Thank you.