Good to see you, Jen. Good to see you, Chuck. I haven't seen you since we had a debate years ago, I think at Polygon, totally different world. But I was thinking this morning, I was driving in, I'm like, hmm, of all the things you could do to infuriate your audience. This is probably at the top of the list. But you don't need to do this. Why are you doing this? Yeah. So there's a couple of reasons why. Number one, I want to take yes for an answer. Your anti-war. We've been anti-war for 20 years. So I have not been so blessed you for that. Thank you, brother. Thank you, glad to see you. And so that's amazing. That's important. And I also want to break down the barriers of Republicans versus Democrats, right? Wait versus left wing. I think that it's kind of used to divide us. And I think that the powerful already have an incredible elite team. They're very, very organized. And they do it through donations, to the politicians, etc. But the American people are not organized. We have built two teams. But those two teams, the Republicans and Democrats, have been trained to fight each other instead of fighting up, right? Exactly. And so when you split the population that way, you take away all of their energy because you have them use their energy against one another rather than against you. It's actually brilliant. It's how they're British world India. Exactly. Yes. And it's done on a meta level in every way. So by the way, on a global level, Christians versus Muslims, two billion here, two billion there, make sure you guys are fighting. One another. And hey, look at that. We've used up all your energy fighting one another and not looking up. I have noticed, yeah. Okay. So, and then of course the third issue is Israel. And so that's what I want to talk to a lot about today, I hope. And I think that that's an animating issue for a number of reasons, not because it's stand all be all, but because it is deeply symbolic. And so whether it's big pharma or big oil or APAC, they are buying our politicians. And so you're a rare person saying that. I'm a person saying that. And they make sure media works against us and they try to shut us up and say, don't tell anybody about money in politics. Yes. No, no, these politicians are honest and honorable people having debates. They're not having any debates. They're cashing checks. So I want all of America to know that. And at the end of the day, Tucker, if we don't unite as Americans, the powerful of an a rule is forever. I think that's exactly that is absolutely true. So let's just start with motive. I hate going to motive because we don't even know our own motives a lot of the time, right? Motive is very hard to determine. But when this topic comes up, people go immediately to motive. You're taking money from somebody, a foreign power. Okay. You have got some secret religious affiliation. You're filled with hate. It's all about why you have these views rather than addressing the views themselves. I've just noticed this having lived it. And so I just want to ask you about Israel specifically. How did you come to this and what are your motives? Yeah. So it's difficult for me one for me because I have, I grew up in a talent was about 50% Jewish. I'm a Jewish friends. I have Jewish family. I have an nephew and niece who are Jewish. And so I don't want to make people uncomfortable and I don't want this to be about the Jews. That's crazy. And what I tell people all the time is, hey, listen, my friend Dave, my friend Jack, what's not never called him and ask for a question. Right. Netanyahu was never like, hey, should we take 53% of guys? What do you think Dave? Right. So that's not how it works. So if you're, so I, anyone who's got that intent, I'm not interested in it. Okay. You're not going to have me as an ally. It's not going to work out. I have Jewish family. I have Jewish friends. I'll never sell them out. Okay. Right. So, and the other thing about Jewish Americans is they're Americans and we're, I believe in a united America. Okay. So you're for America. I love you and I protect you. I'll give you one last example of a Darging Yibri 1000s, right? But Dave Smith. Dave Smith is an amazing ally of ours. Wonderful man. Yeah. So if you come for Dave, you come for all of us. He's one of us. Okay. We protect our own Americans. Right. So now why do I have an issue with Israel then, even though I would actually, naturally want to ally with Israel, yes, all the Jewish friends of family that I have. Right. And I didn't know a lot of Palestinians growing up. I only knew one Palestinian who had one in our high school, we had hundreds of Jewish folks who loved Israel, etc. Right. The problem with Israel isn't just the genocide that they just committed, but that would be enough. That is a horrific injustice in Gaza, in Gaza. I mean, you've got it well over 70,000 dead. You've got God knows how many thousands bird in the rubble and they're adding to the count every day. You've got 10% of the entire population that was either killed or injured, which is a stunning number. That's why almost all every genocide scholar says it's obviously a genocide. Right. 10% of the entire population? Yes. That'd be over 200,000. Yes. That's right. Because the Mount injured are well over 130,000. Right. Just to be clear on that, that's a number that we should know, I think, since we paid for it. And I think it's so important to know what death tolls and the injury count is because you did this and you have to know what the consequences are. I think it's totally fair. We don't know when the Russia Ukraine war, we have no idea. And we have no idea in Gaza. So I just want to say that there are estimates that it's over half a million. I don't know if that's true or not. But that's the point. We should know that. Yeah. We can write to know that. So Tucker, that's going to go to points two and three, which I could just erupted with him. No, no, not at all. Not at all. But I want to come back to that. Yeah. Two and three are super important because it's symbolic of the power that all the donor class has not just Israel. With Israel, you have gaslighting that is extreme where you don't have that in any other place. And you explain what that is. So you'll say, hey, I don't think we should give Israel another $30 billion or another $100 billion. I don't want to get into all these numbers in a second. And they'll say anti-semon. Now, wait a minute, that doesn't make any sense. We can mad live this. You take any Israeli target point and put in a different country and it sounds absurd. Right? Like you owe Thailand $300 billion. People will be like, no, we don't anti-tyracist. Right? You're like, what? What do you mean, no, any Thai people? What are you doing with? You're an anti-trist. Right? I'm not. Right? Why do you hate Thailand? Exactly. But you're obsessed with Thailand. That's my favorite. You're obsessed with Thailand. Okay. By the way, I would be obsessed with Thailand if Thailand took $300 billion off of us. Right? And if Thailand was like, you have to attack everyone else in Southeast Asia. You know, we have a Thai Christian heritage. Yeah. And imagine if India did that. And they're like, we have a Hindu Christian heritage. And that's why you need to attack Pakistan. Yeah. And by the way, if you're not protecting Pakistan, you're being paid by Bhutan. Yeah. Yeah. Of course, people who are getting, who are working for a foreign government accusing you who just want to stay out of it of working for a foreign government. Is that what gaslighting is? Yeah. Gaslighting is when the media says, take something very reasonably you're saying and makes a sound like it's crazy. So we say we gave them $21.7 billion in the middle of a genocide. Okay. So that's on top of the $300 billion. And that's by the way, 10 to 12 billion we spend bombing Iran, Yemen, and almost all their enemies in the same period of time. We just gave them another 8.6 billion and another 3.3 billion that happened in the last two weeks. So when you say, let's just take one sliver of that. Hey, I didn't want to pay for a genocide. I didn't want to do that, right? Whether it was the tide, the Bulgarians, the Israelis, I just, I don't want to kill 20,000 children. I don't want you to spend my money killing 20,000 children. I don't care what race or religion they are. Why are you so hateful? Exactly. And that's literally what they say. So I'm against killing kids. They didn't do anything actually. Yeah. And they say, so you hate Jews. That's gaslighting, right? Right? That's so wait. Oh, I live in that country. Yeah, I know what that is. Yeah. So I'm the one trying to stop the killing. I'm for non-violence. In fact, I'm religiously for non-violence. If I have any religion at all, it's non-violence. My hero is Mark Luther King and Gandhi and Mandela. And so I say, do not do any violence to anyone. It would be, in fact, if someone is doing what it's there against us, right? And I say, and don't, and you just heard me say it, I say, you say that. a thousand times I love Jewish people. This is not about the Jews. So this country wants us to pay for a genocide. I just don't want to pay for a genocide. They listen to all that and they go. Now everybody understand that J.Q. is an anti-Semite who hates Jews and is like an immoral person. And if you're not progenicied, you're anti-Jewish. No, no, no, don't say that. Don't say that because you're actually going to get my Jewish friends hurt. When you say you're anti-genocide means you're anti-Jewish. That equates Judaism with genocide. Don't. I don't know anything that drives up anti-Semitism more than that. But back to the original injustice and then we'll get back to more and more gaslighting because the gaslighting is another perfect symbol of what mainstream media does and establishing media does, right? They gaslight on almost every issue. So real quick, one more, like big pharma. We can't negotiate drug prices. They're like, that's pro-free markets. No negotiation. Wait. Capitalism. Not being able to negotiate prices is the exact. opposite of the free markets. Everything on television is a lie. It's all an illusion. That's very funny. I've never really thought about it like that, but that is so true. I mean, why are we not rebelling against the biggest socialist or communist program in American history that we're not allowed to negotiate drug prices? What kind of absurdities is that? And we're the only country on earth that applies to. So it's just they're like magicians established from media, CNN, MSNBC, Fox, New York Times, and most of us. They're like, look here. Look here. Meanwhile, the action is going on here. So the New Year is here, but that does not mean you've got to overhaul your whole life. Despite claims to the country, you don't have to take drastic measures, make a few changes here and there, and you'll be a lot better off and you can start with the snacks in your pantry. Now, products from Standard American chipped brands are, let's be honest, pretty repulsive filled with chemicals that make you feel heavy and bloated. They don't even taste that good. They're not good for you. We recommend an upgrade with Masa chips. Masa is the easiest way to eat clean without feeling like you're on a diet. The chips contain three ingredients. That's it, organic corn, sea salt, 100% grass fed beef towel, and that is it. No seed oils, no mystery chemicals, just food, actual food. And they're amazing and you feel great after you don't feel weighed down. We particularly enjoyed the Kobanero flavor lately, but they're all great. You want to give them a try? Visit MasaChips.com, M-A-S-A-Chips.com slash Tucker. Use the code Tucker for 25% off your first order or you can clink the lick link in the video description or you can scan the QR code to claim this outstanding offer. And if you don't feel like ordering online, you can buy a nationwide at your local Sprout supermarket. Stop by and pick up a couple of bags before somebody else does. Well, the original argument is I remember I was never involved in this, but I was in libertarian adjacent world a lot of my life. And so I remember hearing that argument and I remember thinking, yeah, what is that? And they were like, no, no, if you were allowed to negotiate drug prices, you will kill pharma innovation in the United States. We leave the world innovation. I'm like, okay, I guess I didn't realize that a lot of pharma is just poison anyway. This is before the sauclers killed a lot of people in Appalachia. And I was like, okay, but then you watch pharma offshore. Like they offshore. The Jersey you grew up in New Jersey was a pharma stronghold. Basking rates on all areas filled with pharma companies are making the drugs that they are not anymore. We don't make antibiotics or make vitamin C. We don't make all these drugs because they have short. So we protected them from fair competition by eliminating negotiation. And they left anyway. So like what? What's the upside here? I gave you a thousand examples. We gave the semiconductor industry 50, somewhat billion dollars under Biden. That was the chips act and all the Democrats are like, he's FDR 2.0. I'm like, guys, that's a $50 billion corporate subsidy. Okay, and did we put any guardrails in? So did we say, hey, Intel, here's at least eight of the 50 billion goes straight to you. I think it might have been 12 and that ballpark. So now as conditioned to that, you're supposed to build here in America so you can't fire any Americans. And obviously we're not going to give you the money because the ostensible reason for us giving you the money is to build a semiconductor industry here in America. Exactly. Right. Intel fired 8,000 people right after the bill passed because there's no guardrails. Because why? 8,000 Americans. 8,000 Americans. Of course, immediately they fired them immediately. It's a joke. The whole things are joke that none of the politicians mean it and the people that allow them to get away with all of this. So all that is the robbery. The mainstream media is the getaway car. So they come in and they make excuses. Oh, FDR 2.0, it's brilliant to give away your money to the semiconductor industry. It's brilliant to give it away to big foreman. Is there any of anybody objects or conspiracy theorists and anti-Semites? It's in their job is not to cover the news. It's to cover up the news. So I mean, again, look at that is literally true. Yeah. So Obama ran a campaign called a campaign ad called Billy back in 2008. It was about the deal to not negotiate drug prices. It was outrageous. Everyone hated it. A Democrat named Billy Tawson had negotiated it in Congress. That's why the ad was called Billy. And Obama was saying, I'm not going to be like those Democrats, right? He got in. Sit where not to go. She enjoyed prices. Trump said we're going to negotiate drug prices. Not going to negotiate drug. So I knew Billy Tawson really well for a wonderful guy from Shaq Billy, Louisiana. Just a really charming guy used to hunt with him on. And I always loved him still do. if he went from Congress to what, do you know what's next job was? Lobbyist. Head of Big Pharma. Exactly. He was the head farm lobbyist. And that's my point, Tucker. Not attacking him, but that happened. I was there. Yeah. Look, what? So it means for me to look at that and goes, no, I don't see it. I don't think Big Pharma gives more like four times more than the Israeli lobby does. And they're like, no, I don't see it. I'm like, isn't the adage followed the money? So here is an industry giving billions of dollars to politicians. That's a lot of money. Oh, yeah. 5,000 at a time, right? And then to super PACs, etc. They seem like they're bribing almost all of Congress. Nope. Nope. Because we're sitting here. Because they're bribing all the media too with drug. Of course. That's their number one advertisers are drug companies. Number two advertisers, by the way, are politicians. Why do they always say that politicians are honest and they're having real debates? Because politicians are actually their top clients. So when they spend 17 billion dollars in money in politics, where does it go? It goes almost all to establishment media to buy ads. So the Republican Party and the Democratic Party are the best clients that CNN New York Times have. So they are always talking about how great the Republican and Democratic parties are, how terrible primaries are. Because you used up that money. We didn't get all those bribes ascended and spend it in a primary. We got it to have a fake fight in the general election where you have the lesser of two evils. We got you. So that's the rose at a stone, money in politics. Once you see that, you see how politics works and you also see how media works, which then leads us back to Israel. So we say guys, they have contributed guardian to the peace on this. Israeli lobby has contributed to 94% of Congress. Okay, first, do you think they did that for their health for the general welfare? Or do you think that every group they have is named after Israel? Because the whole point is the support Israel, right? That's not a complicated question. It's the American Israeli political action committee. It's got one of the groups that's called Democratic majority for Israel. They ran $4 million worth of ads against Nina Turner, which is one of Bernie Sanders' campaign shares to make sure that she was defeated by Shontel Brown. Shontel Brown was one of 11 people running against Nina Turner had almost no ratings at all. Nina had a 35 point lead. She was running against the little pusions. Shontel Brown puts a statement on her website saying how much she loves Israel. Boom, $4 million appears. All in favor of Shontel Brown, all against Nina Turner. That's her raising her hand saying I will work for Israel. Remember what happened in the years? They erased a 35 point lead. They bought every ad in Cleveland. And most importantly, they got mainstream media to say, now remember Nina Turner hates Joe Biden. So she loves Donald Trump. Now that's Cleveland voters. They don't want that, right? Now is that true? No, she has a set of statements that voting for binding is like eating a half bowl of shit. But okay, but she said, but voting for Trump is like eating a full bowl of shit. So what am I going to do? I'll eat the half, right? She they never, ever put the second half of the statement in. They just said in every news story, whether it's on TV or in the newspapers, Nina Turner says voting for Biden is eating a half bowl of shit. She's so Trump favorite. But how could she be pro Trump? The rest of the sentence says he's twice as bad. So people in mainstream media are giant liars. They've lied about me all the time. They lie about Republicans Democrats. But mainly they lie to protect the donor class. So then again, back to Israel and it because it's such a perfect symbol, 94% of Congress. It's not 34%, you had 34% because they have a lot of control. That's a lot of money that they're giving to a third of our Congress. That's 64% you'd say, come on, they have enormous power if not control. And 94% it's clearly controlled. Part of that guardian story is 82% of Congress votes basically with Israel every single time. That 82% on average gets 100 just in that last election, like a little on all the other ones, $125,000 per member of Congress. Now establishing media says that's not a bribe. They're just talking to one another. Oh, hey, how you doing? Here's 125,000, so you'll vote for Israel. But it's not for so you'll vote for Israel. It's that you can have a better debate or whatever. And they're like, of course, that's not a bribe and they don't control those members. Well, how come they vote with Israel every single time? Why don't you follow the money? I thought the old adage of journalism was follow the money. And every time we ask you to follow the money, you call us an anti-Semite. That's really, really weird. That's a super weird thing to do. Again, Madlip, fill in any other country. The question that Bulgaria was giving to 94% of Congress. We're great Britain or Sweden. Any country doesn't matter. It doesn't matter. And you said, well, it seems like the Bulgarians have 94% of our Congress locked out. How dare you anti-Bulgarion racist, you bulgarest? It would be absurd. It would be absurd. Of course, you have to point this out. So and what have they gotten in return for the hundreds of millions that APAC and other Israelis lobby organizations have put into Congress. At this point, they've probably put an over a billion dollars collectively over all those years. So what they've gotten back is over $300 billion in funding through the lifetime of Israel adjusted for inflation. Let's be for October 7th. October 7th, we add that 21.7. You could argue 10 or 12 billion more for the wars we're fighting for them. Those are not free. Every time we drop a bomb on Iran or Yemen or Nigeria, it costs us a lot of money. It's money or a rock or a rock. But we did that. Yeah. But look, if you get into that, the global war on terror, which is if we're being honest, the global war against Israel's enemies, costs us $8 trillion. So Israel's lucky if we don't count that atrial. It's why we're bankrupt. Yeah. I mean, here we are at 38 trillion and Tucker, that's the other amazing part. So now in the last two weeks, they give an Trump gave another $8.6 billion totally on account. Where's that 8.6 billion coming from? Did anybody ever vote for that 8.6 billion? And then on a beta, he gave another 3.3 billion. Where is this money coming from? Does anybody voting on this? What is going on? Well, it's good. It's these are IOUs to countries that are buying our treasuries. Exactly. So that's the next layer of it. So you're telling us we have to borrow money from China and Japan so we can give money for free to Israel. And then we pay the interest for the rest of our lives. And they don't pay any interest. Well, why don't they borrow it from China and Japan? Exactly. Well, why are we borrowing it and give it to them? We're saying to tell you about a new project from Amazon MGM called Melania. For years, the people in charge of trying to tell you who she is. But they didn't show you who she is. Now, you can see for yourself. Every protocol, every precaution, every single move, meticulously coordinated. This new film takes you inside the 20 days leading up to the 2025 presidential inauguration. And it does it to the eyes of the first lady, Melania Trump briefings, the planning, the private conversations, witness what it takes to get there to become first lady of the United States. Mark your calendars, Melania premieres in theaters January 30th. And but can I ask a question that really bothers me? Why don't people who support Israel or any foreign cause, he for the cause themselves? Like there are a lot of very rich people I know some I like some who are profoundly pro-Israel and really think about it a lot, care about it a lot, have friends and family are great. Why don't they and some of these people are worth billions and billions and billions? Why don't they, why do taxpayers have to pay for this? Why don't they just donate the money to Israel? I'd never have understood that and no one will answer that question. Because of leverage and economies of scale. So let's say Larry Ellison is an example. So to be fair to Larry Ellison to the founder of Oracle, he actually did the thing that you say. He gave $16 million to the idea and the middle of the genocide. As a donation, how about five billion? I mean, that's $16 million for it's not much actually. Yeah, so I'm going to get back here. So he's like, hey, genocide well done. Keep genociding here's 16 million more. It's a really, it's an outrageous thing to do. But okay, you love Israel. You love that they're committing a genocide against Palestinians. You despise Palestinians. You're deeply racist and you're big against Muslims. That's your business, Larry Ellison. But now he thinks, wait a minute. What if I give the American politicians and then instead of me giving the five billion or the 50 billion, we get the sucker American taxpayers to give it, right? So now how can I do that? It's actually simple. It's so dishonorable that I can't really even fit that in my head to folks. I don't force other people to pay for charities I support. I mean, I support them because I support them. I mean, that's what integrity is. I can't imagine sticking a gun in someone's face and see you have to donate to my charity. Yeah. So and in this case, it's not a charity. It said, no, but a cause that you believe in. Yeah. Okay. So then drop site news has done some terrific reporting and they found emails of a who brought the former Prime Minister of Israel and others. Can I say a drop site news has done some amazing reporting. Yeah. It's unbelievable. And in fact, the way that establishing media is not covering their stories shows you what a joke it is. Drop site news breaks more story. I didn't really wasn't was sure it wasn't until recently. They're breaking more stories in the New York Times Washington Post put together by far. Yeah. It's not an accident. That's because they're trying to break stories. Yes, they are. It's trying to do the opposite. Yeah. Epstein's stories are amazing and we should get back back back back. They're unbelievable. I'm sorry to interrupt. Yeah. I just wanted to say that. Drop site news found emails of Larry Ellison talking to the Israeli ambassador. And he says this is back in 2016, 2015, 2016 that campaign. And he says I'm going to go vet Marco Rubio for Israel. Now remember Larry Ellison's ostensibly an American, okay. But he doesn't, he's talking to the Israeli ambassador and says I'm going to make sure Marco Rubio is on Israel's side. Then he goes and talks to him at a party and he comes back and then reports back to the Israeli ambassador. Don't worry, he's on our side. I'm giving him five million for a super pack. By the way, at that time that's against Donald Trump. Okay. So that's Larry Ellison saying I'm basically buying Marco Rubio on behalf of Israel. So that doesn't even go to Marco Rubio's APAC tracker on an APAC tracker. He's over a million dollars from the Israeli lobby. But they've got all this secret money and their super packs and all the other things that they have. And in that case, he's caught because we have his emails. Don't tell me he's not working for the Israelis when we have emails showing he works with Israelis. And then what is the request of that? Hey, look at that Marco Rubio Secretary of State. And now we're going to war against Iran, maybe Venezuela. We're doing everything that Israel wants. And so that's a nice break they caught. What are coincidence? And by the way, this is not a partisan issue. You had Obama's former speech writer go out the other day and say, we probably over topped the Holocaust to our kids. Okay, this woman I think Sarah Horowitz, but if I've got the name. That's right. Yeah. So that's off time I had of who she is. But she Obama's speech writer and she says we should we we talked them. The Nazis were strong and oppressed the week. But now Israel is strong and targeting the week. So we shouldn't teach that anymore. I'm like, do you hear yourself? Do you hear what you're saying? And then at free press somebody wrote an article about, oh, our kids, they're against genocide now. What do we do wrong? You didn't do anything wrong. You told him, one of the thing you told him, you taught him Jewish culture. Never again, stick up for the underdog question of authority. Can't murder innocence. I mean, that is that's like a baseline. You can't murder people who didn't do anything wrong. Because it is murder for just vacation for killing innocent people ever. So if you think about it, let's just take the Marco Rubio example. And I'm not putting it all on Rubio. It's a giant institution and infrastructure. And like I said, it's 94% of Congress, right? You put in five million in Marco Rubio a decade later, he's secretary of state. And in the middle of your genocide, you got $21.7 billion. Now if you're Larry Ellison, do you want to put in the $21 billion in yourself? Or do you want to put in five million to a politician? And then you get the $21 billion for free. The problem is that it treats the people who are giving the money against their will. There's never been a vote on this. If there was a national referendum on it, should we be sending tens of billions of dollars to a country, not a run? Of course it would fail immediately. But it treats those people very badly as kind of subhuman like a curse what they think. We're just going to take their money in debt their children into the generations. And it's just the contempt that that displays for Americans is unsettling to me. So I have a proposal on that, Tucker. So why don't we do a poll? And I challenge CNN, New York Times Gallup, anyone to do this poll. If not of them accept a challenge, then we'll do the poll. We'll commission the poll and then we'll see. And then they could verify if they like. And the poll is does America owe Israel any more money? Because every pundit on television say we owe Israel. We owe Israel. I didn't ever explain why, right? You owe really say that all the time. They say, okay, what do you mean? 300 billion, you owe Israel. Of course you should pay them 300 billion. Why do I pay them 21 or 31 billion in the middle of a genocide? You owe Israel. Why do I owe Israel? No one ever explains. No one ever explains. Actually, I've never heard that. They actually say that out. Why we owe them? Of course. Of course. For what? Where's the debt from? Yeah. And so and when I press, I press on every one of these target points. That's part of why they despise me, right? And I say, okay, help me understand that. Why would we owe Israel? Well, they suffered a Holocaust, the Jewish people. Well, first of all, the Jewish people did not Israel, right? That's different. Okay, but we rescued them from the Holocaust. And all those Americans died. A lot of them are hundreds of thousands Americans died. Do we fight in the war? If we rescue them from the Holocaust, why do we owe them money? It's like none of these target points make any sense. If you only do just prick the bubble and people instantly go, oh wait a minute, lift the curtain. So here, we rescue them. They'll actually say that. Yeah. So they're Bosnian, right? For example, right? We rescue them from a genocide, from the Serbs, right? And I'm proud of that. And I think we did, you know, we saved tons and tons of lives. And you can say, maybe we shouldn't have interfered. Maybe we should be more isolationist. It's a good debate, but at least we did something demonstrably good there. Okay? The Bosnia is after we rescue them from the genocide coming to say to us, you owe us. No, they said thank you. By the way, you won't find anyone on this planet who loves America is more than Bosnia. Okay? And so they love America. They appreciate America. And someone lost five million people in the Holocaust. anyone on this planet who loves America's more than Bosnia's. They love America, they appreciate America. Poland lost 5 million people in the Holocaust, 1.8 million non-Jews, 3 million Jews. So after the Holocaust, Poland could have said UOS. No, we saved Poland, Russia saved Poland. We saved Jews, Russia saved Jews. By the way, did Russia ever get a thank you after losing what 20 million or so people in the war? As I said now, Israel is constantly attacking Russia. I got no love for Russia. I think Putin is wrong. I don't think he should have invaded Ukraine. But wait a minute, why does anybody owe Israel for anything? It doesn't make any sense at all. It doesn't. Okay, so now they want a new memorandum of understanding. They're going to try to make it 20 years and partly because of you and us and all the people that are going, wait, why? That memorandum of understanding is a president saying, we owe you for the next 10 years, and that's an agreement between the United States and Israel. Yes. So for example, Obama signed a 10-year memorandum of understanding saying we owe Israel 3.8 billion every year for 10 years. So no votes on it during that period. The only votes you get is that it gets put automatically into the budget every year. And once it gets put in, you have to actively take it out. But if you have to go to take it out, they'll call you an anti-Semite and try to ruin your career. Amazing stories about that. Marie Newman, a US Congresswoman, voted against one of the appropriations that Israel got. Four Democratic colleagues come on the floor of the house and say, how dare you? How dare you vote against Israel? We're going to take away all your money. Actually, they guess you could ask Marie no one about it. She said it on the Young Turks. This happened just a couple of years ago. Okay, she was in Congress from Illinois. They said, we're going to take away all your money and we're going to spend a ton of money against you. Her own party? Yeah. Her own party. And that's what happened. They spent about 4 million against her, eliminated. No way. Andy Levin, Jewish American Congressman from Michigan, kind of a legendary Jewish family in Michigan. Yeah. He's a hard-loving, was a senator. Yeah, Sandra Levin, yeah. Andy Levin says, two-state solutions. Says, I love Israel. I'm a Zionist. Okay. But obviously we should have a free and independent Israel and a free and independent Palestine. Only in against Andy Levin, eliminated. No way, eliminated. Jamal Bowman, you think it was about the fire alarm? Hey, you might be upset about the fire alarm or whatever else Jamal Bowman did. They spent, the Israeli lobby spent 19 million eliminating Jamal Bowman. Corey Bush, eliminated. Okay. Anyone who opposes Israel is eliminated. This year marks the 250th anniversary of our country and it's a great time to think about what makes America strong. Ladies that make their products here play a major role in our national strength, American workers working with American steel. That is the source of pride and Liberty Safe is one of those companies doing it. Liberty has been building gun and home safes in the US for decades. No imports and no shortcuts. This authentic American craftsmanship designed to protect families, their firearms, their valuables for generations plus proven fire protection and a lifetime warranty. We have one proudly, a big one, not to brag and protects what matters most. That's part of your responsibility. Supporting American workers is part of patriotism. Liberty checks both boxes built for the long haul, built in this country, built in America. Check out LibertySafe.com today as it celebrates and honors this anniversary of special safes and offers throughout the year. Can I ask you a question? I mean, this is shocking enough. I'm all confess. I don't follow the details of Democratic politics, close enough to have heard of any of this. I knew about Jamal Bowman, but the rest I didn't sue. I wonder about that strategy, which they're now employing on the right and trying to tarp, you know, slandering people as Nazis or trying to get them killed. Which they're doing. But I wonder like as a strategy, obviously it's immoral, but does it actually work? Isn't it better to say, as you would in any negotiation, like here are the things I actually care about, let's see if we can come to terms, like allow a little bit of flexibility. There's no flexibility allowed. Well, Tucker, congrats. You have forced Israel into some flexibility almost single handedly. I don't feel that at all. I feel that because I've never been against Israel and I'm not against Israel now. I'm not against any person actually. And I'm certainly as a Christian, totally opposed to hating a group based on its blood. That would include whites, wax, Hispanics, Turks, and Jews. And I mean that. So whatever. I've really tried to be like, whoa, whoa, whoa, what's that all this down? It doesn't work. And I just wonder, that doesn't seem like a good strategy. I guess that's what I'm saying. Like just as an negotiating position, it's like you have to have some willingness to move. You can't be that rigid or you're not going to win in the end. Yeah. So the reason I said that is because, look, first let's distinguish. Mainstream media purposely blends all these things together. Partly because Israel wants to use Jewish Americans as human shields. They want to say if you attack us, you're attacking Jewish Americans. And so you're not allowed to. You're not allowed to, right? But in reality, there's Jews as people slash Jewish Americans. Then there's how you feel about Israel. Then there's how you feel about the Israeli government, right? We are talking about the current Israeli government. And they say, no, you're talking about Jews because they want to hide behind that, right? When we keep saying, no, not the Jews. And they're like, no, the Jews, the Jews, like stop saying the Jews, it's not the Jews. Moreover, I get to define what I think and what I'm talking about. And let me repeat myself. I think anti-Semitismism is immoral and I won't engage in it ever period. So I get to decide because I'm a sovereign man what I think and I can try to express it as well as I can. No one has a right to tell you what you think. Yeah, it's really obnoxious to them. That's Orwellian. It's like, are you in charge of my soul? Yeah. I don't think you are. So for example, I'm an atheist. So what does that mean? That means I think all humans are pretty much the same genetically, right? That's stone cold. So if you told me a Jewish or Muslim or Christian or Hindu is different, I'm philosophically opposed to that. I'm ideologically opposed to that. I'm scientifically opposed to that. I just think it's wrong. It's incorrect, factually incorrect. So that is a distraction and they've now weaponized the term anti-Semitism, which also does a lot of damage because when real anti-Semitism comes, people will think, oh, those are the heroes fighting against the genocide, right? That's what I was talking about. It also scares people. I mean, I've experienced this a lot in my personal life where people I know and love have been convinced that I'm, you know, Nazi or Nazi, a J center, hate Jews or whatever and that I'm trying to hurt people, which is literally the opposite of what I would ever do want to do. I don't agree with that at all. And I say that constantly, but they've whipped people into a frenzy, preying upon their deepest fears and there are many victims of that kind of evil. But one of the victims is the people who are being terrified. Like, people are terrified. I think actually the number one target of Israeli propaganda is Jewish America. Of course they say, well, if it's not for Israel, the whole world hates you and you're all going to die. You're all going to die. Everyone hates you. And it's an illegal hate. It's a hate that can't be even reasoned with or discussed. You don't have to know anything about why people disagree. It's hate. It's fundamentally irrational and it will never end and until they kill you or you kill them. It's like, whoa, that is a very heavy thing. It's not a true. Second, you're inspiring violence by talking like that. I mean, the only end point of that kind of thinking is violence. It can only be solved by violence. Killer be killed. That's what they're saying. Yeah. And so again, Mad libit say, okay, let's see that you oppose something the Turkish government did, which I hope you do because they've done plenty of bad things. I oppose a bunch of things that the Turkish government has done. If after you're stealing Turks, that's my problem. But I mean, that's the point, right? If you said, hey, I don't think the Turks should have gone into Northern Syria. And I say anti Turkish racist, you'd be like, what? What kind of lunatic are you? That's not a thing that does just because you disagree with the actions of a government at this time doesn't mean that you hate Turks in perpetuity forever and ever. You hated them before you hate them afterwards. No, I just don't agree. Look, I didn't agree with the Iraq war. Does that mean I hate Americans? No, it means I don't agree with that government action taken at that time. And all of that is very logical until you get to Israel and then they flip it on its head. But can you see how irrational and fear-based the conversation is becoming and the cost to American society, not even having anything with Israel, but that way of thinking is a scary way of thinking. First of all, it's identity politics in its purest form. This group versus that group, this group has special rights, this group has fewer rights. I mean, this is everything that I hate and I disagree with this question. Can you see the cost to the whole society because of this? An enormous cost. So you know- Making people hate each other. Yeah, look, I'll go back to the stats on how awful the genocide was and all of that. But to me, at least as bad is the control over this country. And I came here to be free and I came here for American sovereignty. How old were you when you came? Eight years old, my family came here because my dad is an enormous believer in America. Like, yes, you won't find a family who loves America more than we do, right? And by the way, he had that belief in faith and it was met. We came here and that faith was true. That hope was delivered and we have lived amazing lives in this country because of the opportunity and the hope that this country provided. And by the way, our answer to that is thank you. And mine. I feel that way. I feel grateful. Yeah, I'm enormously grateful to America. Yeah. And by the way, when America helps you, the correct answer is thank you. Not you owe me. Okay. Give me more. That's not the correct answer. And it's not taken as a correct answer from any other country. But when it comes to Israel and they say, no, give me more, right? We were supposed to say, oh, thank you, sir. No, I don't want to say thank you. You have children. How would you respond to your children if they said that to you? Oh, I would be a mistake for them. Yes. Oh, you can't. You can't put up with that. Not for one second. You degrade yourself. You hurt the person you're dealing with because you inspire more of that behavior, which is totally bad behavior. Yeah, it's so unhelp. I mean, how could we get, how do we get into this? Yeah. Let me give you two examples about how they are taking our freedom away. Okay. So a friend of mine runs a company in LA. He gets an email from what looks like probably a bot, but it could be in Israeli troll, whatever it is. But he writing in saying, we found out that one of your American workers is an anti-Semite, and you should fire her. He's like, really? Oh, I didn't know that. What did she do? Did she attack someone? Did she say something outrageous? And he finds out that she had put up a Palestinian flag during the genocide as supportive like, hey, I'm against the genocide. These poor people on her Facebook account. That's it. Nothing against this. You're allowed to have that view. You can support the Palestinians. You can support him. You can support whatever you want as an American. She's not supporting him. She's not. I get it. But let's just remind ourselves that we have a full range of intellectual freedom because of the first moment and because God gave us those rights, not any administration. So like, you cannot allow infringement on those rights. She doesn't even say anything against Israel, alone Jews. She just says, you know, just has the Palestinian flag. You're like, that's just an average American. It's not Tucker Carlson, it's not J.K. You're going to win. She doesn't have a show. She's a random American. Now all of a sudden Israelis are emailing your boss and saying, if they dare even support the Palestinians, treat them as humans, they're anti-Semites and they should be fired. No, no, that's oppression. That's oppression. And it's against the average American. I can't stand it. Okay. So you and I get a target of oppression to constantly stop. But I get it. We're in the media. We're in wars. Right? These information wars, media wars, etc. But leave average Americans out of it. And they won't tolerate it. They won't tolerate any dissent. Any dissent at all. What is that? Because so, you know why Tucker, it's worked for them. So now that gets at least the second example, Barry Weiss. Right? So Barry Weiss claims she's like, remember when she was in the New York Times, she's fighting against cancel culture. Our college campus have been taken over by cancel culture. She put out a cancel culture when she was on the campus of her college, Columbia, when she pushed for anyone who was against Israel to be silenced. I mean, she's always been for cancel culture. Exactly. So she actually started her career as a student who went around saying, I'm proudly Zionist and I'm going to try to take out Arab and Muslim professors who don't toe the line for Israel. So she got famous doing cancel culture on college. Oh, I remember very well. Then she pretends in the middle of her career that she's against cancel culture, specifically on college campuses. I mean, the lie is so brazen. Right? And then she goes to free press and then starts cancel culture again on college campuses. They spoke out against Israel. They should be fired. They should be arrested. Oh, yeah. It's what we, we, we, we, we, we. I'm a dangerous Nazi. Yeah. You're talking about arresting Americans for disagreeing with another government, with another country. I mean, if you're not bothered by that, then you're, you're, you have a servant mindset. Right? Yes. These folks obviously have 94% of Congress. They obviously pro Israel factions have almost all of established media. We can come back to why. Okay. And I'm okay with it. I will serve them. Well, I'm not okay with it. I don't want to bow. I love that America's free. We came for that freedom and that freedom is delivered for us. But I don't want to give it away. I don't want to give it away to anyone. If I want to give away my freedom, I want to stay in the Middle East. Yeah. Okay. I came here for the promise of America. Our family did. So, and, and you know, among, among Muslim Americans, there is no group. I've borne Muslim. I'm atheist now. Okay. So I, I had 22, I went through the religions. It wasn't for me. Okay. But am I going to defend my family and my background? Sure, I am, of course. Right. But ideologically I'm atheist. So I had, we, this country had room for me. And this country didn't ask, are you Muslim? Are you atheist? Are you this? Are you that? It just, it gave me the same rights as anyone else. And I love that. And I'm, I'm pretty sure, I mean, I don't want to take away democracy in, in Turkey, in my opinion. Yes. And he's done some good foreign policy, but it's, it's domestic policy. I'm, I'm against. Okay. If I stayed in Turkey, I would almost certainly be in president's point. Right. And here, I'm not in person. No. Okay. Look, now all of a sudden they're very open to the right way. Why are they open to the right wing? Because you can't miss it. Megan and others are saying, hey, maybe we got fed a lot of propaganda to hate Muslims because they happen to be Israel's enemies. Well, of course. And so maybe all that media about how they're all their terrorists, terrorists, there's, and you look at it and go away. And we were taught by books that Robert Maxwell bought that, um, Israel was attacked in 1948, Israel was attacked in 1967, Israel's always the victim, victim, victim. And then you look, you go, wait a minute, in 1967, Israel attacked. I was lied to it. No, Israel attacked all of its neighbors and destroyed their military, their air forces before they even got up off the ground. Right. And they called that a pre-emptive strike. So that became the new self defense is offense. And what did we do in Iraq? Preemptive strike. We went into Iraq and they could have weapons of mass destruction. By the way, where did we get that false intelligence? Israel at the time, Ariel Sharon was saying Iraq is Israel's number one enemy. Iraq at the time, by the way, hated al-Qaeda. Al-Qaeda attacked us. Of course, it was a Baptist government. It was secular. They had tons of Christians in the government. Yeah, not only that, Al-Qaeda constantly attacked the local rulers. So Saddam ever caught Al-Qaeda. He executed them on the spot. So in a sense, he's an ally of sorts in that case against Al-Qaeda. And it counterbalance to Iran. Yeah. It should held our hostages for over a year in 1979. So it's like that was in no sense consistent with their interests. Iraq had nothing to do with 9-11 at all, despite the many, many lies. I knew people who told those lies really, really Steve Hayes wrote a whole book about it was a lie. No one's ever apologized. But those lies all served one imperative, which is fight Israel's enemies. I was there. So I know that that's true. And everyone knows that that's true. And you're now required to lie about it. It was just a mistake. It was not a mistake at all. It was totally intentional. Yeah. And so when I give speeches to those Muslim groups and I talk about American sovereignty, that's when I get the biggest applause. Because who is the victim of another government meddling in the American government, the most Muslim Americans are? Because I mean, there's no equivalent. I mean, for any money that the Gulf countries or anything else puts into America, it doesn't get any power at all. Okay. So but the Turks, this is interesting because you were born in Turkey. You came here at your co-host on your show or someone on your show. And a cast bearing is just a wonderful person, I think. But is Armenian? So one of the most famous feuds in history, one of the most famous genocides was the Armenian genocides right after the during the first war. And here you are good friends and work together every day. And that to me is a huge part of the promise of America. You can leave your tribal wars in the countries of origin and come here and interact as equals under the American flag as citizens. Like that is truly the vision. I think everyone, we imported tons of Irish in the 1840s into an Anglo country. They didn't eat each other. Those countries had been hated each other for centuries, but they all came here and pretty much got along sort of watching the Israelis import what they are doing and there are many proxies in the US. Importing their ancient tribal conflicts into my country, telling me there's an Anglo multi-century American, my family, that I have to be hate Muslims or something. It's like first of all, I'll decide who I hate. Not you. It's not up to you who I hate. You're not in charge of me. And second, like that's your battle. Why don't you keep it in the Levant? Like I don't want anything to do with that, right? Yeah. But now it completely dominates your hate Muslims. It's like first of all, I believe in Jesus, I'm not a Muslim, but I like a lot of Muslims. And I'm never going to say I don't. And it's that funny that they're like, if you don't agree to everything the Israeli government does, then you hate Jews. But if you don't, I don't hate Jews and I don't hate Muslims and I don't want any part of their foot. I mean, what? But wait, Tucker, then they go on to the second part of the sentence. So like if you disagree with Israel, you're a bigot, then they say, you have to hate Muslims. But wait a minute, I thought you were against bigotry. So you're not against bigotry. So how is hate all Muslims any different from hate all Jews? Well, it's not. It's not. Right? It's the same. But these, you know, people who don't believe in universal principles and that's kind of the core problem. It's like only certain types of hate are bad. Only certain kinds of bigotry, but no, no, if bigotry is bad, it's always bad because all people are created by God and they're inherently equal. They may have different abilities. They do have different abilities, but they have equal value. And if you don't believe that, it's very wise, doesn't, then you can with a straight face, say anti-Semitism is wrong. I agree with you, very wise. Hating Muslims is right. No. I mean, I don't agree with you. I'm sorry. Yeah. And why don't we bring that into my country go away. Yes. Laura Lumer, Mark Levin, say all the time you should hate Muslims. Muslims are the problem. Well, then you've lost your moral high ground. Well, they don't believe in an universal principle. It's just, it's just identity politics. It's no better than any other form of identity politics. And it's all disgusting and immoral. Exactly. So whereas to your point, Anna and I do a show together and that's an Armenian and a Turk doing a show together. Literally. And a show called the Young Turks. I was like, well, I first thought I was this years ago, I was like, holy smokes. Yeah. People may not know what the young Turks were, but yeah, whatever. Isn't that beautiful? Isn't that a beautiful thing about that? In the Thomas of America, leave your tribal, your ancient tribal conflicts in your countries, origin and come here and exist as equal citizens under the law. That is the, that is to me. That's the most American sentiment I can imagine. Yeah. And so, and by the way, when you do that, that doesn't mean that you leave your entire culture behind, don't bring your food, don't bring your language, don't bring this, don't bring it. Right. Great. No, no. We've had, the Italian sprought pizza, they choose bought bagel of locks and, and pastrami and the Chinese project. It's great. Wonderful. But you have to agree that America is your top identity. Of course. Or else you're going to have, who twos and tootsies murdering each other in your cities? Yeah. Like, you know, how about you know? You have to be an American. It means something to be an American. It means you put ancient tribal hatred aside. I mean, so when you look at the young Turks, our audiences, our minions, Greeks, Jews, Muslims, Christians, everyone, everyone. And in the old world that wouldn't have happened, that's why we came here. Because we don't want the old world. We want this world, this world of freedom and equality. Amen. Amen. Right. I just could not agree with what you said more strongly. I just really feel it. Yeah. So back to the memorandum of understanding why I'm a digresser. No, no. I'm doing the same thing. So they say 20 year, the new one we want is a 20 year memorandum of us. So we have to give you a 20 year contract. And they say the four billion that we're giving them currently per year on top of everything else is not enough. And they started talking about five billion. So wait a minute, five billion, 20 years, we're talking about another 100 billion. We're going to borrow from China to give to Israel and then pay interest the rest of our lives. And this is a exclusive of this does not include military obligations. So if there's another war, of course, we'll backstop it with missile defense or whatever carriers in the region. Right. So it doesn't even include that. Yeah. So, but because they got so much pushback, this is the first time I've ever seen the Israelis given inch, all of a sudden Netanyahu comes like this, maybe 10 years, maybe we tape her it off, right? It's total bullshit. Maybe go away and never come back. Yeah. How about that? So look, I started a site not another dollar.com. Okay. Not another dollar. Because that it hates it. Okay. We'll call it that. So what we're saying is look, two things. One is number one, if you if a Congress person takes money from Israel vote against them. Okay. Now why? Because we want our representatives to be our representatives. It's not an outrageous. That's a bare minimum mask, right? And happy to apply to any country, okay? But right now Israel is the one giving to 94% of Congress. So there has to be some consequences. I agree. So since we're peaceful and nonviolent, and by the way, again, violence destroys any movement. That is why a lot of times counterinsurgencies start the violence, of course. Right. So if anyone's nothing more real than false flags. Yes. It's just a fact. It's been a feature of warfare, hot and cold from the beginning of history. So do if anyone proposes violence, they're on the other side. Okay. Reject them, turn them in turn them into the authorities. Okay. Zero violence so they cannot destroy the movement. Okay. And because it's the right thing to do and it's the more position. Right. So what we're saying is I also have Operation Consequences.com. It goes to the same thing. So what are the consequences? Not violent, not hatred, not anything. Just if you vote with Israel to give them another dollar, we're going to vote against you. And you know what? You don't have to cross party lines. That's what primaries are for. Yeah. So if you're a Republican, you never have to vote for a Democrat. If you're a Democrat, you never have to vote for a Republican. Go into the primaries and we're going to make two lists. One is are you taking money from Israel? Okay. And that list already exists. You know, you have a pack track grid center. We'll put it up on the site so you can see, oh, these guys are taking money and these guys aren't. So when you see Tom Massey and he takes no money from a pack or any of this really lobbies, you go, I might agree or disagree with Tom Massey, but at least I know he's honest. And he represents us and not a different government. Okay. And the second thing we're saying is, did you give money to Israel? Or did you take money from Israel and did you give money to Israel? So if forget the pass because they all gave money in the past, okay, we're fair clean slate. But going forward, you vote one more time for another dollar to Israel. I mean, you're never going to get our vote ever. It's a solemn pledge. Okay. Now you could sign the pledges on not another dot com or operation caskwares.com, but it doesn't matter. Create your own website. Create your own pledge. Create your own movement or join the movement. Say, yeah, you know what? I don't want to go to those sites. I want to do it on my show. Great. I love it. In a right wing, great. I love it left wing, great. I love it. Okay. But you've got to get the representatives some consequences. It sounds like democracy. Exactly. That's all it is. That's all it is. So just inject the views of the people who own the government into the conversation with the government should do. Yeah. Also, if you, for example, radical, if you do that poll, does America owe Israel any more money? My guess is an overwhelming majority are going to say no. How would you get that poll? I mean, do you think you could get CNN to take that poll? Well, if they say that no, we're not going to ask Americans that then they obviously have an agenda. They claim to be objective, right? CNN comes to objective. They're still for many years. Not objective. Right. New York Times very much pretends to be objective. All right. Then ask the question, do does America owe Israel any more money? Okay. Maybe we're wrong, Tucker. Right? Maybe the Americans come in and go 80% of Americans say yes. We always real more money than we'll stand corrected. And we'll go up our bad. Americans can't wait to give more money to Israel no matter what the circumstance is there. But wait. If it turns out 68%, 82%, some significant majority of Americans say no, we don't know them anymore money. Now does the voice of the American people matter or does it not matter? And you know what the answer is. And that's why they won't do the poll. And that's why we'll do it for them. That's okay, right? Look right now, 92% of Democrats say that what Israel didn't cause it was wrong. And that was before the election. And both Joe Biden and Kamala Harris said, I don't care about my voters. I don't care about 92% of my voters. They couldn't have been any clearer. I'm going to serve Israel instead. Now number one donor lifetime to Joe Biden is a pack. A pack gave the Senate. Is that true? Yes, over $11 million throughout his career. The Israeli lobby totally financed now 11 million just to Joe Biden just to Joe Biden. Okay. And that began. I would have thought it was city bank or the credit card companies. So he was known as the Senator from MBNA, which is a card company in Delaware. So he was literally known for corruption. Now, did you hear that? It means true media from objective. No, they gave his son a house. Right. I mean, it was pretty open. Yeah. I mean, Joe Biden's trademark thing in Washington was do whatever the donors tell you. That's why the one promise he kept was to the donors. Remember, he said to them, nothing will fundamentally change. Because if you're at the top, you don't want anything to change. Right. Because then you might slip from the top. If you're at the top, you love this status quo. You want a politician coming in telling you nothing will fundamentally. So here's one question that I have that I don't have the answer to. So I understand that that's all consistent with the darker parts of human nature. I'm winning. I don't want anything to change. I get it. I don't even judge it. But the rest of the country is withering and dying and that's measurable in life expectancy, for example. You know, there's no way to argue that this is helping normal people and they're not staying the same. They're going down by every measure. Down to their personal health. Why are the people who run the country are ruling class? Like it's not enough that they profit it does feel like they're trying to hurt the people they rule. That's the, that's, I mean, I've reached that conclusion. What is that? And class, it's not enough that they profit it. Does feel like they're trying to hurt the people they rule. That's the, that's, I mean, I've reached that conclusion. What is that? So I'm most angry at our politicians and I'm going to give you an analogy about that in a second. Uh, so like, so Israel, pharma, they're going to logically try to rob us. Of course, I get it. Right. The king takes most for himself, but he also wants to make his people like not die earlier, but they do want us to die earlier. What is that? But it's, yeah, so it's largely our representative soul. So I talked about Biden, Kamil took five million from APAC, talked about that. Uh, let's talk about Trump. So Trump in the first election in 2016 takes a hundred million from Sheldon Adles. Okay. So the Sheldon gets something in return. Of course he does, right? So he got a great number of things. Uh, corruption charge and, uh, when largely went away with a small fine, uh, the state tax was dropped right in the nick of time before he passed away, saved them billions of dollars. You know where the Adles was making most of their money gambling in China. Yeah. Okay. So they're mainly a Chinese company and, uh, and they had to bring their money back from China to America. So they got a tax holiday. We don't get tax holidays, but they get tax holidays. And so they're, the repatriation tax was brought down to about 8%. So instead of paying 35% they paid 8%, which saved them billions of dollars. So then they take that money from China, bring it back to America. They give a hundred to Trump. He runs again and give another hundred. Uh, they, he runs again, they, uh, this time it's Miriam Adles and Sheldon's passed away is wife Miriam gives 137 to Trump. So now collectively they've given $337 million to Donald Trump's reelection campus. So now one of the things they wanted was taxes and other interests and defeat the unions and their casinos and all the things they're, they're wishless. But the main thing they wanted was for Israel and Trump says it all the time. He doesn't hide it at all. He says, he said in the kinesh. Yeah. He said, look, you guys give me money and you said and Sheldon wanted me to, uh, move our embassy from, you know, Telviv to Drew. So I moved it for him. Like you're not supposed to say that. Okay. But I love about Trump. I love it. He just says it. Yeah. So he's like, and then so they want to this and, and I gave him to go on hikes. I said, go ahead. Take it, right? Whatever Israel asked. And she said, Sheldon came in here in my first term more than any other person. And he said to be fair, he gave the most, right? So if you give that much money, you get access and you get American policy. So now Miriam's up there going, maybe you should run for a third term and I'll give him 250 million us. She said that on air next to Trump. So what that is them rubbing it in our face saying. So that's the part I don't understand. Like every country has a ruling class that drives the most benefit from whatever system is they're running. But it's the pretty undecised hatred for Americans. Like why the humiliation rituals? Why say that in public? Why basically give the entire country the finger. You have no control. If you step out of line, we'll send the police to your door. Like you don't need to behave that way. Yeah, this is relatively new. There's hatred in there. That's how you behave toward people you really want to hurt. Or they were more subtle about it. Yeah, that's why I never said anything. I wasn't fully aware of it, but also it's like it's working. That's what I don't really get involved in this. But all of a sudden it's like, you're not allowed to live in the country that you were born in because you disagree with a foreign country. It's like, you don't need why are you talking to me like that? Who do you think you are? Why do you, why, what are you doing? So since they're starting to lose control. Now back to the American people overall. This was about six months ago, the numbers are probably starker now. But 60% of Americans said we don't want to support what Israel is doing with financing anymore. 60%, 60% for Gaza. Okay. They said we are not backing what Israel is doing and only 32% said yes. So two to one, very, very, very clear that American people two to one don't give Israel any more money to kill people in Gaza. Don't do it. And all of our politicians, Democrats, and Republicans are like, no, we're going to give them more money. We don't care. Shut up American people. So why are they switching to this new harsher tactic? Because I think they're going for intimidation. They've already lost the people. They've lost the propaganda wars. So they're just going for bullying. They don't intimidate me and I'm totally happy to pay any price not to go along with this, not because I hate Jews. I certainly don't hate Jews, but because I love my country and we have the right to act in our own interest and to say what we truly believe. And I will never bow to any other system voluntarily. And I feel like a lot of Americans clearly you feel that way. 100%. America was not made for bowing. So that's the things that hurt my family. I'm happy to bow before God. I'm not too arrogant to bow, but I'm not going to bow to something that hurts my children. Like I'm not going to do that. No, they're not going to take our freedom away. So back to your point about the accumulation rituals. Then why do that? It gets way worse. In case you don't know this for the folks at home, the Adel sins then lobbied Trump to get Jonathan Pollard back to Israel. Okay. So Jonathan Pollard is a traitor. I mean, as big a traitor as we have ever had in this country. And through hate or if America says it out a lot of all the time. Yeah. And he goes further. And dangerous Jewish people by saying if you're Jewish America, you should work for Israel like I did and betray America. He says that. Okay. So now this is as despicable anti-American character as you will find on planet Earth. So not only do they lobby to get him back to Israel. First of all, he should never been let out of jail. Ever, ever. Whatever Israelis do with the Nationalists, with the Navy secrets that he gave them. Do you know? I gave them to the Soviet Union. And they gave them to the Soviet Union in exchange for a refuse next. I remember this. I know people were involved in it. And yeah, our top ally gave our national security secrets. This is the middle of the Cold War. It's not a joke. And these countries have nuclear weapons pointed at each other. And Israel gave those secrets to the Soviets. So that's just a fact. Oh, you're lying. I'm not lying. Yeah. And in this case, yeah. In this case, not only so they've been lobbying Democrats and Republicans, get you on a Pollard out of jail because he delivered for Israel. And so they got Obama to pardon him and not pardon him, but like say, okay, he can get out of jail. Then they got Trump to say he can leave the country. Okay. So this is all already disastrous. But just to rub it in a little bit more, he was flown back to Israel on a private jet owned by Sheldon Adelson. Let's say Adelson's saying, F you, we work for Israel, not for America. We're going to take the worst trader you've ever had and celebrate him. We're going to give him a hero's welcome. I don't understand that. That is not in my personal range of like emotions. That's like you won, got it. Okay, great. You know, you're getting what you want. Okay. But that's like if you're playing tennis with someone and you crush them in tennis, rather than going up in shaking hands, you know, good, good game. So forced to do is the show. You leap across that and like beat him to death for the racket. I don't, I look, what is that impulse? I think it's the scariest thing I've ever seen. They're going for full intimidation. Right. But why? Because they lost the American people. We're gone. So look, I mean, look, Tucker, you're arguably the biggest show in the right wing, right? And you certainly wear a fox and you have the numbers to back it up now, right? Or are you really the biggest show on the left? This is the, you know, you could argue that it's the heads of the families getting together on behalf of the American people saying the right and the left. And then by the way, we can bring in any independence. You can bring in Tim Dillon, anyone else and they will say the same thing enough enough. We have no hatred in our hearts. Okay. I doubt it. But enough. So not another dollar and we're done with you guys and hey, good luck, good luck with Iran, right? But I don't have to spend a trillion dollars fighting your war for you. You're right. And what if, look, and you know what they're doing guys, pull back like this is so unhealthy. This relationship, pull back. We both regain our sovereignty Israel doesn't have sovereignty exactly either. I mean, I don't know. You could debate what sovereignty means, but they're totally dependent on the United States. That's not good. That's that good for Israel. And so like, let's just become normal countries again and then be friends. Yeah. That seems like a good outcome to me. Yeah. By the way, it's a terrific outcome for Israel, right? So now when you total it all together, probably around 350 billion that they've taken from us and they've an eight trillion in wars we did for them. Take the win and go. Like it's time to take the winnings off the table. Feel that right? So if you say no, I want another 300 billion. I want another 100 billion. I want you to pay for another war and I'm going to take more. And you can't have the first amendment anymore because you're not allowed to criticize me. Yeah. Okay. That's when I say I'm not participating in this totally happy to go to jail for it. I don't care. I'm never going to participate in any effort by a foreign power or own government to limit my birthright. So Tucker, let's talk about that because if there's so many things that Israel does that I'm not sure people are aware of and why are they not aware of it because established media not only doesn't report on it, but actively covers it up. Right. And if you dare report on it, they'll call your names and try to ruin your career. Okay. So what have they done? First of all, the first amendment is sacrosact. So no, there is no exception to the first amendment for Israel. And by the way, if you say there should be, you're trying to destroy our constitution. Okay. So no, we're not going to let you destroy our constitution. So no, nobody should be arrested on a college campus for writing an op-ed against Israel and editorial saying that they should be sanctioned. That's all. That's what the Turkish PhD student wrote and they're like, that's it, arrest her. What do you mean arrest her for her speech? What does that mean? And now, as I said, they're targeting American workers, trying to get them fired. The lady who put both of us on a list for all Angie, so I might do the year, whatever. She went and gave a speech about and by the way, everyone could look up every fact. I'm saying they can go find the videos for themselves and they should and they should spread it all over the internet. And she's on there going, we're going to find any American that opposes us and we're going to try to ruin their lives. She said it. She's like, we're going to make sure they never get a job. They never get a wife, a husband. We're going to go after their families. I'm like, you're saying it out loud. You're saying it out loud, right? I don't believe in blood guilt in this country, period. I mean, that's why your family is able to move from Turkey and you wound up close friends with an Armenian because you're not responsible for your ancestors. That is a core American value. Exactly. So then there's 31 states, I believe, again, look it up. Maybe it's 30, maybe it's 29. Plus, but about that area that have passed law saying you're not allowed to boycott or divest or sanction Israel. And if you're an American company that does that, we're going to take away your contracts from the state governments. You will be punished severely financially. Your family, your business, etc. If you dare to disagree with Israel, what the fuck kind of law is that? And by the way, that's a lot of democratic governors and a lot of Republican governors. If your governor is saying, you must serve Israel and if you dare to defy Israel, I'm going to take away your living. I'm going to take away American government contracts from you. You should be livid about that. Is there any law in the United States that you've heard of that says if you criticize the US government or constitution, dust, crater, flight? I don't think there's any penalty ever for attacking the United States and I'm not saying there should be, of course. But then how can there be penalties for disagreeing with the foreign country? You can say whatever you want about America, whatever you want and people do it. I'm glad you can't. But the second your critical of Benjamin Netanyahu, you get punished by the US government. That's insane. If that's the state of play, I was like a state of saturation. Is it? Yeah, no, it's not. Again, Madeline, put in any other country. But even your own country, it's totally fine. Yeah, you can criticize America. Oh my gosh. You can call for sanctions of America. You can call for boycotting America. You want to go after the Portuguese, okay? Imagine if they said you're allowed to criticize every country on earth, including your own, except Portugal. Why? Why except Portugal, right? But if you say why except Israel, anti-Semite. And why did they say anti-Semite? It's to eliminate every voice of opposition to Israel in American conversation. Are you ready for the consequences of this, though? I mean, you're a business owner, your father. Yeah. I'm not being melodramatic. I never talk about this stuff. I'm not going to now, but I'm just, you know, let's be real. Like the reason people don't say obvious, non-hateful things like you shouldn't be prevented from criticizing a foreign country in your own country. The reason they don't even say that is because they know what the consequences, real consequences, when not a joke consequences, these are not people who are kidding. Yeah. Are you comfortable with that? Like, why'd you decide to do this? You don't need to do this. Yeah. So we've already dealt with a lot of consequences, right? And so first of all, you know, they tell folks don't do business with the young Turks, you know, or they're, you know, that, yeah, I definitely know that. I know that for a fact. And our network is called TYT. You know, we got a 24 hour channel in all these places everywhere by cable. And, and they said, don't do, don't do sales, don't do investments, don't do anything because they're anti-Semites. Okay. So, you know, take away their money and make sure that they don't survive. And then they do propaganda to the audience. That's less effective. But, but for a while it was ineffective. You know, oh, they're hateful people. They say they're on the left, but they, you know, they're bigots and they're this and they're that. And then every kind of a man, it attack against me. But the establishment media always hated me. Why? Because I'm populist left and they despise populism. So certainly do. Yeah. Why do they despise populism, do you think? Because it's against the status quo. It's for change. Yeah. And if you're at the top, you don't want anything to change. They don't want to rock the boat because it's their boat. That's why they murdered Huey Long. But populism as a pretty, pretty long and very violent history in the United States reaction to it. Yeah. You just get killed. Do we get death threats all the time? Right. Do we get threats of different sorts all the time? And if you like, if let's say that the Iranian government was threatening to kill me or their supporters were threatening to kill me or my family and they were doing all these attacks against our business, people would be, I think, outraged, right? And Jake Tapper would love to talk about their radians in terms of the American company and threatening America. Because we should do something about Iran. Israel does it shut up. Anti-Semite. Well, Jake Tapper hasn't defended you. Jake Tapper is going to write a book one day. It turns out we were the problem. No one could have seen it coming. No, we see it now. Jake, you're the problem. Okay. So this whole defense of Israel over the top defense of Israel is absurd. It's insane while pretending to be objective and they actively covering up the news here. Let's do more. Why get involved? Because I can't help it. I can't help but be free. And that's why I love this country. That's why I just kind of made for me a uniquely wonderful country for me and my personality. And I can't bow. I just can't do it. I'm in an airplane probably 20, 25 years ago with James Carville who was my co-host at CNN. And you know, a great guy in some ways. A great guy, very smart. And I said something about Israel, some humiliation. They were shooting into the church, the Nativity, murdering a bell ringers. I was like, oh, I don't want to fight about Israel. I never have wanted to. But I said that is just too much. I mean, whatever it was at the moment. And it goes, I'll never forget this goes. Much kids get into college. I was like, I guess I had little kids, a lot of them. And he goes, then you'll shut up. I was like, you think that would affect my kids' ability to get into college? I'd never even thought of that before. Of course. Then you'll shut up, quote. That's a verbatim, quote. You want your kids to get into college. You know, shut up. And to my shame, I guess I did kind of shut up for like 20 years. I don't want to deal with this at all. I've got all kinds of things. I'm interested in it. I'm not that interested in Israel. I love Jerusalem. But like, I don't want to get involved. So I'm trying to be melodramatic, but that's real. And did you ever have a moment where you're like, you know, maybe I don't, maybe I don't maybe to ignore it. Let it slide. Yeah. No. And so, to create happen to me. So there's a school, private school in Ella. It actually have an anod to it in two different ways. So, and we applied for my son to get into that private school. And one of my nephews happens to work as a volunteer in that school. And someone in the admission told him that my son's application was going to be hurt because of his dad's positions on Israel. Actually, they actually said that out loud. Why the Israelis have been happy to murder tens of thousands of children in Gaza because they believe in blood guilt. That's just, that's just, that's the true. They say it out loud. I'm a like, we believe in blood guilt. Like the children are responsible for the sins of their parents. So we're going to kill them. We're not let them into the school or and we face this a lot in my family. So yeah. Yeah. So that's a ramification for us personally. And as you know, Anna's husband is a coach at another private school. And they try to get him fired. And they demanded like some sort of Maoist apology where he denounces his own wife and calls her an anti semi publicly. And he's like, no, I'm not going to do it. He's own wife. Yeah. They're like, you must announce your own wife. Otherwise we don't feel safe. Okay. What is that? What is that? And so we don't feel safe. You're threatening to wreck my family, but you're the one that doesn't feel safe. Because it's always projection. They're always the victims. So like why do I say Jake Tapper? Like the Jake is just representative of the mainstream media overall. Israel keeps taking more and more land. You could see it on a map. They just took 53% of Gaza. Jake and the rest go self defense. No, but wait a minute, brother, I can see the map. Israel is growing. They say they want greater Israel. They're doing greater Israel. They're the ones that killed the Palestinians and then took their land. And Jake goes, no, no, don't believe you're lying eyes. Don't believe you're lying ears. Israel is the victim. They're always the victim. They're going to fire you. What did you do the work for? Like why would you that's absurd? Why would you say something like that? What is your mission? Okay. And I challenge Jake. I challenge all of cable news anchors. So why don't you talk about, for example, one of hundreds of things that we've mentioned here, but another one is nine Americans killed in Israel over the last three years. Nine Americans killed not accidentally, but by Israeli settlers or the IDF. Mer, actually, actually. You know how many did you know that? Yeah, so sorry. Do you know how many consequences there's been? Our government does not ask for them to be arrested. What do you mean? In American citizen is killed. What about my Huckabee? He's the American ambassador who just met with Jonathan Pollard, the traitor in the US embassy without telling the CIA or Donald Trump. My Huckabee is not our ambassador. He's their ambassador. No. Okay. It's sad to see a man so degraded. Yeah. So where's our justice for the nine Americans killed? Are we going to even ask for justice? Or is Israel literally above the law? They can kill Americans and totally get away with it. Our government won't even ask for redress. Right? Well, I think we know that's true already. But it's a fact. It's not so beautiful. And then you got Tom Alexander-rich. So he's the guy who is an Israeli cybersecurity official, goes to Vegas and looks to rape it American girl, right? So he's like, oh, this is a great opportunity for basically pedophile tourism. I'll go to America. And I know as an Israeli, I won't be held accountable. So he gets caught in a sting operation. Got him. Okay. Good. Gets caught with eight other Americans who were also involved in that operation. The eight Americans are in jail right now in Nevada. Alexander-rich back to Israel. Free ride. How? But wait, you can't say that the Americans who did something terrible should be in prison. Great. Wonderful, totally agree. But the Israeli is allowed to do it. And he can rape any American girl he wants here and he gets a free ride back to Israel. No, no. So right now he's technically under arrest. But our government isn't doing anything to try to get him back. No, we want him extradited. But what about my Huckabee? Is he going, is he brokering in extradition? Because he tried to rape an American girl, you say. That's a fact. No. My Huckabee is not doing anything. So the Americans killed no consequence. Americans that might could be complaining about the nine Americans. That's a nine Americans have been killed. Yes. It did Huckabee say anything about it? Not to my knowledge if he said anything. It's been incredibly quiet. Okay? And hey, Mike Huckabee, if you want to prove me wrong, get out there and fight for it. So God damn it, they killed nine Americans and fight like hell. Forget tomorrow. Forget yesterday. You'll focus on tomorrow. Go get him ambassador Huckabee. Let's see what you got. The demand that they extradite Alexander-rich back to Nevada where he faces consequences like the other people who were caught. Where are you? Where are you? I mean, this happens over and over again through the since Israel has been formed. Robert Maxwell stole our nuclear secrets. The worst possible thing you could do. We didn't even arrest them. Why didn't I look into why didn't we arrest Robert Maxwell? Because it would have caused an international incident that embarrassed Israel. Well, they should be embarrassed. They stole our nuclear secrets when they were pretending to be our allies. They should be deeply, deeply embarrassed. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Not only did it was Robert Maxwell not arrested, he was allowed to buy textbook in America for that go into our kids' schools. We're letting a trader like that, a guy, he wasn't American, but he was a British citizen. He was a, you know, and he lived here, he lived there, and we're letting him buy the textbook that go into our kids' schools after, after he stole our nuclear secrets. And eventually got a state funeral, again, heroes welcome in Israel. Congratulations. Are we ever going to stand up for this country? So how about the spies we caught after 9-11? Okay, put aside whether they knew didn't know what their activity was, but we rounded up dozens and dozens of Israeli spies. Okay, great, great job, FBI CIA whoever did it. Fantastic, really proud of you. And then we let them go back to Israel. Is that a thing we do if we cash out Russia, spy, or an Iranian spy, or a Dutch spy? Do we go, oh, you're free to go. Aren't we supposed to arrest them and keep them in prison? But when it comes to Israel, there are no laws, there are no rules. There are allowed to do anything you want. And if you object, Jake Capric comes on and calls you an anti-Semite. So a year ago this week, the new president of an afternoon duration issued an executive order declaring that all files related to the Kennedy assassination, MLK, and Bobby Kennedy's assassination had to be released. And they haven't all been unfortunately. But in tranches of documents that haven't released in the last 12 months, we've seen it get in again. References to Israel have been, and there are a lot of references to Israel in the files around the Kennedy assassination, interestingly. Have all been redacted, all been redacted for 62 years, 63 years. It's like, what? I don't understand. Like why would that be? Why are there two monuments to Jimangleton in Israel? The number two at CIA. I think it's all very, very odd. And you hear people complain about conspiracy theories, and I'm definitely against conspiratorial thinking because it drives you crazy. On the other hand, in the absence of transparency, that stuff grows like algae. I mean, what do you think? If you don't tell people the truth, like what are they supposed to think? They're going to come up with all kinds of theories. Why can't? Why would you adapt to references to Israel in the Kennedy files for six decades? Like what is that? It's almost an admission. So like, I did it. It's very odd. I'll say that. So I didn't know that until recently. And again, my establishment media never talks about these things. And again, it's not just about Israel. So for example, on 9.11, we're rejecting references to the Saudis. Oh, I know. Why? Why? So they say, well, they are allies. Well, if there are allies, then maybe they shouldn't have had an hand in 9.11. Right? They didn't have a hand in 9.11. Oh, great. Then show me the redacted part. No, I won't show you the redacted part. Okay. Now this is weird. Now this is our government working for other governments. And what happened after 9.11? We rounded up all the bin of lons. Yes, there were bin of lons in America. And we rounded up all these early spies. And yes, there was tons and tons of Israeli spies in America following the 19 hijackers around the country. Yeah. Yeah. And what do we do? We rounded them up. Oh great. We got it. And we released them back to Saudi Arabia in Israel. Yeah. No, that's our number. Are they in Vader Rock? Yeah. It's nothing to do with that. Fantastic police powers to the point where the country's not recognizable from what it was on September 10th, 2001. So that's our government working for other governments. Oh, I'm aware. And we can't stand it. So which leads us to Epstein. Okay. So here's another one. Drop site news has proven definitively that in my opinion, and we'll talk about the evidence that Epstein worked for an intelligence agency and almost certainly Mossad. Yeah. And almost certainly the CIA knew it. Of course. Okay. It's the evidence. It's overwhelming. First of all, in all the emails, he is looking to help one country. No, it's not Finland and no, it's not America. It's Israel. So how do we get cyber weapons to Israel? How do we get America to bomb Syria? How do we get America to bomb Iran? Okay. Hey, who brought former prime minister of Israel? I get set up a meeting with you with Putin. Wait. Epstein is so powerful. He can set up meetings to the former prime minister of Israel, can. He can call Putin any time and get someone a meeting. Then we find out that he was in the middle of the Iran-Contra affair. He was the one switching the planes out. How many civilians were involved in the Iran-Contra affair? Easy answer. Zero. There are no civilians involved in Iran-Contra. Everyone was intelligence. Okay. So this guy switching out planes in the middle of Iran-Contra is obviously intelligence. And that's Jeffrey Epstein. Okay. So Jeffrey Epstein was much more powerful than we realized. He could set up a meeting with almost any war leader. He could get almost anyone into the White House. Again, a who'd Brock has trouble getting into the White House. Epstein makes a call boom. He's in the White House. Israeli spies stays over at Epstein's house. There's just no question about it. He is definitely intelligence. And in every turn, he's looking to help one country in its Israel. American media says, shut up. No, Jeffrey Epstein, New York Times is a story about how he's like a forest scum. He just tripped over the money. And oh God, golly gee, he just happened to be an in the savvy investor. And they do nothing to see here. Don't. Now, drop sight news already showed it. Why wouldn't you try to build on that? Why wouldn't you cover that? Is that not an interesting story? I think it qualifies. I don't understand. I'm not pretending to understand it, but it's certainly interesting. It's certainly interesting. Yeah. I mean, and by the way- And it seems significant too. Yeah. If you're the New York Times or you J. Tapper, you're saying that? I don't want to believe something that's wrong. So show me, oh, no, drop sight news got it wrong. Those emails are wrong. It turns out he was working for a sweet. Okay, or no one. Fine, but they don't do that. They don't disprove it. They don't prove it. They don't report on it. They never ever talk about it. That is super weird. Super weird. Speaking of an admission of guilt. Yeah. Yeah. That's an interesting story in a long, long time. Obviously, American people are captivated by it. Yes. Is the New York Times is seeing and claiming that they're not captivated by it? No, they obviously are, right? And they report about it as it affects Trump all the time. Trump, Trump, Trump, Trump, Trump, Trump, Trump, Trump, Trump, right? I'm not saying the Trump didn't know I've seen he did. I'm not saying they weren't great friends. Right. Right. Right. But it's a bigger story. It's a bigger story. It's just strong. Yes, I think it is. Right. It's a Trump, I guess. It was Trump. It was Trump. Why magic? You don't want to have people look here. This is where the real action is. So again, I'm to look here. Get them to look here. Yes. It's sweet card, Monty. Yes. It's all an illusion. So it's unconscionable not to talk about FC. So get him to look here. Get him to look here. Yeah. It's three card, Monty. Yes. It's all an illusion. So it's unconscionable not to talk about Ephesus connections to intelligence, including Mossad and including the CIA for sure. And British intelligence and French. And what was this? I mean, you get the sense that it reveals the, you know, the superstructure beneath, you know, it gives you a glimpse into how power is exercised globally because it is global, right? And that, you know, there's so much that I know a lot about the obscene story and I'm still totally ignorant about what that was. I really don't understand it, but it's obvious. There's a third rail for a reason. Yeah. Yeah. So that's why right now there's a bit of a revolution going on. Do you think there is? I there is. Yeah. And so again, another reason why they hate you so much because the left wing was already gone, you know, 92% disapproving of the actions of Israel and Gaza. And our politicians already gave us the middle finger and said, no, we'll lose this election rather than defy Israel. We'll lose Michigan. We'll lose swing states. We don't care. We serve Israel loyalty. Okay. Now there's a bunch of Democrats that are against that. Rokana being the leading guy, saying, no, I want to see that. See, files. No, I think Palestine should exist. I don't know why why everybody talks about Israel should be allowed to exist. Good news. They do. Right. And they have nukes and they have ironed domed that nobody has. They're about a safer country as you could find on planet Earth. No one else has ironed domed. Only a handful of countries have nukes. They have a better military than the rest of the Middle East combined. They're perfectly safe. Then you say, okay, you're good. You exist. We're all in favor of that. Now, Palestine should exist. They're like, how dare you. You had he semi no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, you're the big. You're the big saying that another people should not have freedom. They should you, they've kept those people enslaved five and a half million Palestinians for 58 years. And then they brag, oh, Israel's the best democracy and the only democracy in the Middle East. Well, it's a democracy within Israel. It's the dictatorship within the occupied territories. What is happening in the occupied territories? Let's bid a dictatorship now in mainland Israel for for Israeli Jews too. I mean, you're not welcome to, well, first of all, they try to keep people from leaving the country restricted freedom of movement. And there, I mean, you get the cops at your door for saying certain things in that country. It's in many countries. That's true, but it's also true there. So like, come on now, stop, stop lying to me. Yeah. And so the media, they they're an enormous part of the problem. So you see our politicians, both under democratic and republican president and administration say, no, we're not going to release the Epstein files. No, we're going to give Epstein a sweetheart deal back in 2008. And then we're going to take Alex Acosta and make him the labor sector under Trump. Right. That was the funniest thing that's ever happened. Didn't work for it. Well, yeah. And by the way, oh, Galaine Maxwell, that sounds familiar. Oh, she's a daughter of Robert Maxwell. Legendary Israeli spy who stole our nuclear secrets. By the way, I don't know that that's ever been mentioned on cable news ever. Isn't that a super interesting fact that the main co-conspirator of Jeffrey Epstein that her dad was the biggest spy Israel has ever had? Now you can say, hey, there's sense of the father or not passed on to the daughter. So that doesn't prove anything. But it's at least an interesting fact. And it's not even the most interesting. In my opinion, the most interesting fact is attorney general Barr covered up Epstein's murder because he was murdered. And he covered it up as the attorney general of the United States and said we have to let people know this was a suicide. Like number one rule is don't let them think it was a murder. He said that before they done an investigation into it. So like that's a cover up by definition. You don't even know the facts, but you're reaching conclusion and commanding everyone else reach the same conclusion you're covering it up. Next time he has father Donald Barr, got Jeff Epstein his first job teaching math at the Dalton School. He didn't even have a college degree, okay? And then got him a job at Bear Stearns. The attorney general's father is the one who started Jeffrey Epstein's career and set him up with his friends in finance. And then his son becomes attorney general and covers up his murder. I mean, what are the chances, Jenck? Like what are the odds on that? Do you think? Then you combine that with the odds on the Maxwell's. Then you combine that with the odds of Israeli spies and prime minister staying at his house. And then you combine that with all the emails he's saying, I can't wait to get America to do what Israel wants. Unlike like the thing, we've all seen crazy things happen. It's like, oh, happenstance and like, you know, sometimes it, you know, rolls up and you get the jackpot. I get it. That is part of life. But if it keeps happening and you keep yelling at me for noticing, I think you think I'm dumb, right? Yeah. And so, what I think happened, come on now. Yeah. They they're insulting our intelligence. You think? Yeah. Yeah. And so what, but there's something great happening at the same time. Okay. So, so politicians terrible. But now we got a little bit of rebellion on the Democratic side with a con on a couple of guys, a little bit of rebellion on the Republican side with Tom Massey, a little bit of anti war with Rand Paul. And Marjorie Taylor Green was great. I wanted her to stay. By the way, the one person that we had Marjorie Taylor Green on the show a couple of people started yelling at me. How dare you why? I'm going with she's the enemy and stuff. And I'm like, guys, they want you to think that the other side is the enemy. They want you to have Marjorie on your show. Yeah. Oh, bless you. Good. So they want you to attack. Use all of your energy and all of your fight against other Americans. Okay. Worse. And so Marjorie Taylor Green comes on. And I said, well, I had her on because she's agreeing with us. She's a now. She's anti war. We're anti war. Like I'm taking us for an announcement. Right. Amen. There's a bunch. She ever do anything substantive to stand up to Israel. Yeah. Actually, she did. She's almost single-handedly killed a boycott investment in Sanctionville in the house. Yeah. She said, no, this is taking away Americans for new speech on against it. And when she made a big deal out of it, it embarrassed other Republicans because yeah, it's against our freedom of speech. Exactly. Right. And so did do something great. Right. More than almost anyone. Yeah. And so I still disagree with Marjorie and you on other issues. Right. But why would people get that so interesting that the people be mad at you for having her on when she's one of the only members of Congress, literally the only members who's doing the things that you have said that you believed in for a long, long time. 100%. It's so strange. Because it's because we've been taught by who, by the media, to hate each other and to have a tribal brain that art is totally true. Right. So because if the left and the right, the Republicans and Democrats realize that the people rigging the rules are the ones with all the wealth and power up top, that is the only force that is mighty enough to take on the ruling class, the donor class. So that is why they have to get us fighting at all times. You must hate each other. Don't look up. Whatever you do, don't look up. Hate each other. Use all your energy this way. So unfortunately, our side got taught this too. So Marjorie Taylor Green, Tucker Carlson, that's it. You can't ever talk to them. They're the bad guys. Right. I'm like, are they still the bad guys if they agree with that? Let's, let's, let's get back. What, let's define bad guy first and do, wait, do I have to change my position if Tucker agrees with me? Do I have to become a pro war? All right. Let's bomb Iran now. There's too much. I can't deal with it. Some podcast retreats. The I'm changing my mind. Yeah. So now, road did something really smart and this gets back to Marjorie in a sec. Road took an executive order that Trump had about lowering drug prices, most favorite nation status, right? If France, Germany, Japan are paying this much, we should pay that much. Why are we financing the whole world? And that's what's happening. We're paying so much more, not than Ethiopia, but then other developed nations like Germany. Of course, to subsidize drugs that aren't even made in this country. Yes. It's bonkers. By the way, we subsidize them in a hundred different ways. We also, we pay for their research that goes to the universities, right? Of course. And then they, then we give them the patent. What? No, no, that patent is worth billions, maybe trillions of dollars. And the American taxpayer paid for that research. Should we not get equity? That is how capitalism works. When we bailed out the banks, should we have not gotten equity? If a private company bailed out the banks, they would have owned the banks. Okay. That's how capitalists don't pay your mortgage. They own your house. Exactly. Right. But for collateral. Yes. But for the donor class, in that case, the pharmaceutical companies, no, no, just have it for free. Right. You asked the risk. You privatized the reward. It's the oldest system. There is. And also the most immoral. Yeah. And so the reason why the tapers of the world hate left wing populace is because we've been pointing this out for 20 years. So, so when road does this and he goes, okay, look, the executive order, it's we'll get knocked down by the courts. But good news, if we turn it into a bill, it can't get knocked down by the courts. So he took the executive order for beta didn't change a word. Okay. And said, now let's pass it as a bill. And he got two or three Republican co-sponsors. I went through the Democrats, the couple of Democrats that I know in Congress. And I was like, guys, this is beautiful. It's a layup. This is poor Democratic policy. We got super lucky, Trump did an executive order doing our policies. So let's jump on Roseville. Nope. The only person I could convince to join Roseville was Marjorie Taylorbury. No way. Yes. And what did Jake tap away on this? So no, here's my beef. Oh, Scooby would Jake. So other than his nonstop defensive Israel. So and I'm sure he'll object to that. Oh, that's I've slightly tweaked them from time to time. What do you mean? Okay. I'm like 12, 11, 9, 7% against the genocide. Okay. But it's not a genocide. You actually said Mike. So I feel like Jake Tapper is looking down his nose at us every time he talks on TV. He's like, and I will tell you this is real head nothing new. None other donors had anything to do with anything. Right? I feel like he I don't, I don't know why I know Jake. Well, but I feel like he's the one who's suffering. I feel like it hasn't worked. It's the prizes that he wanted. He weren't worth having. And he's he doesn't seem happy at all to mate, but you know, yeah, I'm just so god bless his heart. I wish him nothing but happy to do it. But so how did it come about? So when I ran for Congress, the media lied about me in hilarious ways. Okay. So and Jake joined in on that. So they would take out of context clips and then Jake would retweeted and without even checking what I thought you were a journalist. So they, the New York Times said that I had a history of being anti Muslim and never mentioned that I was born Muslim and my family's Muslim and my background's Muslim. Never mentioned it. The New York Times described me in such a vicious way that if I was a voter in my in that district that I was running in, I would have voted against me. Right? Because I don't want to vote for an anti Muslim anti semi anti everything. They painted me as like some like vicious racist right winger when I was a biggest supporter Bernie Sanders in the primaries, right in 2016, 2020, etc. So and then they said, oh, he had an interview with David Duke where I live in to David Duke because David Duke was saying outwardly anti somatic things. Yeah. And I called him an anti semi, a big, uh, all these things. You know me, I and also a federal informant just to be just to add to the list. Yeah. And so and an idiot, etc. So I said all those things in the interview. I hold no holes bar to young terms, right? New York Times said that I agreed with David Duke that he was not a racist. Another outlet said that I brought David Duke on to share his anti-Semitic views. No way. Yeah. And so other journalists watch the interview. I want to see how terribly anti-Semitic and racist jank was pretending to be a left winger in all this. And I'm like, holy shit, you guys are totally lying. The exact opposite happened in the interview. So New York Times had to do a rare correction on that they're like, okay, fine. All right, he was being sarcastic. Fine. Okay. But we, by the way, I had a PR person because it was a congressional run. They, and they were really well connected to all these folks. They called the New York Times. They called the editor and the editor. This is amazing. The editor told them, and I don't know why they say these things. I'm stunned that they say them out loud, but the editor told them, look, you're right. I watched David Duke interview. We got to retract it. And you're right out the Muslim thing. You're right about the beast shall be, which we'll get back to. Oh, Larry's that's that's my favorite. Hold on. So he says, but I went around and I asked and everyone here hates junk. And they don't want to do a crash. The best I could do was get a correction on the David Duke one because that one's so over the top. Everyone here hates junk. That's amazing. That's amazing. Yeah. I don't know how many people he asked. I don't know if he has three people, 13 people. I was probably a small group that was working on that group. But the fact that he would say that to our PR guys, unbelievable. Right. So now the beast shall be. Okay. So I do a segment on the young Turks like over a decade ago. And I say we had this guy, Rodell, that it was having sex with horses in Tennessee. And I thought with a what a bizarre crazy story. He gave the horse an STD. Rodell, what are you doing? What are you doing? We're making fun of this guy. Then I really dry. I go, you know what? If the horse is receiving it, you know, I don't know the horses objecting, right? They cut the tape. And I go, that's it. The jinx for beast shall. Okay. So if you keep rolling the tape, what I say next is is the horse going to object nay. And then everybody in the school. It's pretty funny actually. Yeah. And everybody laughs. But they cut that part out. Right. So it New York Times made it seem like it was part of my legislative agenda. Or sex. Yes. I mean, isn't that like an old Lyndon Johnson quote? It's un it. It's very much like a very fancy. I can't say it's too vulgar. But yeah, and the idea was to accuse your opponent of well, bestiality. Not because it's true because then he'll have to deny it and repeat it. Yeah. And here I am denying him. Yeah. When the conversation is about bestiality, you're not winning. Yes. And matter. So that's why they do tricks like that. And tap for like retweet. Love it. Who cares? Oh, I wonder what he said next is not a thought he had in his mind, apparently. Right. That's amazing. So that's how they do character assassinations. Okay. But you said, you said at the outset that they're losing. And I think I do think that's like the real lesson here. So like I was at CNN with Jake, you know, 25 years ago. And that was like a big to us. It was a, you know, in their 20s, it's like a big thing where it's CNN where it's so great. And he stayed. And you get to 2026. It's like who would want to job at CNN? Like I don't think again, the prize is worth winning. Like you don't actually want that. Not just because it's a burglar, whatever. Just honest, because like nobody cares. Yeah. Like it doesn't mean anything anymore. Or maybe I'm just too out of it. And I think that. Do you think it still means something? No, it means very little. But in their world, that's still high status for that really. Yeah. And they're oh, of course. So look, look at our careers and and how much things have changed in the last 10, 15 years. Yeah. And so when I was a, a host on MSNBC at six o'clock, back in 2011, that was highly celebrated. I mean, oh yeah, I instantly started winning awards and getting speeches, paid speeches and all these amazing things that I never got online. We're the, we're the first YouTube partner channel ever. I'm the original YouTuber. And really? Yeah. I've gotten the un-chirxes. Yeah. I didn't know that. Yeah. What year did you start it? So we started the show back in 2002. So we've been around 23 years. We were the original talk show for serious satellite radio. So we're the first show there. Then we went to America that you remember the liberation very well. Yeah. And we were their morning drive. And then we went. So as part of that, we were all over radio markets throughout the country, on exam. And we did great. Our ratings were terrific in, in different places. Then we started online video in 2005. And we're the oldest running show in internet history where the longest running show there is online. That's a, I did not know that. That's amazing. So that's pretty neat. We feel good about it. Now, but there wasn't a ton of prestige attached to that for the first 10 years, right? God, I was mocked. You're on the internet. Yeah. I was on television. So I know that I looked at who on the internet, some internet show. Yeah, internet. It's told us, it told us like, why would you leave serious satellite radio to go do YouTube? Like, what are you on there with the cats playing piano? 100% fat kid falls off bike. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so it's, I keep turning down money. It's seriously offered us a quarter of a million to not do online video. And I was like, no, no, online video is the future. I'm going to do online video by Hooker by Kirk. I believe it in a thousand percent. I wrote my friends an email in 1998 saying online video was going to be TV that it was only a matter of time. Okay. So that's why we're the first YouTube partner because I was positive, not only that online video was going to win, but YouTube was going to win. And so the entire time mainstream media is mocking us, etc. But then in 2011, I did a campaign to get on MSNBC and our audience is amazing. Best audience in the world. They sent thousands of emails to MSNBC until I finally got a meeting. My agent originally fired me. I declared my candidacy for the open position at MSNBC. And the guy who worked for us at CIA at the time was like, this is embarrassing. You're not going to get the job. And so don't do that. It's it'll be very public. And I was like, brother, I got news for you. I wasn't going to get the job anyway. Okay. Fair right. And so, and I'm a risk taker and I'm a natural born rebel. So I'm going to go for it. And I believe in my audience and they did. They got me the job there. Great news. That's wild. It was amazing. And then they kept watching and watching. We're like doubling the ratings of the regular hosts unseen on her roof. Like if a guest host fills in and gets about 75% on the audience, that's a pretty good job. Definitely. Yeah. That's a nice job. I'm getting 125, 150 on some super rare occasions. It's got 200%. So doubling the audience, but 125, 150% of the regular hosts on a consistent basis to the point where a supervising producer came in close the door on a day we had great ratings. And Jen, you got to bring it down. I said, why? Stop rating so high. He said, because the other hosts won't want you to fill in for all. That is a real thing. That's a real thing. Oh, I know. And so I never felt that way. I'm not competitive. But there are a lot of people would not have you sit in as a, I mean, that actually happened to me. Very famous host stopped having me because I did decent numbers. They don't want that. I get it. Yeah. But good news. They got the ratings are so good. I got the job anyway. I'm out there for six months. And then at the, but in the middle, I kept criticizing the Democrats. And I kept criticizing Obama from the left, not from the right, but from the left. Remember who the home team is? Yeah. Remember who the home team is, right? Right? And I'm like, yeah, the home teams are audience. That's why I have high ratings that you've ever had at six o'clock. And they made me an offer that they thought I couldn't refuse, which was, you know what, we're going to move you down the weekends, even though have the best ratings we've had. And by the way, I beat Fox and 18 to 34. I was the only MSMEC show to beat Fox in any demographic. Okay. And they're that we're moving you down on the weekends. Why? They won't say it, but Phil did say it earlier on he had pulled me into his office. This is still different than that. No resident. Yeah. Of MSMBC. And he said, I was, I was in Washington. And they're not happy with your tone. Washington's not happy. Yeah. What's like a movie? It is. It's not, but it's a B-rate movie. And it's I'm like, I believe you. I work for a film girlfriend. So I know who I will always like, but he's not a genius at all. And so he says true things out loud because he doesn't sort of know. I mean, I can literally picture him saying, Jenka Washington's not happy. Yeah. He know he went further. He said, outsiders are cool. And they wear leather jackets and ride motorcycles. Okay. But we're NBC. We're not outsiders. We're insiders. I'm like, Phil, this is a dumb speech. And I'm the very last guy on earth. You should be giving this speech to, right? So that's why he offered to double my salary when he said move to the weekends. Because the only way you stay on cable news is if you play ball, of course, right? And at some point, apparently you were, they were not happy with you. Apparently. And that was the message I received. Yes. Yeah. Who never explained it, but I don't, I didn't care. Now, when I said no to MSNBC, and when you came off of Fox, in their minds, we were gone. We were dead. We didn't exist anymore. But yet here we are. No, I think that I'm thankful to God all the time for that. But no, I totally agree. And part of it's the technology. And I just wasn't farsighted or broad minded enough to see it early at all. I mean, I was busy scrambling up the greasy pole. And I of television. And I didn't, I don't know. I didn't see it. You know, I made fun of Rogan. I've told Rogan this. I made fun of Rogan. Oh, a podcast. So I'm sure a lot of people listen to that. Or the internet. I was like the internet, please. So you saw it. I wish I had seen it. I didn't. But I also think it's not just technology. It's a way of thinking. And it's super obvious wrote a part of a book on this one, that that you're opening one is the truest thing. Some of this is real. A lot of it is fake. Go fight amongst yourselves while we loot the place like that is true. Yeah. So what they do is they eventually remove anyone who objects to the system. Exactly. Right. So another good example is Dylan Radigan. So Dylan Radigan was always admired Dylan Radigan. Yeah. He was a CNBC started their two most successful shows. Biggest most successful anchor they've ever had. But after 2008 crash, he said it was the banks because it was the banks. How is that controversial? And CNBC had to take him off the air. Who else was it? Who else was it? The borrowers? It's the borrowers fault that was the loan. The banks. So that's how the ecosystem works. Those banks pay the politicians. By the way, number one donor do hope and change Obama in 2008 or the banks. Okay. So then they get a giant bailout and their bonuses are paid. And with some of those winnings, they funnel the money back to the politicians and then how they control media. Well, banks are also huge advertisers. Wait, but are you, is that true? I mean, okay. So oh, it happens. The global financial crisis totally changed the world forever. And there's not a single human being on this person who could say it wasn't the banks. I mean, what else would it be if it wasn't the banks? It was only the banks. It was the banks by definition. And he actually got taken off the air for saying that because if you can't say that, then you can acknowledge like daylight or gravity. Yeah. Because then that's true. that's really what happened. That's definitely what happened. Yes. And it's pretty wild. They said it was the borrowers. They did with the borrowers. Yes. It was their fault. They were being irresponsible. They should know. They shouldn't have borrowed. So they wrote their own loans. Is that what they, is that the allegation? I mean, why did some housekeeper Clark County Nevada was writing bad loans to herself? And Golly, we couldn't tell because we didn't do any due diligence on that well, why didn't you do any due diligence on that? Exactly. Right. Because they didn't care. And because they were using it for collateralized debt obligations and leveraging it up 100 to one and gambling with our money, they weren't actually mortgages. They were financial instruments. And we thought we were taking bank loans. They were loading that money out of interest and then we were getting the, you know, equity and household. It was not what it was. And Dylan talks about how in the beginning we used to do wealth creation. Right. Now mainly it's wealth extraction. Yeah, have noticed. And so those donors have having bought Congress and the media are sitting there and extracting as much from us as humanly possible. The oil companies are very successful. Some of the top companies in the world. Yeah. Very, very profitable. We give them $35 billion in subsidies. Every year. Why? I don't know. Why is the average person working their ass off in Kansas? Barely making, you know, the rent or the mortgage have to give money to these incredibly profitable companies to incentivize oil drilling we're here. Do they need further incentive? I thought capitalism was the incentive. I thought profit was the incentive. Why do I have to further incentivize oil companies to do their jobs? You can point. Since it's determined by the market price of oil, the per barrel price of oil, which is set on international markets, no individual controls that. And so when it's profitable to drill for oil or gas, they do. And when it's not, they don't like it. That's all the market. Right. Yeah. And so and here's another thing that's never corrected on cable news, even though it would be against Trump. So they have every reason to to publicize this. So when we invade Venezuela, where we attack Venezuela, and now we're getting their oil. Right. But wait, who's we? The American people don't get the oil of Venezuela. It has nothing to do with the American people. No Exxon mobile gets a contract. Chevron gets a contract with Venezuela. They get the oil. They get the profits. They sell it on the world market, not just the American market at all. They have no obligation. If they want, they don't have to sell Americans a single ounce of that oil because it is their oil, not our oil. And why does that even matter? Because Exxon mobile otherwise would have had to pay a higher price to get Venezuelan oil. It's not like they couldn't. They could just make a deal with Venezuela. But they chose not to because they thought it would be too expensive. So instead, we have to start a war. We have to pay for that war. And then we pay oil subsidies on top for the oil companies. And they get the oil. They settle on the world markets. It doesn't lower our prices at all. And so what did we get out of this? Well, so the plan on this and who knows how to work out. I don't know. But the plan is for the administration to negotiate the oil contracts. And for the money to go to the administration and then to be doled out to the treasury and then the companies. That's the state of plan. It happened to be there the other day when they were talking about it. So is the plan to take a percentage of the Venezuelan oil and just give it to America? Yes. That is unprecedented. That's the stated plan. I'm not an expert. I'm not, you know, an energy person. I'm interested, but I'm not an expert. I don't speak Spanish. Like there's a lot of ignorance. And of course, I can't see the future. But yes, that's the stated plan. That's what Trump said to I was having lunch with Trump. And he's like, oh, come to the oil meeting. I'm like, I don't, you know, it's just my world. So I was like, okay. So I go up there and all these heads of the big oil companies, including Exxon, they didn't seem too enthusiastic about it. But we'll see. And I just happen to be sitting in the room totally by accident, literally by accident because he's asking to come. And he's like, he's telling him, he's like, no, no, this is for our country. And you'll get a cut that I will decide. You know, I can just tell you what I saw. So that's a, that's not how it should work, right? Because when you say to a different country, we're going to come and we're taking your natural resources. And we're just going to take a certain amount for us, period, sad day for you. What'll happen is, an insurgency, people will be mad about that. Well, that's the concern. I mean, and the other point that he made again, I don't know where this is going, I am literally praying for stability in Venezuela and around the world, I hate the chaos, I hate the chaos in Israel. And we show so much, we unleash so much. It's just the worst thing that we do. But the idea is that they have cash, big time cash shortages, you have to pay the military, you have to pay the government workers, you have to make sure inflation is an added control of the currency as in collapse, et cetera, et cetera. And that oil profits will go to Venezuela. This is the stated aim to keep the country from falling apart and to prevent insurgencies, which they're afraid of. Because then like, how is that a win? Yeah. So I to say that I'm enormously skeptical. Yeah, I get it. I get it. I get it. So you know, in Iraq, we didn't get any of the oil, the oil companies got it. And it didn't help us at all. I've been mad about it ever since. We call the a lot of the Latin American countries, banana republics why we did coos on behalf of banana come press. It's not their fault. It's our fault. Our banana did we get the bananas? No. We call the lot of the Latin American countries banana republics why we did coos on behalf of banana come press it's not there fault is our fault our banana did we get the bananas no Dolan got the banana exactly they sold them at us at a the same exact price they just had a higher profit More right we literally attack countries for haliburgans profit for doled. I'm aware of these Profits so who is we who is the American people right and and when do we ever get represented? I could not I've you know I vehemently agree on and the space between intent and reality is Often very wide so you don't you know you don't know what's going to happen but it's I the only thing that I learned And I was didn't go to Washington To talk about Venezuela, but I just happen to see this The main thing that I learned is what's being described Is a brand new brand new system Whether that'll happen you know a lot of powerful forces don't want it to happen But that's what is being described is a totally new arrangement See yeah, so look my sense of it is when you go and you attack other countries Our military is amazing Best the world best that's ever been created right. Yeah, so that was an amazing mission that they didn't mean as well An amazing one they didn't run but you do three or four of those and you're gonna get burned because it's just a matter of chance I think that's I think that's right and yeah, just rolling It's just rolling. I know I agree with everything that you said and just in general. It's good to Know your limits. I think humility is important I think you can really get hurt I've gotten hurt in my life because I imagined I'd power as I didn't have like I think it's a very male thing I could do that. Yeah, and so guys. I just want to honest that no once we lose some men right like I don't know where it's gonna happen. I don't know if it's in Venezuela or on or somewhere else Somebody's gonna get shot down. We'll lose 12 13 guys. Whatever's gonna happen right. Let's you know Don't panic don't let them she purd you into saying well that means we got to Put more troops in I agree right now. We got to get revenge. So then oh my now We lost a hundred guys now We got to dig in even more and more and more so that you know whether it's ex-automobler Israel Whoever's profiting off of it could not agree more because you open yourself up to manipulation on false flags and we've seen many many false flags I would say there are a bunch of things about the Reagan record. I would not defend I don't think anyone should defend but in 19 October of 83 have this horrible barracks bombing and rain barracks killed over 200 men Marines Horrible truly horrible bombing and Reagan did not invade Lebanon You know happy and Beirut. He did not invade. I mean that and People were really on him like you can't you're gonna let those murders go unavenged and He said I don't think it's wise It wasn't always wise, but in this case. I think he was wise. He didn't invade Beirut. We could have you know I voted the last I used to be Republican growing up and the last Republican I voted for was George H.W. Bush and So why did I vote for him? because he I thought he did something very principled. He said look Iraq invaded Kuwait Yeah, and we can't have that there are now in their sovereign country and if sovereign countries attack one another There'll be no end to it right okay So then they said okay, and I like that. I like the first person go for I in fact at college. I did a pro war rally Okay, actually actually at Penn yes. I was on I got a fox fort and it debated a anti war Guy and Philadelphia over okay, so is that tape available? Yeah, it's it's the my first TV appearance With that and that must have been 91 92 Yeah, and that may sing yeah, and so look I don't think I do a pro war rally today probably not right and and people change and that's what also had an awful lot of war Right. We've had an awful lot of war from 1991 or to the present. I don't know how many wars in 35 years. We've had a lot of wars Yeah, and at that point we didn't we left Vietnam in 1975 and And you know, we'd we'd grenade a But we didn't really have a lot of wars between Vietnam and right so is it yeah people had a different memory Yeah, and so first of all, you know one of the things that we emphasize are young turkeys uh Open hearts open minds. Amen, and so and I'm one of the things I tell the audience is if I didn't believe in open minds I would have stayed a Republican so So so you gotta have you gotta be thinking you gotta be looking at new evidence data So in that case it was actually not a bad war I mean wars are always terrible, but perjorie go for we go in it's very limited We freaked weight and we get the hell out. Yeah, and the decision. I like the most was He did not go into Iraq at the time Israel and others are going going Iraq going to Iraq. They were mad that we didn't go. Yeah And the guy who held the line was Dick Cheney of all people he has a secretary Dispatched and he said no it makes no strategic sense for America to go into Iraq What are we gonna do with it? And that was really Appreciant and right and it's amazing what happens to people and I don't know what happened to Dick Cheney But he then turns around, you know, just some small amount of time later working for George W Bush And it says we gotta go into Iraq We gotta go into Iraq and then of course Halliburton makes a tremendous profit Israel's super happy The defense contractors are super happy. We think that Iraq was a waste. We lost trillions of dollars We lost thousands of men Americans that died on foreign soil or were destroyed, you know for the rest of their lives Yeah, I mean, you must know so much Yeah But it wasn't a loss for the donor class for the donor class. They won they want spectacularly The fast contractors oil companies the speculators on Wall Street They all literally made it killing right and at the time Israel was saying that's our number one enemy You have to attack Iraq. Yeah, so it's the whole puzzle. It's not just one thing It's and there's another piece to it, which is there's no power like the power to end human life There's a thrill that people derive In being able to extinguish another person's life because it it's a godlike power You know, and I've certainly seen it a lot, you know and people just like Not because they're evil or because they hate and but they're just like oh my gosh. I'm so powerful It's unbelievable. I can literally kill someone And it's allowed boy that is Addictive and the more you do it the more you like it. Yeah, I'm worried about it And so look back to hope So back then the media was terrible and 69% of Americans thought the Saddam Hussein had personally attacked Us on 9-11 man. Now if I thought Saddam attacked the same state of peace. Yeah. Yeah If I thought that I would be for attacking Iraq. I mean attacking us on 9-11 was terrible Right, we need to make sure that that never happens again. There needs to be consequences. Is that true? 69% of Americans thought that yes At the time of the invasion seven out of ten. Why? Because mainstream media systematically lied to them. They implicitly lied they would have Dick Cheney come on and say Iraq is from the same general region as al-Qaeda Now wait a minute if you were a journalist you would say but sir Iraq is a post-al-Qaeda They execute al-Qaeda on the spot right? But they didn't say that Meet the press Tim Rosser didn't say it when Dick Cheney said no I interviewed Cheney during that period two on embarrassed to say probably said it to me I don't even remember but that's so bad Well, there are two main things they kept saying Tucker and and young terms of sold We were on the air at the time online. Okay, and knowing that case the radio, okay And so we're only two shows against Iraq war young Turks in the mind. We're seeing now Okay, and so we're it that were national and we're going no They didn't attack us and everybody in media is a shut up shut up and patriotic On on patreon support the troops. I'm like yeah, I suppose troops. I don't want them to die And for no reason when they didn't attack us. Yeah, the second thing was weapons of mass destruction And where do we get the fake intelligence on weapons of mass destruction? Israel yep as laundered through the New York Times as laundered through the New York Times So now wait. Where's the hope now look at the media now CNN MSM. See we just had a conversation 10 minutes ago about how they're becoming irrelevant Who cares right they went from the gods of the universe right getting to set the narrative And you want to Iraq war. We're gonna give you an Iraq war right you want subsidies. We're giving you subsidies You want to end negotiating prices. We're gonna end negotiation of prices and we're not gonna say any no one's allowed to say That's anti-capitalist anti-free market no one's allowed to say anything outside of these tight rules How do you know that well? I said things outside of those tight rules and they said you gotta go right and they do that They did it to deal around again. They did it to you. They do it to everyone But now the podcast have swarmed them. Yeah, now we're larger than them So now that we're larger than them the dynamic has changed so The left and the right didn't abandon Israel for good cause excellent cause they didn't abandon them for no reason They abandoned them because mainstream media does not dominate anymore if there were no online media Nobody would have heard about any of the terrible things. They know none of it none of it So here I'll give you one fact that's startling You know we can talk about the incredible amount of deaths and the children who died and they killed more journalists than the rest of the Conflicing the world come hundreds of journalists over 250 journalists. Okay. Some of them assassinated Included in American journalists. Oh, I know this was pre not October 20th October 7th but Shreen oblock lays an American journalist. Oh shot with scoped rifles at a distance wearing a press I don't even like journalists that much, but that's like that's such an atrocity. I can't believe it happened Yeah, they we know even the New York Times in CNN was like yeah, that's an assassination shot from hundreds of yards away Sniper make sure that get them in the neck doesn't hit the vest doesn't hit the helmet and kills them. Okay, so Jamal Khushogi When he was killed by the Saudis that became an enormous story good. Good. I don't want anybody chopped up That's a Washington Post columnist. That was crazy and they got condemned and they should Israel assassinates an American journalist like a hookahres Wait, did the person get arrested who shot her who gave the order? Have we asked for extradition of that person? Nothing and supposedly American commentators like celebrate Rachel Corey with some lefty girl gets run over by a bulldozer I don't know that I agree with Rachel Corey on much, but she's an American. I think from like Pennsylvania. Yeah, she's a girl And she gets killed and Ben Shapiro's like well, don't stand in front of bulldozers like I don't know that's your fellow American Like don't you care that a foreign country murdered an American? No default one of the guys who was delivering food got killed. Oh, yeah, Jacob flicking. Flicking jury if I'm not mistaken You can get a look up his name, but No cost questist no one arrested no one goes to jail, but wait you murdered him You murdered an American you murdered nine Americans shouldn't every consequence But these days now the the ultimate fact I was gonna get to is So they how do you tell if a group is a terrorist organization? They target civilians. How do you know they target civilians because they have a very high civilian kill ratio? So for example Hamas on October 7th they killed civilians and military. They go hundreds of military guys They killed more civilians. Yeah, see seven percent of the people they killed were civilians. Yeah, so terrorist group clear obvious that's terrorism. That's terrorism. Okay In Gaza Israel civilian kill ratio is 83 percent It is worse than Hamas in fact it is worse than any terrorist organization in the world 83 percent and at scale tens of thousands potentially hundreds of thousands of people killed 83 percent civilians They say no you have to apply that label unevenly and Unfairly you only apply it to our enemies, but if we do worse than them You are not to ever say it and that figure by the way comes from the Israeli press The Israeli press is way better than the American press I've noticed. Yeah, you know why because they can't call them anti-Semites. Right. It's totally right So they can't end the career of anyone who criticizes Israel because they're all Israelis, right? But here in America if you report the same thing you're gonna be called an anti-Semite And they're gonna try to get your fired shut you up and ruin your life. Yeah, so that is why not playing along Exactly, but that's my point about hope no one on TV has ever said what the Israeli press is reported that Israel has an 83 percent civilian kill ratio in IDF is basically a terrorist organization and they have killed 70 times The number of people Hamas is killed and they've killed more civilians as a percentage But we're forced to fund that terrorist organization But no one on TV will ever tell you that because if they do They know that they are risking getting fired And so I talked to Ryan Graham from drop site news about this just a couple of days ago on our show We do young tourists from 6 a.m. Eastern every day on YouTube that at 8 p.m. We're doing a show called revolution Okay, peaceful nonviolent political revolution So you must take power away from them if you don't take power away from the lobbies Then you're forever going to be their surface, right now you could do that in dumb ways like violence But that's not gonna work and it's even more or you could do that through the way that our founding fathers design through Democracy right take their power away at the voting booth primaries are golden go do primaries and And that's why I make sure you meet a so but Ryan's on and I go hey Ryan you guys have done these brilliant stories connecting I've seen the intelligence. There's no question about it has anyone followed up from mainstream media New York Times and said he's like no no He said look we're going through a cache of emails that are actually public They can actually beat us to the scoop and I tell our competitors Beat us to the scoop and they won't do it They won't do it so then we got a new conversation. Why won't they do it? He said look There's no I totally agree there's no grand conspiracy. There's no memos rib But every reporter in DC knows and if you do a story on Israel Even if it's a hundred percent factual You're risking your career. You want your kids to get into college as James Carverle said that's exactly right Well, you found out you want your kids to get into high school? No can't get into high school now that happened to you Yeah, I've seen very similar things and so Yeah, that's intolerable. I you know, I have a pretty high tolerance for You know a corrupt ruling class. I think every ruling class is corrupt to some extent but I have zero tolerance for Humiliation unnecessary humiliation and for cruelty to people's families as your tolerance there's never except that and That's what's happening now and cruelty to the families is really and you shouldn't be surprised look with what they're Remirting all these kids in Gaza. You think they You know different attitudes. Not American attitudes at all So the naivete is something we were also taught by mainstream media Right. Oh the what the government says is true and if you disagree with what the government says your conspiracy theorist Wait a that presupposes that the government never lies Not just the US government no government ever lies Israel never lies Turkey never lies nobody ever lies Or you know that has not been my experience Okay, Norma right number two they say um If you say the government is lying you're a whacko You're more easy. Yeah, you're immoral and you should be banned for media You should be canceled right so that way There's no voices to oppose the government inside of media and press and German as the oppressed the population So like you go I've been a million monarchies in my life and some of them are well run and others are not But in the well run ones you can say well, there's no freedom. You can all that criticism as the king Okay, but which I'm opposed to I'm American. I'm a totally different frame However, if the country's well run and the people are prosperous and happy and they're Think that their children are better lives than they do at least you could say well I'm doing a good job for the people here But if you run a government that systematically oppresses the people So thoroughly that their life expectancy drops and then you say you're not allowed to say a word about my leadership That can't stand like that doesn't have A long lifespan that's too much like nobody can can handle that right and that's where we are oh I know and so that's why Now in the podcast for us and it's not just you and me right you got Tim Dylan and Theo Vaughn and everyone is now speaking up and Saying no enough So I must no must and so I noticed the Americans they killed I noticed the 20,000 kids They killed I noticed all the civilians they killed and I noticed the The Congress that they bought and I noticed that the media is in their pockets I you know the Congress is obvious. They literally get paid to support Israel let alone whatever you know other interesting You know material they might have from Epstein or whoever else right And and now I see the media So now I see it this is an awesome development tucker Not just saying hey, I'm done with Israel or I'm done with money in politics That's my number one issue Israel is just a symbol money politics is the cancer That's that's why we lost our democracy That's why we lost control of our government because they're just working for the people bribing them. It's Yes, it's a problem that Israel is a symptom. It's not the cause of all this stuff exactly so But on top layered on top of all that the thing that gives me the greatest hope is that people are beginning to see the illusion Oh, they're getting us to fight one another Okay, what are the culture wars? What is identity politics? So as the a lot of the left was doing identity politics We're a lone voice the young Turks very much in favor of Bernie very As left is against in the biggest show on the left for a long long time, right? But we're saying don't do identity politics. Okay. Why? Because identity politics splits the support exactly okay So now you've got to get past that and people are beginning to get past it Conflicts that can't be resolved like you and I are mad at each other our kids are mad at each other Our grandkids are mad at each other like these are not fixable problems if you have tribal conflict It can endure for centuries or longer Testing one thing. I think it's super important is that you can't allow people to force you to lie ever and you will lie, you know Inevitably and you will say things that are wrong unintentionally I've done both But allowing somebody to force you to say something you know is not true Destroy's you as a person and I look at I mean, I could name many people but my cook we have known for over 30 years Almost 35 years because I worked in Arkansas at the newspaper and he's a completely different person Completely that's a broken man and I say that with heartful compassion That's a guy who's allowed other people To steal his integrity and force him to lie and you become a husk And no man can live like that. It's like it's a it's a 1984 Winston Smith thing like once you say two plus two equals five You're broken inside like don't allow people to force you to lie and just need to say that Yeah gaslighting is almost a Industrial version of torture. It is it's totally is a portrait of a dignity from you So on the left you got Fatterman and Richie Torres that are like that on the right You got Huckabee and Lizzy Gramm and Ted Cruz and notice Huh, they told us to fight each other, but they seem to agree an awful when these are unhappy people either They paid a huge cost like so they all think they're getting something out of this and whatever they think they're getting I can't imagine but what they're afraid of threats or whatever But in the end they lose when you allow other people to treat you like a slave and to repeat their lies You are destroyed and you have to live it that for the rest of your life. Don't ever take that deal Talker. Let me give you one more analogy that clarifies that. Yes, so it's like a a movie Where they tell you Hey, you know what your your wife came in With this baby that she found and it's a victim and you guys are gonna adopt it and she's so Golden-hearted and she brought the kid home and you go okay great Let me see the kid and a guy walks in and goes here first I gotta give you some glasses Okay, and he gives you glasses and you put him on and you oh my god. What a cute. I have no idea where this analogy's going But I love it. Okay. Yeah, totally wrapped up it. Okay. Yeah, so and you and your wife is nursing The kid and feeding it etc. And then one day you go. I wonder what it things look like without the glasses and The guy who gave me the glasses because no no no don't take the glasses off don't take the glass off Now you're like wait a minute I really want to take the glasses. Yeah, right and you take the glasses off and you find out The glasses were the illusion. It's not a baby. It's a grown man. Oh, and he's been inside your house the whole time You're on your wife cuddling your wife Taking your money. He's got like a almost a half shirt on big belly Airy guy he's sitting on your couch with your wife suckling suckling it turns out The glasses were the thing that made you see it wrong and made it seem like it was an innocent victim a little baby You were taking care of now. You find out you got a grown man inside your house Pawn on your wife and draining your checking account now the question is who are you most mad at? Okay, I'm the least mad at the guy first though The first action I'm going to take even though I'm the least mad at him is You got a leaf You got to leave the house right now. Otherwise something terrible. The man child. Yes, the man can on your wife. Okay. Yeah, I grew to agree that Okay, first step is get the fuck out of my house Okay Second guy I'm mad at is the guy who gave me the glasses Yeah, what the fuck you made it seemed like it was an innocent victim and I was being a good guy by helping this Entity okay, and now I find out no it was just someone taking advantage of me. Yes and taking the person who was supposed to be closest to me that was supposed to have trust with me. Yes And taking all my money And you played me for a fool I fucking hate the guy with the glasses, right? But the person I'm most upset is the betrayer is the betrayer The wife in that case. It's an uncomfortable adieu. You could switch it. The husband and wife. That's not the point The point is yes, if you don't get it by now whether it's Israel or any really lobby any donor class That's the baby the guy with the glasses is the media saying oh no These poor little oil companies. They need your money Look at it. It's a victim. Otherwise. They can't real for oil these drug companies. They've only made trillions. You can't let them negotiate prices Right or it's Israel. Oh, it's an innocent victim of all the nasty Muslims and terrorists around them And then you look at the map wait a minute Israel's gained all this territory and they've done it by taking 300 billion from us But most importantly The wife is the politicians. Yes, and they're supposed to represent us and they have betrayed us Okay, and I can't stand it. I can't stand it. It's time for a divorce. It's time for a divorce So everyone's got to get out of the house first the hairy guy. You got to go. Okay, otherwise We're gonna have trouble Then the guy with the glasses and then finally the wife everybody's got to go. We're gonna get a fresh new start Operation consequences.com. Okay. I can't I literally could do this interview for 10 hours and never improve on that analogy So I want to end with that. That was amazing. Oh, that was a Wake-up thingy about that in a cold sweat Thank you. That was amazing. Thank you. Don't ever appreciate