So I've heard you say that the United States is in a civil war and I think most Americans don't perceive that Can you tell us what you mean? Well that I mean by a civil war I should say a type of civil war, right? And what I mean is that there are irreconcilable differences that Each side is willing to fight for in order to get the outcomes that they want and that in that environment The issues of how does the legal system work? Is that gonna stand in the way of that fight or is there going to be a fight that will Make the cause more important than anything so That's the type of situation that we're in and those gaps We understand there's comment there's wealth and values gaps. Right rendering to this this is We've seen this through history So where that goes is a different question, but we are in that type of civil war. Are we not clearly? We are clearly we are How are they resolved me clearly they can be well through violence? But what are the other ways you resolve the kind of conflict we have normally? They resolve through conflict because you get to the point where both sides can't Reach agree been both sides don't even want to talk both sides don't want to respect the rule of the law So when we're dealing with things like sanctuary city issues, right? We're dealing with enforceability Who has the enforceability? Okay, and you almost have to play out Okay enforceability means police forces and such things right? People with guns and you know causes that just because the legal things as they shouldn't do that That's not gonna stand in the way we have that kind of a situation So we are probably past the point of being able to resolve that by compromise and Empathy and all of that so normally it goes that way. I mean the only thing that it can be done Is to have the fear of that Created necessity for having Another path, you know like we were talking about the death situation. Yes So can can there be a fiscal commission that gets together and then achieves those things or not? I think it's unlikely. I think we're going to more fragmentation states there are some states other other states. I think we're going to see more fragmentation and so but you know it's like this dynamic through history This isn't the first time this happened this happens repeatedly through history and usually You know it runs its course So the way our leaders in the United States would dealt with it over the past 30 years has just been to ignore it Completely distinct. Well, there's a cycle, you know the cycle was Let's say I don't know Ronald Reagan and Tip O'Neill and Ray get together and they were operating in a certain way and the Manifestations of the circumstances, you know the manifestations of dead or wealth gap or values gaps were not as great So you didn't over that 30 year period have as much polarity in many different ways So now you've gone to greater polarity if you watch statistics. I Everything I do comes from measuring things. Yes. Look at statistics the gap in measuring conservative or liberal Um votes in the house in the Senate is the greatest gap since 1900 and The voting across party lines Is the least since 1900 so you see this gap you see it you see it in the elections right the green and so The blue and red so We're not it's not just an evolutioner. It's where we are where we have gotten to that is the ir reconcileable questions Does the Supreme Court? You know we thought about the Supreme Court differently Not long ago right the Supreme Court was the Supreme Court And so now it's different So what accounts I mean there are million ways to measure this in all of them. Do we do you agree? Wow, of course I agree of course I agree and I and I agree we think that every measurement shows the same result Which is the kind of okay, so we know where we are But it what completely and we're not sure how it's resolved, but I think Also causing to ask What happened? What was the change that led to the polarization? It was unimaginable even 35 years ago um the change was in a combination The system working well for the majority of the people and which has to do with the majority of the people not being productive You have productivity equals income Right, okay, so now if you take education And you take measures of how productive or how well trained you're going to be You see and therefore also income your productivity you see by all of these measures Great great gaps that exist. So by way of example is Unicorns and the changes that we're seeing fabulous changes in what we're seeing in Technologies yes, but it really comes down to if you take the number of people who Have been making those changes and have a unicorns in this wonderful world They go to the best universities and they make these wonderful things happen That's about three million people in a country of a little over 330 million people and if you take the average 60% of Americans have below a sixth grade reading level 60% of Americans. So when we deal with education you have to make that population for duct and and through productivity they become educated and They become productive the earned money and you have a better facility so a number of things change that It was the combination of globalization. Yeah, and technology Think about I remembered and you probably remember what the middle-class working on an assembly line at an auto plant was like and how Manufacturing occurred. Yes, okay a combination of foreign producers and Automation changed all that of course So that produces a larger wealth gap and then with that wealth gap. We also have very large Values gaps, but it's driven by the wealth cap It's it's both you know some population here we are at the world government summit summit in Dubai and you have very Globalization and everybody the elites let's call them the elites where they're among the elites are here doing deals and then You know facing questions and all of that And at the same time then there's those who are dealing with their basics so Wealth gaps contribute to it, but there's also values gaps Technology is part of the reason that we're here religion yes You know belief systems These are important too. Of course But we're on the edge of this AI Transformation which seems like it's going to accelerate the trends that have led us to where we are right now So what do you I mean if Artificial intelligence you know increases efficiency but leaves an even greater number of people without meaningful work In the United States There needs to be a game plan Yeah, okay There needs to be a game plan That's the main thing in other words. I can describe the circumstance. Yes Okay, and we can agree that there needs to be a game plan Well, let me ask you since I'm not responsible Everybody you spend your life talking everybody and you know you're one of the world's biggest investors so it you know You're taking these questions here. So Are you familiar with a game plan in progress like there is not a game plan at all? No That seems crazy. You know it seems crazy. It seems of We are going from a transition. I'm just being analytical. Yes mechanical. Okay. We are going from from a transition in which there is I Don't know collectivism a Multi-national You know all the constituents working together kind of environment that has also created bureaucracy and inefficiencies and so on so you're going from a Environment in which there was a world health organization of right trade organization a world bank and all of that to you know lateral I it in my own interest In other words as a country or within a country as a constituency my tribe what is my interest and you're going to fight for it so we have evolved into that kind of A of the land. Yes situation and so the question is almost what is the we who is in control? Okay, I mean we change control very quickly So and then who has the plan? So now you get in control you fight to get into control your in control You've got to do things quickly and you're doing things quickly You know we don't have the continuity to be able to work together to be able to have a plan Well to be more specific about it I would say that people developing the technologies so they would be very strange companies of course but also Google and Microsoft Conqueror you're so idealistic, but Realistic yes, we all should work together I'm merely saying if I'm You know unleashing something on the global population Then I think it's fair to ask me like what you know like what do you expect to happen to everybody? I think no, but I think that's what I mean The notion that it's fair to Denies the reality that we're in an environment of pursuit of self interest So if you take the fight let's say of technologies Of course the one who wants to get the latest AI out it wants to beat the other one who does it let alone an American firm in the Chinese firm And I'm just trying to describe the reality of the water tucker So now let's look at those realities. That's the reality So when you say they should Okay, that's the theoretical should they should come up with rules that is better for the harmony of the people as a whole Okay, I agree they should I guess But you're absolutely right And I'm not not here to sort of inspire a moral lecture from your deliver one I just want to kind of know what you think is going to happen So you have these technologies is it fair to say that they really are as transformative there is big and huge Hugely Yeah, the greatest so I've studied history right. Yes. I study You know what was the impact of The printing press and what was the impact of for the industrial revolutions and so on This in my opinion is the biggest impact that we have because it will revolutionize all Thinking that applies to everything and applies to everything so whatever you're doing It will make it much more efficient much more powerful But that includes wars too, you know everything is going to be radically Transformed because anything that we apply thinking to is going to be very much transformed by it We did an interview with a woman called Casey means she's a Stanford educated surgeon And really one of the most remarkable people I have ever met In the interview she explained how the food that we eat produced by Huge food companies big food in conjunction with pharma Is destroying our health making this a week and sick country the levels of chronic disease are beyond belief Well Casey means who we've not stopped thought thinking about ever since Is the co-founder of a healthcare technology company called levels and we are proud to announce today that we are partnering with levels And by proud I mean sincerely proud levels is a really interesting Company and a great product it gives you insight into what's going on inside your body your metabolic health It helps you understand how the food that you're eating the things that you're doing every single day or affecting your body in real time And you don't think about it You have no idea what you're putting in your mouth and you have no idea what it's doing to your body But over time you feel weak Entired and spicy and over even longer periods. I mean get really sick So it's worth knowing what the food you eat is doing to you The levels app works with something called a continuous glucose monitor a CGM You can get one as part of the planer you can bring your own. It doesn't matter But the bottom line is big tech big pharma and big food combine together to form an incredibly malevolent force Pumping you full of garbage unhealthy food with artificial sugars And hurting you and hurting the entire country. So with levels you'll be able to see immediately what all this is doing to you You get access to real-time personalized data And that's a critical step to changing your behavior. Those of us who like Oreos can tell you firsthand This isn't talking to your doctor at anual physical looking backwards about things you did in the past This is up to the second information on how your body is responding to different foods and activities The things that give you stress your sleep etc etc It's easy to use You powerful personalized health data and you can make much better choices about how you feel and over time It'll have a huge effect right now you can get an additional two free months when you go to levels.link slash Tucker that's levels Dot link slash Tucker this is beginning of what we hope will be a long and happy partnership With levels and doctor Casey means Can you give us some concrete examples that you believe will come to pass? You know in the next few years what will change That we at this point can understand well right now A quart test of of a eyes is We all of them can pass tests that are Equivalent to the PhDs in all Fields in One mind so that there is What we call molly paths the people who Can think both across domains so in that we have these operating so that they It's not just like a PhD in one area. It's like a PhD in all areas and that it could look across those areas and give you answers and Operate that way that is created the there's an acceleration of this because it compounds as it learns the learning compounds and it produces that so that is a reality today People just haven't yet experienced all of that and so you're very quickly going to be in a situation where the Problems are going to be given to it You're going to ask its strategies and so on that can take into consideration All of the things that are happening from everywhere and how the cause effect relationships work Think about it this way. There's so much complexity in the world everything That where you know what happened there's their economic policies or economic things there are financial things there are Health things they're all of these things and they all relate to each other. It's you know It's called I think the butterfly syndrome, you know Butterfly changes flaps its wings. It has these of course secondary consequences This is all very complex It's very complex for the human mind to think about those things We're now having a situation where it can all be taken into consideration and be a partner a thought partner that can actually go beyond our capacities to think about those relationships and In thinking about those relationships and so on it has an enormous impact Somebody in medical area was giving me the example of Learning about all the causes But with the data that they're going to have on each one of us about What were our experiences and what is our diagnosis of your each of the parts and you watch that over time? What what air do you breathe? What environment are you in? What stress are you in and all that? That that will be the understanding of these cause effect relationships that in turn change things and then you go down to the microscopic level of dealing with practically at the molecular or cell level in dealing with these problems, okay? Changing of DNA and these types of things all of those we are in the midst of a tremendous revolutionary change What about the field of economics? Can you take kind of the art in the guessing out of the office? You're saying you have said many times you've written a lot about it but the need of governments to get Down to 3% GDP with their debt So where else everything collapses How do you do that and always political consequences the population doesn't want less money spent on them? Obviously you could get you know governments falling and stuff Wouldn't AI just solve that for you? I you said it produces strategies. There's Does AI control human nature? No, okay. Human nature My bet is that human nature is going to be the biggest force And it's all been to come down to like how we are with each other I'm so glad though, so they'll be room for human beings still even those we're changing DNA and implanting ships and our reasons well if not we're lost and if so We're dealing with each other Yeah, I don't know how well that's going to go either But I wonder like that you know, there's still debates. I mean you're effectively the economist The debates about supply side versus demand side like what is you know, what is the near and far-term effect? I'm aware going to we're going to be able to understand at a mic or a level how things work better exactly Okay, so by the way Again, I put out this This writings of this study that shows the mechanics And I want to convey that mechanics so everybody can see the mechanics But you're going to go down to a molecular level that means like nowadays We or policy makers like the Federal Reserve think about Something like inflation right and they'll be maybe five measures of inflation and We're using the term inflation Because our minds are limited in its capacity to the of the number of things we could think about right when we're now in this new reality Which we now are you can go down to a Molecular level essentially and saying I could see all the different Transactions of what was bought and what was so exactly and why and now I can really have a level of Understanding we don't have to be at this grand level that we don't we're going to be at the molecular level of Understanding individual transactions and what's affecting them and be able to deploy Resources at the individual molecular level just like we can do it in biology or Physical existence and so on so I mean this will suck lots of downsides to AI obviously I'd I'd read it I would end it if I could but there are upsides and this sounds like one of them So like if you of course so we have the COVID again and we're thinking about suyish and COVID checks With AI we can know What the money's going for and that'll change everything will change the controls and it but it is of course a two-edged sword right It'll change who controls it who has access to it who can use it Detramentally to other people all of these things are part of the questions Is there any way to avoid like totalitarian social controls under AI with AI? I think there's a question of whether you can have social and and totalitarian Tortellitarian controls or maybe you just have anarchy. I mean, I don't know where we're going. I don't I can't tell you I cannot tell you what this world. I do believe we're going to go through a time warp Okay, what I mean it's going to feel like You're going through over the next five years and that environment is because of these five major forces that has to all of these things and The changes in the technologies particularly artificial intelligence and related technologies So the world five years from now is going to be a radically different world And I don't know what that's going to look like when you go into the world of quantum computing And what quantum is like in so many different ways it raises questions of you know What is that like I'm not smart enough to tell you what that world is going to be better for 50 years? Is in control. I don't know who's in control. Okay, so but right So this is like the opposite of what you've done your whole life where you try to predict You know five years hence that's your whole business, right? Well, that's I said my My business is try to predict but I would say the first thing whatever success. I've had in life has more to Been due to my knowing how to deal with what I don't know Then anything I know okay, so how you deal with what you don't know I believe okay is so Important so I guess my my business in a nutshell is I try to find a bunch of bets that I think are good bets But of diversify well so that I have a bunch of diversified right that's because I Do not know I mean in terms of my actual track record I've probably been right about 65% of the time okay, and I and anyone bad bet can kill you So I've known how to deal with that that's what I've learned including how to deal with what I don't know So now you're describing an environment where you can't really know anything About the world in five years you well. I can know I could place good bets Okay, there are some things that are highly knowable. Okay, highly knowable like they say, you know Death in taxes, okay Demographics Okay So I could know or have a view for example that owning I believe owning dead assets is not going to be a good thing So I could think about alternative store holds of wealth I could think about that. I can place some bets That allow me you know, they're not the certain bets, but I can place enough bets and have enough diversification That I can be relatively confident of some things But never absolutely all totally confident But I think when we're coming back anyway, that's the reality. I'm just describing my our reality the best I can that's why people who are confident in the future and are just experiencing the present You know right now People are describing all of them are describing how things are And almost everybody thinks the future is going to be a modified version of the press your extrapolation forward yet Okay, things are good. All right. I get it. Okay. Thanks. Well, I'll guarantee you there will be big changes So those are dumb people you're saying making those kind of I'm not I'm saying it's Understand it's understandable, but when you study change. Yeah, and the nature of change it's a You know the world changes in dramatic race because of causes that we can look at and get a good understanding of We can't be sure about anything because of the nature But in this specific I mean, that's always true and wise people understand that like you don't you're not in control of the future Of course, you're not God, but in this specific case where there are specific technologies whose development we understand because we're watching it It almost feels like there's no human agency here like not one person ever suggests like well Why don't we just stop the development of the technologies by force? Well that I think you mean theoretically You know, I don't know just look how the system works. Okay. Who makes what decisions how Like I think you have the bias of we should stop all these technologies and just stop it Somebody else has another visit Yeah, and the other people have other views and as a reason and then there's a means by which those views Turn into actions. Okay, and so it's correct the system that we're dealing in I will make those types of decisions and we could discuss the pros and cons of all of those things But that's just how it works, right? I don't know. I mean there there are all kinds of pernicious long-standing things that we've stopped like the global slave trade The Brits are like we're not for this we're stopping it and they did Tucker you you are using that we stopped Okay, no Britain stopped it. Okay, but I'm just trying to say you have to look at the system and say Who has their hands on the level of power right and what will they do and what are their motivations? How does the system work? I think that's right. Okay How does the machine work to make decisions? Okay, we so if we can agree on This person makes these types of decisions about these things and it works this way Then we can say we the collective we can do that But this theoretical collective we that is going to make this it's like we could sit here and be very I get it I Determined nation Probably can't stop this so that my second question is you keep hearing that there's just AI race between the United States and China Yeah Is it true that one country will be completely dominant by the end of this race and that that will be meaningful work? I think no, I think that what's gonna happen is And again, I'm speaking now probabilistically I think that There will be different types of developments, but by and large You it's very difficult to keep intellectual property. Yes That you when you take the products of the intellectual property and you put them in the public exactly that'll last about six months I mean at right at most and you'll develop here in the nearest and so intellectual property protections and isolation is probably not going to work so and so now we're going to have Different advantages and disadvantages. Let's say for example in China's case There are many Fantastic chips not quite at the same level See we design chips, but we can't produce chips effectively. We can't produce By and large we can't produce things any manufactured goods as effectively Cost effectively by and large. We have a problem doing that So what we'll do is we'll design those better chips. It won't have put the intellectual protections and you're going to then have the production of Things in China at a very inexpensive way manufacturing China has about 33% of the manufacturing in the world which is more than the United States Europe and Japan combined They manufacture effectively cheaply. They will embed percent of the manufacturing in the world, which is more than the United States, Europe, and Japan combined. They manufacture effectively cheaply. They will embed chips in the manufacturing. The application of chips, they're going to probably, they are more ahead on China's more ahead on the application of chips, robotics. So we're talking about just thinking, but when you connect the thinking to bodies that are automatic bodies to it, and you have robotics and so on, they're ahead on that type of so different entities are going to be ahead in different ways, and we're going to then be in this world in which there's competition in that world, and then there's an attempt to be protection ist or whatever or to fight those differences, and that's what the world looks like. Does the combination of AI and robotics bring manufacturing back to the United States? We are behind in both of those areas, greatly behind. So I would say we're not going to be have competitive advantages in those things. What we're competitive in is that small percentage of the population that is uniquely inventive, in terms of inventiveness, the number of Nobel prize winners in the United States. United States dominates Nobel prize winners in the world, the inventiveness, best universities, and so on. We have a system that is a legal system, and a capital market system, and we can bring the best from the world all to the United States to create an environment. If we could work well together in that inventiveness with rule of law, and all of that working, we have those things that are competitive and damaged. We do not have manufacturing, and we're not going to go back and be competitive in manufacturing with China in our lifetimes, I don't believe. Okay. So now the question is how we deal with that? Our inventiveness, you just said, in many have said, comes from our education system from universities, but then you begin the conversation by saying that AI is already... And foreigners, we'll look at that population, this three million people who are just basically changing about half of them are foreigners. If you can attract the best and the brightest, and there's a lot to be attracted to in the United States from the best and the brightest, because we are a country of all of these different people who are operating this way, and we create these equal opportunities. Look who's running some of the countries, companies, they come from different places. If we can have the best of the world in the world, come in that kind of environment to be creative and so on, we can invent and so on, but we can't produce. The people you're describing have come to our universities, that's basically... That's right. We still have kind of values there, because Stanford's there. That's right. If you've been paying attention, you know that, out is not just another nicotine pouch, it is literally the best nicotine pouch in the world, and we know because we use it all day long, we've used all of them. Turns that you can actually make money by telling people about out. We're launching our affiliate program. If you have an audience bigger small, you can cash in you where a 10% commission on every sale about that you bring in, and to make it even easier will give you a 10% off-link for your followers. They save you aren't it's really simple. By the way, compared to all the other products people sell online, help is truly good. It's delicious. It is easy to sell because it's heartfelt. To spread the word get rewarded for it, the best nicotine pouch in the world. You began the conversation by saying that AI is now at the point where the machines have the equivalent knowledge of a PhD in every different topic. At some point, are you going to have a university? We'll redefine what universities are like, but you're going to have that combination of things that work together, because still, we're a long way from a long way, but we're away from the point of the decision-making will be made by the AI. You're not going to have the AI determine how your raise your kit, and different people will raise their children differently. The actual you'll rely on it, but it's really the magic for the foreseeable future is remarkable people with remarkable technologies, producing remarkable changes, and then we're going to have then the consequences of that. As long as human decision-making plays a role, I'm totally fine with it. You say that the university is going to change. I mean, how could it not? I thought the internet was going to get rid of universities. It didn't happen. But I mean, how long does it take for the current model to change? It's pretty resistant to change. I think it's slow to change, and those who change slowly will be left behind, and then you'll have the best. I would say, you see things taking place, but anyway, I would expect that it's going to, life is more like a game, I think. It's almost like a video game, and you're going to be able to have real-world learning experiences in many different ways to be able to provide education, but it's going to be interactive. You're going to see a type of merging, whether you like it or not. You're going to see a type of merging of the man and the artificial intelligence. Does that worry you? Of course it worries me. And then it excites me. What worries me most fundamentally is how people are with each other. Yes. Can we put harmony and happiness togetherness? Can we resolve decisions, issues? Can we deal with these issues together? That is the most important thing. I think we emphasize too much the wonderful, remarkable things that we get from AI. We'll have greater life expectancy and less disease, and we can have all of those things. But the question is, do we have harmony, quality of life? I did a study. It's also, I put it out free online, which is ratings, not statistics used for rating various conditions of countries. 24 top countries. It's called the global powers index. It's online free for anybody who wants to look at it. And I rated different powers, economic power, military power, education power, and so on. Then I rated health, how long you lived, the diseases you're encountered by, and so on. And happiness, what your happiness level is. And what's interesting about that is that the measures of power don't have a pest a certain level of living standards. Don't have a correlation with health, which is amazing because you have all the money to produce the health, and have no correlation with happiness. That, like for example, in the United States, which is the most powerful country in the world, by these measures, our life expectancy is five years less than Canadians, so they're right next to us, and five years less than companies of equal income levels. So health, there's work or a lesion. And unhappiness, there's no correlation. But like Indonesia has the second highest happiness, rating. So all I'm saying is we think about also how we work with each other, how we are with each other. The highest determinant of happiness is community. Of course, if you have a good community, you have happiness and it has a positive effect on health. So I think it all comes down to how we are with each other that is going to end dealing with all of the questions that you're raising. There's been no advance in changing human nature over time, right? I mean, let's detect a lot. You'll advance, no advance in getting along with each other. Yeah, it goes in ebbs and cycles. I would look at it this way. There are many religions in the world. Most of the religions have two components to them. The first component is follow the word of God and you have to follow it in that way. But the others are about harmony. In other words, how do we create a harmonious society? So you look at the Ten Commandments or something and their rules for how do you achieve harmony? And there are things like karma. How do you achieve harmony? So different societies have different ways of trying to achieve harmony. So I think that's important. Harmony, I think it comes down to some basic things. I study this thing and I go around the world. I think first, do you educate, raise your children well? Okay. In other words, educate them in capabilities. So they're capable, but also in civility and how they are with each other because a capable, civil person will come out to a society in which they can work well together to be productive, that people have to be productive, right? So, but it ought to be productive. You have to have harmony, they have to deal with the questions. I'm answering your question about how we deal with this. I'm saying we have to deal with it together. There's only an environment where there's harmony rather than fighting. Are you going to be able to address the types of questions that you're raising, right? How do you, you know, when you're asked me, you know, is what's going to happen with AI and and then you say, we need to do this and we need to do that. It strikes me that it to pick how the weeds deal with each other to be able to deal with those things is the most important things and they're a basics of how we deal with each other. That's the most important thing. I agree with that. Last question. You didn't, I don't think you grew up in like a billionaire world. No, my dad was a jazz musician and you know, we had a low middle class family, I have it. Everything I ever needed. Well, so that's kind of my question. Now you live obviously in a billionaire world, which is where do you run? It's more happy people. Oh, almost general. If you get past the things that you, your basics, you know, if I can you know, health, education, habitat and you get past those, you've got everything you need. And then if you have community, you have everything you need. That is the best. Redellio. Thank you very much. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the customer fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a moral. What can you do about it? Well, we could blind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.