So, if you're one of those people who's been  wondering when we're going to find out more about the Jeffrey Epstein story, who's been asking  for disclosure, at least wanting more disclosure, the dump of more than 3 million Epstein related  documents a few days ago by the US government is well pretty amazing, but also kind of a mixed  blessing because in that cache of material is a lot of tantalizing information. There's also a  lot of stuff that's maybe not true. There's some stuff that seems kind of fantastical and it's  all there together. And you could ask yourself, well, why is that? Could this be an attempt to  discredit the whole story by throwing nonsense in next to clearly true information? I mean,  possibly. We can't know. All we can do is assess what's on the internet right now. So included  in that document dump are a bunch of emails to and from Jeffrey Epstein to and from people whose  names we know and in a lot of cases people whose names have been redacted for whatever reason. We  can't know why they were redacted. We can guess. There are text messages. There are videos. There  are photographs. There all kinds of attachments, documents. And there are also a lot of statements  from anonymous people, some named people, uh, that may or may not be true, including people who just  called into some sort of tip line with information about Epstein, uh, including statements from  confidential human sources that may or may not have been taken under oath. Like, who knows?  There's just a lot of stuff there. And some of it seems kind of ridiculous. Maybe it is, maybe it  isn't. Some of it seems worth following up on. So, how do we assess it? Well, that's going to take  an awfully long time. Most people don't have the time. So, we thought it would be interesting  just to start with a very narrow slice of the material. And that's the emails and texts that we  can be pretty sure were sent from or to Jeffrey Epstein that pertained to the question of food,  specifically pizza. And that caught our attention immediately. Pizza. People talking about pizza,  adults talking about pizza and pizza parties. Now, why that catch our attention? of course, because  it evoked memories of this semi-forgotten story from about 10 years ago known as Pizzagate.  That was a wild conspiracy theory thought up by like the QAnon retards on the internet, the  conspiracy theory about Pizzagate. It sounded so absurd. And we're about to get into much more  detail about what that original theory was and what it may have actually meant in just a second.  But it all began, as you may or may not remember, with another trove of information that hit the  internet 10 years ago, Wikileaks to be specific, released in 2016. a bunch of emails from John  Podesta, of course, former high official in the Clinton and Obama White houses to and from a bunch  of people that mentioned the word pizza or pizza parties in ways that seemed totally inorganic,  just weird. In fact, in ways that suggested the term pizza was a code word for something else,  something dark. And people on the internet speculated at great length that pizza was actually  a synonym for children or sex with children. And this was immediately dismissed, of course, and  turns out there was probably a lot more there than a lot of us perceived at the time. And again,  we're going to get into that in just a minute with Ian Carol who's taken a very close look at this.  But back to the most recent document dump, there were a lot of references to pizza. Like a lot by  some counts, almost a thousand in these documents. Some of them probably were just to pizza. You  don't want to read too much into anything cuz you start imagining that you see things that aren't  actually there. But if you read, I don't know, exchanges like this. Let's read one. See what  you think. And we're quoting. This is an email to Jeffrey Epstein, we're told by DOJ on April  6, 2018. Quote, "This is better than a Chinese cookie. Let's go for pizza and grape soda again.  No one can understand." Maybe, you know, there are a lot of fit adults like Jeffrey Epstein, who was  pretty fit for a middle-aged man in 2018 who are regularly eating pizza and grape soda. or maybe  they're talking about something else. Maybe this is code. So, it's worth considering anyway, right?  But it was this exchange that made us think, whoa, wait a second. Maybe the long debunked conspiracy  theory about Pizzagate wasn't actually debunked. And maybe someone should take a closer look  at this given Ebstein's documented history of sexual abuse of young people. So here's just  one exchange. This is the one that stopped us in our tracks and and made us think, "Oh, wow. We  should know more." This is an exchange according to these documents. We're not alleging anything,  but this is what this is what's on the internet from the DOJ. This is on the DOJ website. This is  an exchange between and apparently a text exchange between Jeffrey Epstein and we think a urologist,  a physician who was treating him apparently for erectile dysfunction in the spring of 2018. And  that physician's name is Harry Fish. Um, again, we're not alleging anything. We're just we're just  going to read what's in this. Okay, so this is the doctor texting Jeffrey Ebstein and I'm quoting and  they're going back and forth on stuff and he says, "I'm back. Can call you in Stendra 100  at Zitmer." Now Stendra is apparently an erectile dysfunction drug like Viagra and he's  prescribing it to Jeffrey Epste who apparently needs it. And Epstein writes, "How many?" And the  doctor writes back, "10." "They didn't have your call yet. You have refills available. Call them  back." "Thanks. They wanted you to call," Epstein says to his apparently to his urologist about  the erectile dysfunction drugs. The doctor writes back, "I just did. You can pick them up now."  And here's the line that inspired the segment you're about to watch. after you use them,  after you use the erectile dysfunction drugs, after you take Viagra or its equivalent, we're  quoting, "Wash your hands and let's go get pizza and grape soda. Call me." So, to all the people  who dismissed out of hand this conspiracy theory about Pizzagate, oh, it had nothing to do with  sex or kids or anything illicit at all. It wasn't a code word. They was eating pizza. Here you have  apparently Jeffrey Epstein's urologist telling him that after you take your erectile dysfunction  drug, after you become sexually potent again, wash your hands and join me for pizza and grape  soda. Okay. down. You don't have to be a total wacko to see the connection between a pizza and  grape soda and what sounds like some kind of illicit sex act again committed by a guy with  a documented history of elicit illicit sex acts with young people. So the obvious question is  what is this? The second obvious question is, has anyone in federal law enforcement talked  to the surviving member of this text exchange, which would be this guy, Harry Fish, whoever he  is, apparently now a pharma executive. Has anyone talked to him? Not arrested or indicted him, but  just like sat him down and said, "Hey, pizza and grape soda after taking an erectile dysfunction  drug. What were you talking about? Speak slowly so we can understand." into the microphone. Has that  happened? This is not an attack on Donald Trump. Obviously, it's not a conspiracy theory. It's  not an attempt to crush the Republican party or influence the 2028 primary. It's like a question  that any American should be allowed to ask, which is, are federal law enforcement officials  doing their best to stop the sexual abuse of young people? And that's kind of a baseline requirement,  you would say, in a civilized country that federal law enforcement make a good faith effort to stop  people from molesting kids. And maybe this isn't evidence of child molestation. But if it's not,  what is it? What is it? And is anyone trying hard to find out what it is? We would hope someone  does really soon. And more broadly, what does this tell us about one of the most amazing stories  of the last 10 years? 2016, the Wikileaks dump of John Podesta's Gmail account. There was a lot in  there. A lot. We were told the Russians did it. We end up going to war with Russia over that really.  That's when the whole Russia thing started was in that story. But now that we've had 10 years and  now more information, like should we reassess what that really was? I don't know. So, the new  year is here, but that does not mean you've got to overhaul your whole life. Despite claims to the  contrary, you don't have to take drastic measures. Make a few changes here and there, and you'll be a  lot better off. And you can start with the snacks in your pantry. Now, products from standard  American chip brands are, let's be honest, pretty repulsive, filled with chemicals that make  you feel heavy and bloated. They don't even taste that good. They're not good for you. We recommend  an upgrade with Masa chips. Masa is the easiest way to eat clean without feeling like you're on a  diet. The chips contain three ingredients. That's it. Organic corn, sea salt, 100% grass-fed  beef tallow, and that is it. No seed oils, no mystery chemicals, just food, actual food. And  they're amazing. And you feel great after. You don't feel weighed down. We particularly enjoyed  the coinero flavor lately. But they're all great. You want to give them a try, visit masachips.com,  masach chips.com/tucker. Use the code tucker for 25% off your first order or you can click the lick  link in the video description or you can scan the QR code to claim this outstanding offer. Ian Carol  has been thinking a lot about this. We think he's meticulous and honest and careful and responsible.  Uh and so we're really pleased, grateful in fact to have him join us now. Oh, Ian Carol, thanks  so much for doing this. Yeah, thanks. Thanks for having me on, Tucker. Um, it's a it's a great  intro because you ask so many pertinent questions. Well, yeah. I mean, look, there's so much here  and everybody who's even paying a little bit of attention is getting text after text or pulling up  X and seeing all this wild stuff. And, you know, I I I want to be as responsible as I can and and  just be very honest like I have no idea what a lot of this stuff is. And of course, partisanship  and actual partisan battles are distorting the way people look at this. But I just wanted to pick one  narrow sli, no pun intended, one slice of it and try to figure out what we're looking at here. So,  do you mind I know that and I am a bad source for this cuz I I didn't take Pizzagate as seriously  maybe I guess as I should have at the time. Can you would you mind just giving a a recap a  basic recap of what this Pizzag gate theory was and what we actually know about that story?  Yeah, it's it's another one of those stories that was distorted by the apparent coverup or at  least distorted by the media's response to it, which was very much a straw man style response  in that these emails get dumped online full of everything that was in John Podesta's life. And  John Podesta is a very powerful and connected man. And there was lots of stuff in those emails that  was overtly concerning, politically concerning, ge like geopolitically concerning. But people on  the internet then started to notice these strange pizza messages messages about, you know, $40,000  worth of hot dogs or something like that being flown to DC for parties. Um, things that are just  like, wait, wait a minute. You you think about it for just a moment and you realize that that does  not make sense. And overt references to children, too. like the these kids ages like seven, eight,  and nine or I forget the exact ages will be in the pool and it'll be heated and they will be there  for it's like wait what are we talking about? So people started to dig into what these weird emails  were and then they started to dig into the fact that there's certain pizza places referenced a  lot um places where these people are going and hosting parties. they start to notice that this  one pizza place in particular, Comet Ping Pong, um, which was a pizza place right in the heart of  DC that was run by a very politically connected DC insider boyfriend to the founder or owner of Media  Matters. Um, bunch of strange coincidences. They start to notice all these strange coincidences  around this pizza shop. And they notice that that the Instagram of this pizza shop is  full of very disturbing images of children. um things like children taped to tables, things  like uh commenters talking about uh rape and sexual abuse, things like comments about kill  rooms and um just just so much disturbing imagery on a public Instagram account for a public pizza  place that has photos of like Obama having pizza at it that has that in these emails Podesta  is talking about going and having, you know, lunch at this pizza place with all these very high  level political people and it started to get very strange and and so Pizzagate itself spiraled out  into a lot of questions and concerns and genuine investigation. Um but then it got distorted by  the media the media response which felt a lot like an immune response to a dangerous virus. And the  media response then packaged up all of these very legitimate questions that never got answered. Um,  and it repackaged it as these crazy people on the internet think that Hillary Clinton personally  is running. She's the top. She's the head of a satanic pedophile cabal. And it's the whole thing  is being run out of the basement of this pizza place that you see like the absurdity of the sort  of wrapper they put around this which no one was claiming that. No one was claiming that Hillary  was running it. No one was claiming that it was all out of the basement of this P. They were just  asking a lot of questions about very legitimate strange things. And then a very weird event  happened where as the media is running this big uh kind of smear campaign on these questions, a  guy conveniently walks into that pizza place with an AR gun and shoots the place up. Um doesn't hit  anybody, but manages to shoot a bullet straight through the hard drive that's in the back room  somehow and gets arrested by police very publicly. They have a big photo shoot and he gives a couple  of sound bites as they're hauling him off that are something to the effect of I was so convinced  that it was all real and that it was all here and it's just not or something. And and so it's like,  wow, that is sure convenient that um good thing that Hillary Clinton's not personally running a  giant satanic pedophile ring out of the basement of this pizzeria, which no one was alleging. And  and that was sort of became the wrap-up smear. Um, as you know, Nancy Pelosi has described to  us in the past, how a wrap-up smear works, where you wrap a problematic narrative up in a  false representation of it, and then you have something crazy happen, dangerous, crazy, uh, you  know, objectionable happen around that. So then you can look at it and say that's dangerous. These  conspiracy theories are dangerous and anyone that engages in these conspiracy theories is dangerous.  So we can censor them all off the internet because it's been debunked. Um, you know, don't pay  attention to the fact that the guy that owns the pizza place that has the images of children  on their Instagram is the boyfriend of the guy that runs Media Matters, who is one of the primary  debunkers of these things. So, those are the sorts of weird things that happened around the breaking  of Pizzagate. And no one ever got any answers. Um, no, no one ever no one in government ever took it  seriously. Um, and all those emails are still out there floating. They're harder to find these days,  but they're still out there. And uh the Instagram accounts were they were preserved in various  formats online, archived. Um so you can still find a lot of the evidence, but it's a lot harder to  verify now because you do make a great point about the current email release that a lot of [ __ ]  gets mixed in and a lot of stuff of questionable veracity gets mixed in. And so you have to be very  careful about sourcing it all, especially um 10 years down the line with something like Pizzagate.  May May I ask is do you know if it's true and I I believe it is but so the man you just referred to  who shot up comment pizza in Washington which by the way was like very close to my house where  I raised my I brought my children there cuz it was the pizza place in my neighborhood which  the whole thing is so weird. One of the reasons I didn't take it seriously I was like oh yeah  that's right that's on Connecticut Avenue it's right yeah right too close to it. Um, but the  guy who shot it up, who seemed a little bit off, right, was just shot to death last month, right  before these emails were released by police in North Carolina, who pulled him over apparently on  suspicion that he was a fugitive of some kind. I don't think that he was. They said he reached  for a gun and two cops killed him. That guy, that same guy was killed right before that. Yeah.  Document released. Is that true? I heard the same reporting. Obviously, I at this point I don't  really know what's true. Um, the whole world feels a little bit like the Matrix, but yes, I read the  same reporting and I this the nuance was not lost on me, but I like I don't know about you or anyone  else, but I was in no way expecting to find pizza references in the Epstein files, even though I  had dug deeply into the Pizzagate stuff. And even though we know that Jeffrey Epstein is a human  trafficker that is, you know, trafficking in the same things that Pizzagate would allege gets pizza  references, it just never it never occurred. I wasn't expecting any pizza references. So it kind  of blew my mind when suddenly there's like 800 and something references to pizza in these emails.  And especially you picked out some really really uh great one like obvious ones um at the at the  opener there where I mean like pizza and grape soda is a very overt pairing um that I'm not  sure I've ever seen anyone actually like eat as a pairing. Well and also I mean these are people  well first of all in this exchange apparently one guy's a physician and the other is Jeffrey Epstein  and these are health obsessed people. These are people who talk about getting blood transfusions  just to extend their lives. And I know as an actual pizza fan that pizza is very unhealthy.  I mean, it's been a lifelong struggle for me. Pizza and grape soda, like these are the last  things that people who care about their health eat. And these are, you know, there's a whole  class of people who are well vain for one thing. um but who are very focused on their on themselves  and their physical health. And it just sort of I don't know. It's a lot for me to believe that  the one thing that Epstein's friends and John Podesta's friends have in common is they both have  a steady diet of pizza and grape soda. Like I I just don't believe. And not only do they have  a steady diet of that, but they feel compelled to email each other about it with very weird  verbiage. how many how many grown men email each other about getting pizza or about how tasty the  pizza was or about how many slices you can slice a pizza up into or how many people will be at the  pizza party. Um, then there's another email in the current dump that is even um, it stuck out  to me because it has the word Red Hook in it, which at at first I didn't have the context and I  was it seemed suspicious the words Red Hook where it was someone was emailing asking if another  guy can go to Red Hook for a pizza meal later. And then in looking into it, it turns out that Red  Hook is the address of where Jeffrey Epstein's uh, Virgin Islands businesses are doiciled. It's the  It's on the marina where you would leave in the boat to get to his island. And so then it gets  then it's almost weirder. Someone was emailing asking if another man can go to where Jeffrey  Epste's business is doiciled for a pizza meal at some. There's a lot of emails like that where  people ask if they can use the apartment for a bit or if we can go get pizza for a few hours or  for 30 minutes. is that's a pizza get reference as opposed to these emails. A lot of these times  where it's they're using food language in ways that does not square with how food actually gets  eaten or talked about ever. Most security systems operate like old-fashioned cable internet. They're  installed in one place. They're tied to one address and if you move or your job moves, you got  to start over. But that's not how other people do it. Construction sites, ranches, large properties,  they have a better way. They need cameras that are portable, not tied down to one location. Defend  security cameras are the perfect solution for ordinary people to do this. With Defend, you own  the camera. You're not renting it like a modem from a cable company and you're not locked to a  building or a Wi-Fi network. The job moves well then the camera moves with it. That's a better way  to do things. No power lines or infrastructure of any kind is required. These run on cellular like  your phone. They're perfect for watching job site equipment overnight, livestock at your ranch, long  driveways, outuildings on your property. You mount it where you need it. You open the Defend app and  you are set. You got clear footage, night vision alerts straight to your phone. Defend never  sells any data to anyone. Not tech companies, not the government, not China. Plans start at  about five bucks a month. There's no contract. You can cancel at any time. Visit defendellcam.com  today. defendellcam.com. Do has anyone been asked about this? I mean, is it, you know, some a lot  of the people in these exchanges or apparently in these exchanges are still live? Some of  them are prominent people still uh including the apparently the doctor in this exchange has  do you know if anyone has just been asked in a straightforward way, what do you what was this?  Not since Pizzagate as far as I'm aware. Um, I mean to be fair, it's it's all a little  new. We're all, you know, we're still in the first week here, but um, no, I don't know of  anyone being asked directly about any of these references or or about any of the more overt  stuff for that matter. Um, the other, you know, very rich and powerful people that are caught with  their pants down, so to speak, here. Um, a couple people have issued apologies. A couple people  have, you know, resigned from positions, but it's entirely underwhelming the the official response  because it's one thing for someone like you or me, um, journalists to go and ask questions, which is  good and should be happening, but that's not what should be happening. What should be happening is  law enforcement should be at their door knocking and asking these questions. like we should  have institutions that are there asking these questions and many more many there's I mean this  is a particularly interesting and and dark thread when you really unwinded but there's obviously  all the other threads of just like hey you went to the island hey you said you never talked to  him but you did so and none of those questions are being asked um that we're being told that  it's all a Democrat hoax and that um that Caspel would arrest someone if there was anyone to arrest  test. So, it's very underwhelming. Yeah. I mean, I I always am suspicious of people who kind of  jump ahead to things like arrest, conviction, incarceration, execution. Like, how about let's  just start with an interview. And, you know, I know a lot of people who've been interviewed  by the FBI. I know hundreds of people have been interviewed, right? Well, exactly. But in the  context of a federal investigation, it's it's not crazy to call somebody. In fact, it's common.  And it happens every single day. Happened to like every relative of every J6 prisoner got called  in, sat down. Can we come talk to you? I mean, that it's that's not weird. That's the beginning  of justice. That's the that's the first step in finding out what happened, punishing the guilty,  exonerating the innocent, is having these conversations in the context of a of a federal  investigation, like an FBI interview. And I I find it very strange that none of this has happened.  And so when you see people on television say, "Well, we don't have the, you know, any evidence  to indict someone, you know, panel a grand jury." It's like, I don't know who talked about a grand  jury. Why don't you just ask questions of you're the FBI and if they're not doing that, then you  you sort of wonder why. So let me just Okay, so here's the bigger picture that you're qualified  to provide and I'm not. The implication of this and a lot of other things in this file dump is  that there are basically religious rituals sexual in nature that's very common through history. Um  there were temple prostitutes for a reason that there are rituals involving children underway in  the United States and the west rich and powerful people sexually abusing young people. Um, that  is very hard for a lot of people to believe or metabolize, but it feels like that's not totally  crazy. Like that happens. Does that happen? I mean, absolutely. It's um it's it's so dark that  it's hard for average people, regular people that are just trying to live their lives to even  approach it and even even imag like you cannot put yourselves in the shoes of someone so depraved.  Um, and honestly like regular Americans can't even put themselves in the shoes of a millionaire,  let alone a billionaire because like they're just trying to pay their bills and they can't because  the billionaires are, you know, doing certain these billionaires at least are doing certain  things that are messing everything up. But so it's so far removed from our regular experience  that it's hard to understand and believe. But it it is I mean there there's been good evidence  of elements of that in various kind of fringe investigations for a long time. And I don't say  fringe to mean they're unreliable. I mean fringe to say that they just never get traction with the  mainstream media for whatever reason, right? Um but they it is it's it's right there in these  emails and in these files and it's not entirely clear what all of it means, but there's very overt  references. There's covert references and there's just mounting because people are still digging  through them. These are millions of files and no uh effective way to sort through them the way that  the DOJ put them out. Um, and so the evidence is mounting more and more that we have everything  in these files from people that were turning a blind eye, um, which is also reprehensible.  People that were adjacent and complicit, people that were directly complicit, people that  were straight up evil and and disgusting, and then people that that venture into the demonic or the  truly depraved. And um and people that have been following this story have known for a long time  that unfortunately that is uh that that's always been a part of it and we've had evidence that  that's a part of it for a long time. And that's true of most all human trafficking networks. Um  the people that are doing human trafficking by their nature are some of the most depraved people  on this planet. And it's an enormous industry and it's not getting any smaller. And it it's it's  tragic that it takes something so overt as you know this massive blackmail ring apparently  blowing up in the middle of the United States government and across the entire world and  then trailing out in a like 10 year long cover up almost sevenyear long cover up for people to  even like confront that this is happening but uh it's definitely happening. Um, not everyone  in the files is, you know, participating in ritualistic sacrifices or anything like that. And  there are fake things in the files that are Yes. for whatever reason in there, for one example,  one that went very viral is there's an image in the files of a cutting board with chickens on it  and like a black box uh censored out, but there's like a foot sticking out and it's obviously a  baby's foot. And the implication is that it's a cutting board with some chickens and like a baby  and they're gonna carve it up and eat it. Um, by my understanding that is a fake image. I do  like it's it's kind of hard to tell what's real and what's fake at this point, but there's stuff  like that in there that's like um so there's just a lot of there's a lot of um really messed up  stuff in there, but there's also a lot of people running away with a little tidbit for views or  clicks or likes or whatever it is. And so, um, it's really important that people pump the brakes,  slow down, and and go to the original source files and look for people that are citing their sources  on the files that they're referencing. And when they make, uh, definitive claims, they show you  the files that they're talking about. Because a lot of people are making claims that are actually  objectively untrue or are based on a small morsel that has been blown up into a whole meal of um,  you know, great content, but not necessarily great journalism. So, most people don't wake up in the  morning and decide to feel horrible, exhausted, foggy, disconnected from themselves. But it does  happen and it happens slowly. You're working hard, you're showing up, and then your energy disappears  by midday. Your focus is dull, your weight won't move. A lot of people are told that's just getting  old. That's what it is. But that's not actually true. For many men and women, these are not  personal failures. There are signals tied to your metabolism, your hormones, and nutrient imbalances  that go undetected for years. You don't even know you're deficient. And that's why we're happy to  partner with Joy and Bloss, a company that was built for people who are all done guessing and  ready to figure out what exactly is going on. And that starts with comprehensive lab work and a  one-on-one consultation with a licensed clinician. An actual human being explains what's happening  inside you and builds a personalized plan which includes hormone optimization, peptide therapy,  targeted supplements. So don't settle. Go to joy andblok.com/tucker. Use the code tucker for 50%  off your lab work and 20% off all supplements. That's joy andblok.com/tucker. Use the code  Tucker. 50% off labs, 20% off supplements. Join Bloss. Get your edge back. I'm I'm really  almost overwhelmed by the cover up of it and by the people I know who participated in that.  And I'll just name two of them. One is Bill Bar, who's the two-time attorney, Republican  attorney general, whose father, by the way, started Jeffrey Ebstein's career. His father,  Donald Bar, um was a former OSS CIA officer. Uh, in the files, I should also say that Jeffrey  Epstein describes Bill Barr, the former AG, as quote CIA. Jeffrey Epstein privately says this  guy's CIA. Bill Barr covered up Epstein's murder. He was clearly murdered in federal detention.  Bar said out loud, "We got to make sure everyone thinks this is a suicide." So, why isn't he being  asked about this? And the second is Mike Pompeo. And Mike Pompeo was caught plotting to murder  Julian Assange, the head of Wikileaks. Why is this significant? Well, because it was Wikileaks  that made that first trunch of emails available to the public. And it was Julian Assange who said  on camera basically said my source, he didn't say this, he didn't say my source, but he heavily  suggested in an interview with Dutch television, my source was Seth Rich, the DNC staffer who was  found murdered on the street in Washington in a so-called robbery where nothing was taken from  him. That investigation was taken over by the FBI. What? Why? And Assange goes on Dutch television  and says, "I can't see who my sources are, but they face great risks." you can pull up the  interview right now and look at it. And then he points to Seth Rich and the interviewer's like,  "Wait, are you saying Seth Rich was murdered for this?" And Assange is like, "Look, I can't tell  you who my sources are, but my sources take great risks. Seth Rich just got murdered." I mean, that  couldn't be clearer, right? It was right after that that Julian Assange was incarcerated first in  an embassy in London and then in Bel Marsh prison, never charged with a crime. And that was  pushed by CIA and Mike Pompeo. And it's like, wait a second. Shouldn't someone ask Mike Pompeo?  Like, what is this? What is this? These are real allegations or credible allegations. And rather  than follow up, you're punishing the guy who brought them to light. Tell us how that works.  Mike Pompeo, has it I mean, Mike Pompeo is like wandering free and no one asked him about  this. Like, what is going on? Ian Carol, you're I every time I talk about this story, every  aspect of the story from Pizzagate to Epstein, everything in between, I always have to try not  to get angry because it when you think about, especially for me, the cover up, it makes me so  furious how regular Americans are going to jail over like smoking a joint or going to jail over  like paying taxes that are getting sent overseas anyways or going to jail over a parking ticket  they can't afford. Whatever it is, this madness in this country where we are lawfared to death, but  but these obvious criminals and these people that we at least have obvious questions for are just  walking free. And you bring up two really great points. Um that I mean in both cases, I think it's  obvious that they those actions are being taken on behalf of whatever criminal organizations  or happenings are being exposed. for example, in those email dumps that Seth Rich probably  leaked, cuz it wasn't just Pizzaggate stuff. It was also all sorts of Benghazi stuff, all sorts  of Hillary Clinton stuff, all sorts of other uh really serious stuff that that also was never  asked of the appropriate parties. But I mean, when you start talking about who's still walking  free that that we should be asking questions of and we're looking at the Epstein investigation,  that list immediately grows to like a 100 miles long. And we got in one of the, you know, one of  the document drops that happened a couple weeks ago and then we recroborated it multiple times  since then, we got a list of 10 co-conspirators that they have had for years from one of their old  investigations that just never happened because they were, you know, Cash Patel has been telling  us there are no co-conspirators. There is no there is no organization. It was just him alone. Um,  but we've got a document saying that they had 10 co-conspirators. one of whom was Leslie Wexner.  Um they're named and that the list is long. Like there's pilots, we know their names, Larry Vaski,  there's three different pilots. There's a bunch of um other madams like Gain Maxwell, but you know,  assistants that were helping to recruit girls. There's a bunch of other people that uh were  trafficking models and bringing models in and out. There there's just this long there's an enormously  long list um of people in various roles all around Epstein that we know full well were at the very  least deeply suspiciously involved where they they should be asked some very serious questions.  I mean right up to Ahood Barack you know who by my accounting looks like the handler of Epstein. Um,  he certainly looks like we have all these emails from both Ahood Barack's email server now and  from Jeffrey Epste's uh like trove of documents that corroborate them doing what looks like  intelligence operations all around the world and in the United States. Um, so there's there's just  an endless number of people that, like you were saying earlier, that we could at least investigate  because it's in the name, the Federal Bureau of Investigation. And they keep on giving us this  line as though like, well, we've got emails, but it's not illegal to party with Jeffrey Epstein.  And it's like, we're not asking you to read the emails. We're asking you to investigate all of the  myriad suspicious things that are documented here in these files and emails. Um, and instead of  getting investigation, we're getting what looks like cover up, denial, distraction, anything.  Anything but investigation. Um, and it kind of makes you wonder why. Well, it definitely makes  you wonder why. And part of it is the political dynamic which, you know, poisons everything. And  Trump is obviously sensitive to like partisan traps after the the Russian nonsense, which  was a lie. Russia gate was a lie. By the way, Russia Gate was constructed, in my view, in part  to cover up the origin of the DNC emails in 2016 and the John Podesta Gmail in 2016. Neither of  which was done by Russia. Clearly, you know, there's a lot more there. We're not allowed to  ask questions about Seth Rich. I don't know why. Seth Rich's parents don't own that story. I feel  so sorry for them, of course, but I'm an American citizen. And if someone is murdered on the street  in Washington, I we all have an interest in asking what was that. That's not an attack on his memory.  It's a demand for justice in the name of every single American, not just his family. They don't  get to shut it down. Sorry. Etc., etc., etc. Like there's all of this gets to the foundation of  our system, which is justice. Is every citizen treated the same under the law or not? And if not,  then we need to fix that. So, um, and I know that Trump is really worried. This is a trap laid for  him. I'm sure it is, but let's set that aside and ask about the rest of us and whether our country  can continue on the same basis um that, you know, we assumed we were living under, which is again,  you know, one of equal justice under the law. So, um, can you just go through some of the questions  and I think both of us are trying to be really responsible and fact-based here. Clearly there's  nonsense in this document dump. Don't want to get trapped by it. Don't want to fall for it. Okay.  But on the on the basis of things that we can say with some certainty are true or seem to be  true. What are the questions that you having gone through this for several days now think that we  should be asking following up on? Um well there's questions for a lot of different people and some  of them are more serious and some of them are maybe less serious. Um, one of the biggest ones  in many ways is how did we let Bill Gates be in charge of the medical decisions of our entire  nation when apparently he was trying to slip uh antibiotics to his wife secretly because he  transferred sexually transmitted diseases from hookers on Jeffrey Epstein's islands to her.  That is insane. And when you look back at the absolutely just the crime against humanity that CO  was and you realize who Bill Gates is and who he who he's exposed to be in these emails, um that's  atrocious. But that that's less of a question we need to ask and more of a person we need to just  forget about forever. Right. Well, first of all, I just bless you for saying that and you put it  so well. This is the guy who was making health decisions for the entire world. And apparently  from these emails, he's trying to slip a drug into his wife's drink because he infected her with  a veneerial disease from a a Russian hooker. So yeah, I mean that's just like that's just amaz  Thank you for saying that. It's amazing. Yeah, that's apparently that's apparently our health  professionals um our pandemic response. But um but I I think that everyone that's in the files has  a certain amount of answering to do. For example, Elon Musk and and to Elon's credit, at  least he's out on Twitter um you know, at least putting his words forwards. I don't know  is they all square with me when you actually read what he said in the emails versus what he's saying  on Twitter is the truth, but like I haven't seen anything that directly completely 100% contradicts  one another, so to speak. Um, so, so there's, you know, there's reconciliations of because that  for people that don't have the context, there's a bunch of emails of Elon Musk trying to sort of  organize going to party with Jeffrey Epstein, um, and explicitly saying, "No, I want to go to a wild  party. I'm not trying to have a relaxing vacation. I'm really stressed. I want a wild party." Um,  no big deal if it's a bunch of young girls. Um, but also, it doesn't appear that they ever  actually managed to make that connection happen for a party. Um, they kept missing each other.  he did have lots of meetings with him. Um, so there's those sorts of reconciliations that need  to happen. And then there's the overt lies um like Peter Teal's um connections to Jeffrey Epstein  that have repeatedly been a moving goalpost of I kind of knew him and I was kind of introduced  to him to like actually you you've got a whole bunch of emails with him. Actually, he funded  your venture capital firm with you know hundreds of thousands of dollars. Actually, clearly this  relationship was much more extensive than you uh displayed at first. The same is true of Howard  Lutnik. Um Howard Lutnick, who you know is the commerce secretary right now, neighbor of Jeffrey  Epstein, is on video in interview explicitly explicitly saying that I met him once way back and  immediately knew he was a creep and me and my wife had to go and we never talked to him ever again.  never saw him, never know, whatever. That's not true. He's in the emails obviously like going to  the he took his family to the island. They were hanging out together. They're going to parties  together. So there there's a whole spectrum of um scandal for various people that I think needs  to be answered for individually. And then there's sort of the collective government answering  that needs to be done for the the current administration and all of the various cuz you  know let's be clear the partisanship we are it is so pastime for partisanship right now. This  is an American issue. It's not a left or right issue. It's not just a Trump issue. It's not just  a Bill Clinton issue. It's an everyone issue. It's a corruption issue. And if there's if there's  anything that should bring Americans together, it is harm to our children. And it is subversion of  our nation using the harm of those children. And there's a bunch of people in Trump's circle and  around him that are very much implicated in these files. There's obviously a bunch of Democrats that  are super implicated in these files. Everyone all around Clinton, Clinton himself in insanely  implicated. Um, so it's not about which side is which. It's to me the question there is it's  about our government institutions answering to how have you let this corruption seep in and rot this  out at its core. Um and in many ways I think the heart of who needs to answer for that is our law  enforcement institutions, our FBI and our DOJ. And I can't think of anybody who I'm more disgusted  by right now in our government than Cash Patel and Pam Bondi for their gross misrepresentation  of what this is and their their blatant blatant moving of goalposts on the way here and um what to  me in my opinion looks like direct obfiscation of B now that we've seen these files now that we've  read these documents go back and rewatch what Pam Bondi said, what Cash Patel said, what Dan  Bonino said about how there's no evidence that he trafficked girls to anyone. There's no there's  no evidence that he worked with anyone in any big conspiracy. Um, it it's it's mind-blowing that  see these files and we don't even have them all yet and that's what you would come up with. Um,  so well, and to your to your last point, we don't have them all yet. My understanding is a little  over three million I think documents. However that's measured. They're not documents. They're  digital images. Whatever. Um but that there are a million or more than a million more. This is like  one trunch in a series. It's a little unclear. We were told there'd be we were told that they had  over 6 million. Um and and so now that we have 3 something million, speculatively there's several  more million to go. Um, but we don't really know, as far as I'm aware, exactly what they have. And  one thing that I I think we're at a time where it's important to remind the American people, cuz  a lot of people actually don't didn't follow the story for a long time. A lot of people like didn't  read the the literature that's been written on the case in the past. Um, and a lot of people don't  realize that it came out in the Gla Maxwell trial, um, sworn FBI testimony, like the testimony of FBI  agents. It came out that when they first raided uh Jeffrey Epste's home and they found all those  binders with all of those CDs in them that we have we now have photos of of like Cam did not scan.  Cam did not scan. We've got all the the binder photos with all the different little photos in it.  Um they at first found those binders and all those CDs and all those drives and they photographed  them all and did not take them with them because it was not within the scope of their warrant.  They left and left all of that material there with Jeffrey Epste's staff at his place and then  they later asked them to send it to them and it was sent to the FBI by Jeffrey Epstein's people  and they had no way to corroborate if any of it was untampered with basically um they didn't even  raid several of his properties and and some of the properties that they did raid they basically  had advanced warning um namely the island. So, it's important to remember that A, we don't have  all the documents that they actually do have yet, but B, the actual documents that they do have is  built on such a pathetic original collection of evidence. Um, not not because like all the FBI  agents were corrupt and didn't want to do it, but because something in the system, something in  the nature of how the how this thing was protected uh, prevented any real acquisition of evidence  where where maybe they could have gotten I'm sure they could have gotten a lot, but you're not going  to get a whole lot when you raid the pedophiles mansion and say, "Hey, would you send me all your  hard drives in a week? I would love to take a look at them." Right? Um, and so that when that came  out in the Gla Maxwell trials a couple years ago, it was just sort of like a big slap in the face  um to the whole the whole idea that we're ever going to get any real justice here. Um, kind  of reminded me of like MK Ultra of uh what we have from the MK Ultra documents is mind-blowing  and messed up and completely unbelievable. But people often forget that actually Dick Helms  is B. Our understanding at this point is that Dick Helm's burned and destroyed well over 90% of  the actual files that once existed about it. So, um, we're we're dealing with a slice of a slice of  a picture at this point. MK Ultra, um, you know, approaching 60 years ago, this stuff is like I  mean, some of these files are seven years old. Um, and the people engaged in these colloquies are  still around. by the way, I know some of them. Um, which gets to the other point, which is like how  was Jeffrey Epste at the center of everything, every global? I mean, he was going back and forth  on Libya, you know, he's going back and forth in the global financial crisis. It's like there's  really deeply involved in the global financial crisis. He was actually selling CDOS's. Okay. So,  c can you just I mean there's so much here and I hope when I'm Yeah. you know, we're in the same  place. We go through this in much greater detail, but can you just tell us what we know about that  Jeffrey Ebstein's involvement or intersection with the global financial crisis? What's that? Um,  well, the intersection with the global financial crisis specifically is a wild story that to be  truly told, you need to put the evidence on screen as well, but the short version is that he had a he  had a company called Liquid Funding Limited that was doiciled in the Bahamas. um that was partially  owned by Bear Sterns. Um and Bear Sterns, you know, is where he had come up for a long time.  And Liquid Funding Limited was selling CDOS's um the the same types of CDOS that eventually caused  the global financial crisis. It was capitalized at I believe hund00 million and uh allowed to sell 20  billion with a beat of CDOS's. Um, and I actually just was looking at that statistic earlier today  because it's the this is the craziest story. And that little CDO factory that Jeffrey Epste was  running um tied into Bear Sterns. And if you recall, Bear Sterns was one of the, you know, the  first to collapse, right? that shut down in the months directly preceding Bear Sterns starting to  collapse and Jeffrey Epstein uh redeemed all of those cos all of those assets. That's the terms  are I I don't know the technical terms for what he did, but basically he he made a run on the bank  on those exact assets that were the exact problem. Um, and he was tied into the exact bank that  was financially distressed. And then he wound that whole company, Liquid Funding Limited, up and  disappeared. And later JP Morgan, the bank that he later worked with after, you know, Bear Sterns was  his early banking career. And then he later was doing all of his moneyaundering and banking and  referring of people at JP Morgan, they came in, swooped up Bear Sterns for pennies on the dollar.  They also later spun uh liquid funding limited back up. There's a whole um there's a very overt  financial paper trail that Jeffrey Epstein was better acquainted with the problem than almost  anyone in the world because he was deeply inshed in Bear Sterns and knew the leadership of Bear  Sterns very well and he understood CDOS and he was selling CDOS's and then he just so happens  to wind his whole shop up and close it down and redeem it all right at the moment when things  are about to go bust. Um, so that's that's a wild rabbit hole and it's very interesting, but um  but I mean what is I mean that that suggests well it doesn't suggest it's like direct evidence  of if I'm assuming we can verify what you're saying that like the biggest events in the world  are actually not quite as organic or accidental as we're led to believe and that you know this  is like puppet master stuff. I mean, it it is. I don't know what to say. I don't want this to be  true, but that's what it looks like. Yeah. And um the reason why I feel comfortable saying that is  because I actually did produce an entire YouTube video on teleprompter with my sources directly  in front of my face. They're on screen. It's on my YouTube right now. Yes. Um I think it's titled  Jeffrey Epstein knew or he knew. And um I put it out middle to late last year. And walked through,  you know, document by document. um not not that we know for sure, not that he like you know schemed  it with his Illuminati buddies, but he was right at the heart of it, had all the knowledge of it.  He was deeply connected to all the parties in it and then like the timing is just so coincidental.  Um and yeah, it does start to make you wonder about how much of our how much of our global  events are orchestrated versus not. But then, you know, you think about the global pandemic and  you think about like we've got documents in the Epstein files that they're talking about getting  a war in Ukraine started and how that's going to be good for business. And so you these files  have a lot of these world events sort of woven throughout them um either directly or indirectly.  It's it's sometimes hard to say, but um the reason I think why Jeffrey Epste is at the center of so  many of these things and at the center of so many circles and at the center of so many, you know,  important and powerful networks in our world is because Jeffrey Epstein was a professional money  launderer. Um there sort of is this there's this facade as though we don't know how Jeffrey Epste  made his money. And then there's also a lot of people that will erroneously report that Jeffrey  Epste made his money in legitimate ways but then, you know, got into crime or whatever. It's like  that is that that is not true. Jeffrey Epstein went from legitimateish banking at Bear Sterns  where he was managing private wealth for clients and then in the 80s he went into his like missing  years where he said that he was a bounty hunter for billionaires. But we have lots and lots of  evidence that during that time he was working with arms traffickers, Douglas Lee, Anon Koshogi, and  Robert Maxwell and getting into moneyaundering for arms dealers because he was exceptionally good at  complex financial transactions using derivatives, using tax havens, using uh charitable uh  structures of complex charitable organizations like the Bill and Meinda Gates Foundation, the  Clinton Global Initiative, and he got better and better throughout his career at uh basically  committing complex financial frauds like the tower financials fraud that he was a major part of. And  so when you get to the end of that line and he is getting into the actual human trafficking  side of it, the blackmailing side of it, um money launderers are the node that all criminal  networks have to flow through. Moneyaundering is the network, the node that any because it's not  just like moneyaundering for criminal stuff. It's also if a billionaire wants to shelter their  taxes or wants to pay less in taxes. And you can read the reporting about how Jeffrey Epstein  referred Bill Gates and Sergey Brin and uh Benjamin Netanyahu and Larry Summers to JP Morgan  for banking services. He referred a bunch of the wealthiest, most powerful people in the world  to JP Morgan for banking services, right? which is completely nonsensical if you take it at face  value. But when you realize that that's like how when you're in high school and you need to like  know the guy that knows the weed dealer in order to get into like you know the back door. It's like  you need you need that trust network in a criminal space because criminals have to operate on trust.  And so that it's like you know a guy that knows a guy to get you in the back door for the the back  door of the banking system is what that looks like to me. Um and who would know that better than  Jeffrey Epstein. And so you there's there's this false narrative that we don't know how he made  his money. We don't know what the network like we don't that we don't know don't know don't know.  And what that means is that those people have not read what we do know. Um and there's a lot we  still don't know. But uh how Jeffrey Epste made his money and why he was at the center of so  much is not not the great mystery that it once was anymore. So here's my big picture concern  is that you know all all these our country and the entire west um you know the the structure is  representative democracy some version of that like the people rule and it is therefore these are all  voluntary systems like people participate in the system they pay their taxes they obey the law they  vote they abide by the results of those elections like all this is just voluntary because we all  believe that despite corruption and imperfection, the systems themselves are legitimate, they're  kind of run on the basis of what they tell us they're doing, like this is all for our benefit.  If people decide that like it's all fake, it's all totally corrupt. Our welfare has nothing to do  with why these systems are running. It's all like a scam. I don't know like what happens then when  you know this much about the corruption can any of these systems continue and I should just say  for whatever it's worth it I like a lot of these systems I grew up with them like I'm for democracy  I'm for you know transparent justice and all that stuff I'm not for tearing it all down but I I just  I'm starting to wonder like can any of this keep going now that we know a lot of the truth yeah  that is the million-dollar question and think um so I'm 33 years old right now and I'm sort  of of the 9/11 generation and um I shudder to imagine how a 21-year-old must feel today or a  15year-old must feel today because even at my age um as sort of like a still younger kind of adult  um moving into like my generation is supposed to be moving into leadership roles and moving into  positions of of taking on the mantle of like leading our country in the next you know 5 to 10  years And we all grew up in this world where the first thing we knew as like young thinking adults  was 9/11. And every event since then has felt like a facade. It's all felt like lies. It's all felt  like deception. And it's culminated in this moment where we get this massive dump of information that  just explicitly tells us that all the way back to Bill Clinton's presidency and even before in a lot  of ways um our government has been blackmailed on behalf of a foreign malign malignant sort of  an interest that then when we all we all see in 2019 that this guy gets charged, they get all  this evidence It is now 2026. That is 7 years of the American government doing absolutely nothing  with this with this case. Not prosecuting anyone except for Galain a little bit. Not not asking  any questions, no investigations, no where where like we're told that this is America. We're told  that this is, you know, the greatest country on earth. And what what you would expect then from  any decent country or any decent person if you shrunk this down to a smaller kind of a frame of  reference is you would expect that you deal with it. You you you deal with it. You don't let  people abuse children. You don't let people blackmail your politicians. You don't let people  control your financial networks through coercion and bribery and and control like this. And so when  people in their 20s and 30s and and everyone of every age sees that for for decades now our nation  has been co-opted from the inside and then when they find that co-option and then still nothing is  done. In fact, it's actually actively covered up um for almost 20 years now since the initial  uh sweetheart deal. Yeah. I don't know how you um I don't know how you come back from that.  And that's where it feels a little bit more like um you remember that there's a famous tape that  goes around of Yuri Bezmanov I think his name is describing KG subversion, subversion of a  nation and the stages of subversion. Um it's I I I kind of shudder to to think this part of it  all through. But it really does make me feel like like almost like we've been cast from worth being  controlled to now just being subverted. Because when you've been that deeply compromised for that  long, it's it's almost reminds me of like the man that has let his values slip for so long, has  been lost in the bottle for so long, or has been cheating for so long that that once the lies  all come out, once the the pain all comes out, it's like there's there's no man left. There's no  which is is like that's an unacceptable state of being. That's an unacceptable answer. I'm trying  to raise a family in this country. I'm trying to, you know, raise children. I'm trying to have a  future. And so, so there like I think there's people at all different stages of grief with  this thing and and rage with this thing. Um, and I think that maybe people that skew olders  maybe skew more towards like trying to ignore it. Um, and I think that people that skew younger  maybe also like like giving up about it, but but I'm somewhere in the middle where it's like rage  because this is like I'm we're supposed to have a future here and and I'm I'm of the generation  that's supposed to be here to do something about it. And everyone in, you know, from my generation  up to like Cash Patel's generation, for example, everyone of power is seems to be just complicit or  weak and spineless or unwilling to do something, unable to do something. Um, so I don't know what  the solution is, but it's just it's unacceptable to me that there isn't one. Well, that's right.  But you also like in at the end of what you just said, you said people younger than you just  accept it. I mean, older people can't deal with it. It's too much. It's too different from  what they previously believed. And I understand they they're tormented by it. Like I I don't  believe this. It's all crazy. And by the way, I'm probably close to that generation. I am closer  than you are. And I kind of felt that way. This is too crazy. This can't be real. I took my kids to  brunch at Comet Pizza. I know the guys who own it. like there's no way this can be real, right?  I mean, I'll just admit it. I felt that way. I was wrong, obviously. So, but I get that. But much  more disturbing is not just that boomers are, you know, out of it. We knew that. But that young  people are just like so basically have been made, let's just be honest, so decadent in their  thinking that they're just like, "Yeah, of course, you know, like, of course we're  ruled by satanic pedophiles." It's like, how terrible is that that people are growing  up in this country just assuming that the most grotesque crimes are the way things are? It's uh  terrifying. It's absolutely terrifying. It's like um it's like the generation of children born into  the camp that have never known anything else, right? They've never known the freedom. They've  never known, you know, the sunlight. And and for me, somewhere in the middle there, when I look at  what that what that future looks like, if you let that subversion slide into one more generation,  it it's like is is it maybe that you never come back out? Do you never have a respectful country  again? Do you never have the will to stand on your two feet and stand up for your your rights as a  human again? because I'm somewhere in the middle there where like I I I at least remember when we  all believed that we had a country and when we all believed that there was democracy, when we all  believed that there was something going on here um and that we would have a future and looking  at young people growing up starting to accept that this is just the way it is and that nothing  will ever be done. Um, I shudder to think of if this generation doesn't pull it together and and  do something about this and instead we let the next generation grow into just being sedated by  all the flashing lights and the phones and the Tik Toks and the whatever else and and just kind  of sliding into the soma of it all, so to speak. Um, that is the most horrifying idea in my  mind ever. And I that's like rage against the dying of the light. That is there is no  worse fate in my opinion. Like I death before um before sort of that slide down into the matrix,  so to speak. Um and I it does feel like this is the time. It feels like it's well but when is the  time if not when three million documents come out? So obviously we're just I mean I'm you know  traveling we're not this just happened. You can't process this stuff quickly enough. I mean this is  we're just touching the surface of what's there trying to sort through what's true and what's not  or even just to absorb it like what's in those documents. So, this is just the beginning, but I'm  I'm grateful that you do this because I I think you're an honest man and I measure that with one  in one simple test. Are you willing to admit if you're wrong? And you have demonstrated again and  again. If you think you're wrong about something, you'll just say, "I think I was wrong about  it." So, that's what an honest man does. So, I think you're honest. I think you're obviously  very smart. You see the big picture um and you care. So, I just want to end on two questions.  Where for people trying to assess this is a place to get more information about these documents?  Like where as a practical matter like where can you go to find you can't just like scroll through  Twitter all day like where can you find stuff the primary documents and two what threads are you you  personally Ian Carol following up on like really getting into in greater detail and where can  people find them? Um, my recommendation for where people should go to look into this for yourself  is to double check for yourself basically is you should pair two things together. One should be the  primary source and it should always be the primary source which is justice.gov/epstein /pstein and  you should have that website open and you should have the search bar right there and anytime you  see a real on Instagram or a Tik Tok or something on X, you can pause that and you can screenshot it  and you can zoom in and you can look at the words that are in that email or in that correspondence.  And if you string together three, four, five words exactly as they appear in what you're seeing and  you put those words into the search bar, you'll find that email immediately because there's only  so many emails that have thank you for including me last night in it. And if you type thank you  for including me last night into that search bar, you'll pull up this one that I have on my screen  right now where it ends with it was fun to catch up with all the girls. And so that is a way  that you can anytime you see someone referencing something that's in these files, take a quotation  out, plug it into that search bar and double check it for yourself because there's a lot of stuff  like it went super viral that Jeffrey Epstein was Zoron mom Donny's dad which is not true at all  and it was just like running away with this mad um you know social media energy. So double check  things for yourself. Um that's where I would go. I mean, and so that with that in mind, then you're,  you know, you're equipped to go watch YouTubers and go watch Tik Toks and go scroll X if you want  to and just, you know, absorb it however you want to absorb it. Just remember to think for yourself  and double check for yourself and and take your time because there's so much here that a lot of  people are jumping on narratives too quick. A lot of people are chasing clicks too much and um  it's going to take months and maybe even years if you know the DOJ if the DOJ doesn't help for us  to actually unravel everything that is in there. So take your time. Um as for me, I'm actually  working on a tool designed to help everyone do this. Um we're naming it web after Gary web and  we're going to give it out to everybody. Um where we're just going to put all the documents in and  cross reference them all. It's we're kind of like using a bunch of complex AI cuz I wanted to do  it and my buddy was like, "Hey, we can build that way better." Um, and so basically building  a tool where instead of just having a search bar, you can have conversations with all the documents,  but actually have them primary sourced right there so that when you want to know what's in the  documents, you can get summaries of them, you can ask questions about, you can search them all, but  actually have the original primary sources there. Um, so that's actually what I'm kind of like  diving into really hard this week because it's, you know, I can search for the word pizza and pull  up 851 results and open them one by one all day long, but ultimately this this data set is just  way too vast and we need to make tools that let journalists dig through it in complex ways because  obviously the DOJ wanted it to be let's say that I suspect that the DOJ was not very interested in  making them very accessible as noted by them not giving us zip downloads to even download them with  this time. So trying to make them more accessible for myself. Can I suggest a thread, you know,  for a a younger, more energetic man to follow up on? Absolutely. And that's Ebstein's fixation on  genetics and biotechnology. And it's very clear to me, well much is not clear to me at all. And I and  I don't understand this this category very well. I'm not a scientist or a geneticist, but I have  noticed not just with Epste, but with a bunch of people in Epstein's orbit, there is a fixation on  genetics and and changing genetics and improving people and cloning and really kind of tampering  with the material of life in a way that someone who believed he was God would or someone who's  involved um you know in the supernatural would. I mean, there's there's really heavy stuff here and  um and that that really really matters and I have not seen anybody go into that in a methodical way  at all. Yeah, I absolutely agree. It's there's a bunch about genetics and there's actually some  stuff about transgenderism in there. Um that's very fascinating and tend to look into that.  And then one other thread that you remind me of that I'm I was digging I've been digging into  actually for a couple years now and then was just producing more on because there's a bunch  more on it is his Hollywood media connections um through this woman named Peggy Seagal that is  she is one of Hollywood's most famous madams that had her book of contacts that was getting Epstein  into all these parties and um she's one of those nodes of this connection this this network that  was immediately pushed to the side and hidden in the shadows like no one she was blacklisted  from all of Hollywood immediately. Um and I am very suspicious about why that was and why that  still is. And um so so there's just loose threads in so many directions. Um and I kind of get led  by what's the most like for example the genetics what's the most like messed up or scary or sketchy  um direction that he's going. And then the other thing that kind of pulls me in a direction  is what's the most uh where's the where's the dig that looks like there's the most in it about  whatever topic. Um and so those are two that very much have my attention in Carol. Thank you for  taking the time to do this. Again we're just at the at the very beginning but I just I felt like  a lot of us maybe all of us are being manipulated um in the way that we respond to these files.  Clearly we are. And so I just wanted to stop and reorient what do we know is true at this  early time and how should we be thinking about it. And as usual, you just delivered. So  thank you. Thanks a lot, Tucker. Appreciate it.