The Jerogan experience. Jo, did you know when you send you that Grand Theft Auto DMT trip? A lot of people think that you had a big influence in it. Oh, I'm sure there's a lot of people who've done DMT besides me. But it starts off with this, you know, guy, and he's just driving around with your father. And then he, the kid tricks him into taking it while he's driving. So he starts tripping out. Oh, I'm sorry, man. Oh, it's pretty easy for doing it. Yeah, that's the task, man. You fucking shit. I'm gonna take to you from yourself. Also, I'm gonna warm it to your big account and remove the gun. You're too crazy, dad. That's the dead. That's the dead on the ground. Tripping balls. Yeah, and then watch what happens. This is the part where it starts getting really Jerogan-y. You might have hit me. This is a fucking awesome video. Holy shit. Hey, what's got up? Does it go. Do, do, do, do, do, do, do, do, do, do. Oh, Gee, this is for... Stop! No way! He can't even get you to go. Oh yeah, this is my people. Now he's getting abducted by aliens. So the monkeys first and then the alien ship shoots him up into its face. This is on every time. These people in here on the same wavelength if they didn't hear them if they don't know of me and know me when they were coding this They need to start to see this. We are on the UR. You are the herpes. They're not cure for We are on the same wavelength. We would get along great. If they don't know me We would get along great if this wasn't inspired by me death metal bad fucking comic people everyone If you have terminated all of this you see that he did this Yeah, they're alien gave him the fucking metal sign. Yeah, wow This is intense shit. This is not me. This would no wonder though. That's the opposite But why are you hiding you dick and asshole? You're flying your space You know you shouldn't be holding on to your your vanity in your fear and your insecureness, but the breeze blow through that left flies This hover on your asshole With your final space, what do you care? You're one with the universe so you Oh, yeah, and you can get high and every time you get high you hear inner spots And it's really trippy so like once it goes online October first all is comics We're all just gonna hang out commies or smoke. We together But with this game it's in the Oculus Rift I've heard that this game is the the most successful single piece of anything anybody created ever one billion dollars in three days Not amazing it's amazing, but there's never been anything that sold as well as this God bless America. Why don't you think the economy's down? So like this guy's low cocaine or coco in a day. Yes It is it. Yeah, so much blow you can do. Yeah, I mean after walk Offered DMT by a buddy. Buddy's buddy. We're up in Canada. And he's like hey man. I got this shit this DMT And he's like I'm all You heard of it. I'm like I'm familiar. I've heard of it I know some people that have talked about it like it's just a baby to why don't we go back and we're all out drinking and hanging out I'm like no Shoving fucking hallucinogenic drugs up my body with a guy that just ah It does not sound like a good idea to wake up glaze like a fucking crispy cream donut or fucking you know That's when somebody gets eaten. Yeah, that could happen too Yeah, especially when you're drinking now usually not suppose you're not even supposed to eat It was just too nonchalant about slinging you know us fucking doing DMT. I'm like that's Mm-hmm. I should be taken with a lot more care when I give you some of that once a fuck of Viking. That's what that is No, that's where you fuck of Viking. That is not that's who you come up roofing up with some DMT