The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day What's up man? How are you? Good to see you at the GAD Palace You see how you doing man? I missed you man. It's been a long time I wish we could do it in studio, but I don't think you're allowed to travel from Canada right now, right? I'm not but I'm so worried about your COVID results that just like my hero Joe Biden told me I need to wear a mask What do you think of that of marketing? I like it the parasitic mine mask excellent. Do you are you selling those? I will we will be eventually but my publisher still working out all the final details. Yeah. All right beautiful Beautiful. I want to know how are you doing with the COVID? How is the truth seeker Jamie doing young Jamie's all good to go? He was only really sick for a day because he's young and virile and he takes his vitamin D and zinc and vitamin C and all that stuff He caught it. We don't know where he caught it. He believes he might have caught it at a bar on a patio but really was only sick for a day, but you know we had to do the right thing and so we were locked out He was locked out for 10 days and he had four positive COVID results in a row now five. Did you get one today? Negative they were negative. Excuse me I mean, I was having a good way negative negative in terms of him having the disease but positive in a good way So you've always been negative. Yeah, I've always been negative Okay, yeah, fortunately. Yeah, but we're good to go now. So no issues. No one else has gotten it It's amazing that Jamie is the first person in studio that actually tested positive We've tested everyone today was my 48th test. I've been tested 48 different times Yeah, is that the invasive one where they really go up and tickle your brain or is it a less? I don't they don't have to do that anymore They found they just I mean it doesn't feel good, but they just they don't go all the way up They go kind of midway and they just do it for 10 seconds in each nostril and then they stick it in the machine and you get a result in 15 minutes How how much has this whole thing affected your life? I mean other than having to do things remotely and so on It's affected everyone's life, right? Doing things remotely we have actually shockingly done Not that many remotely a lot of the people we brought in and just tested everybody It's just so much better. I mean you know when we're face to face I mean you and I've been friends for a long time now how many years have we been doing these things together I don't know maybe eight years or something. Yeah, it's nice to see you and hug you and to talk and to you know To look look each other in the eye, but this is a great second best Have the metrics changed in terms of your listeners as a function of whether you do it in person or a No, that doesn't change they the numbers just keep going up Because people are at home and they're trapped and they look for content and they also look for honest content There's not a lot of that shit out there headed up to the election Everyone is so twisted and biased and it's just such a weird weird time. I mean I just I wanted to be over in hopes that not just the election but also COVID so that people can get back to work which I think will calm people down when the financial situation Starts to improve. I think people be less on edge. It's just such a divided time. So it's so unfortunate But I think I think we're gonna learn a lot from this now really do Yeah, I hope so too I mean it's been it's been tough over here because I'm on sabbatical this semester And it's at the time when my book came out. So I was planning on doing all kinds of you know world book tours and also You know also stuff and everything has been shut down So it's been a bummer, but at least I get to spend more time with the family. I guess well that yeah, there's some as long as people Take advantage of this time that you can do some self-improvement you can you know people can meditate and exercise and write and there's a lot of things you can get done Yeah, these are minor concerns. I believe in comparison to the people whose businesses are shut down and The people who've lost family members and you know have struggled personally health-wise with the disease The number of people that are losing their businesses is just insane. I mean this is unprecedented There's nothing like it and one of the reasons why we left California is because of their draconian measures that they're using to shut things down You know the the initial conversation they were gonna shut it down until they flattened out the curve and the hospitals Were at you know We're we're able to accept people and they weren't overburdened Well, they're not overburdened now and they still have everything shut down It doesn't make any sense and they're saying now that after the election after the election is what they keep saying So they're not even trying to hide that it's political and You know Jamie and I and the rest of the crew we were all pretty sick of it and it just our freedoms are being Impinged upon it just didn't it didn't infringed upon rather it didn't seem like The what we signed up for you know We never signed up for an autocrat we never signed up for the government to be able to tell us that we can't work And this is insane. This has never happened before and it you know It makes all the wacky tin foil hat conspiracy theories actually seem to make more sense And they've ever made before which is even more terrifying because people have already been queued on down The ass online everyone's so crazy already online and this is what gives them It adds more fuel to the fire that this is real and it seems to be in a lot of ways I mean that they are they're doing this for political purposes, which is terrifying Yeah, you know I analogize it to you know if you want to raise children well you need to have you know Consistent parenting so that the child knows What he or she needs to do to get the strokes and what he or she needs to do if they're going to get punished when you have a haphazard Parental style. It's a form of mind fuck if I might say for the child because they don't know when to expect your love or your scorn And in a sense I view the current covid regulations A kin to a inconsistent parent, right? I don't know if tomorrow I'm allowed to invite people over for a small barbecue in my house or not It all seems very sort of flying by the seat of your pen And I think that's what stresses me the most that I can't really have any sense of Regularity or any predictability in my life. I think that's a really tough part What are the regulations in Montreal in terms of what you're allowed to do and not all well to do? And are there is draconian and as they are here in the United States? Well particularly in California and I think Texas they give you a lot more freedom. It's really nice So right now we're on our second month of pretty complete lockdown Not lockdown in the sense that you can't go out on the street But you can go to the restaurants are closed. You could only take out the cafes are closed The gyms are closed. So you could certainly walk around the city freely But most of the things that you and I might do if we're going to leave our house We can't do I can't go to the gym. I can't go to a cafe. I can't go to a restaurant So in that sense it's quite tough So I end up spending you know most of my time either at home or I go for long walks Is this a national thing or is it a regional thing? I think it varies across each Province because of all of the provinces for you know for much of the COVID crisis Quebec and Montreal in particular were some of the hotspots as a matter of fact Where I live was one of the hotspots within the hotspots of Montreal And so we were quite quite concerned and so we've tried to limit to the best of our abilities You know going out but you know especially in Montreal Whereas you know you lived in Boston Winter is coming so it was easy to kind of go through COVID When it's April, you know May and June and July It's going to be a lot more challenging to do the lockdown when it's you know minus 20 and I haven't been outside for three weeks You know what they tried to do in LA is really bizarre They try to tell people you can't have people over for like a party You can't have families over for your house And they were actually asking people to turn their neighbors in Yeah, which is just they were offering rewards for people who are turning their neighbors in You know in the beginning it made sense because we were worried that two million people were going to die And this was a disease that was going to ravage the entire country But then when you look at the survival rate it doesn't pan out if we knew coming in to if COVID We had all the information that we have now at the beginning If we had all that information now and they proposed the same lockdown I think people would have resisted. They would have been furious The problem is they initially agreed to it thinking that it was going to be way worse than it was And then when it turned out to not be nearly as deadly as we feared there was no adjustments made I hear you and you know I've had a few You know virologists on my show and I think you have as well And several of them have told me that they Early in the lockdown that they thought that there wasn't a very good cost benefit analysis in terms of the repercussions of such a lockdown that many of the Costs of the lockdown were not being taken into account within the modeling and I think their position has turned out to be true Right very few people talk about the missed cancer screenings and the heart disease and the anxiety and the depression And the spouse of the abuse and the child abuse and so I don't know when that auto corrective Mechanism is going to work, but I suspect that people are not going to tolerate this for much longer I think well I don't know what they can do outside of like a revolt and that's what's terrifying You know, I agree with you though I think the World Health Organization is That was what we were supposed to be paying attention to and YouTube literally said that they were going to censor anything They didn't agree with the World Health Organization Amazing but now the World Health Organization has come out and said that the lockdowns should end They were saying that the the economic despair suicides Drug addiction everything is skyrocketed right and the World Health Organization is saying that the effect of the lockdown has been so detrimental That they don't support the economic lockdown But yet the lockdown continues so now they don't support the World Health Organization anymore Which is like okay? Well who is the authority now? Who's the authority because it can't be the mayor of Los Angeles or the governor of California because they're both So rapidly Democrat This so it's so they're so rapidly liberal that it seems like they would be happy To watch the economy tank if they could blame it on Donald Trump and this is where we find ourselves I hear you by the way is is is California The most democratic state at the various levels of any state is that would that be true to say? I wonder New York's pretty democratic as well. It's the coastal cities. You know, it's something. It's interesting because I maybe I could ask you this Why do you think Cities become so liberal because it seems like there's no real conservative cities Cities almost always go blue I suspect that's because that's where sort of the intelligence here end up going and as as you know most of the folks with that are within the intelligence here are typically exactly the people that I discuss in the Percidic mind the people who are Percidized by all these idea pathogens And so I suspect that you know if you are an up-and-coming person who lives in Binghamton New York No disrespect to New York To Binghamton and then you want to make it you you move to to New York And then you get some degree in the liberal arts college you get Percidized by these idiotic ideas and then slowly all of these urban areas become ultra progressive I can't think what would be another explanation. There's so few intellectuals and Academics that have avoided this how have you managed to be so steadfast? You have avoided this from the beginning and I know you've been criticized But you come out of its smiling always your attitude is very admirable. It always has been because here But you're always smiling through all the nuttiness you seem to have a great disposition about this You know, I'm well, it's a lovely question. Thank you I think I'm endowed with a happy disposition So that when I wake up in the morning not with standing all of the possible challenges. I might face in a day I'm like a kid in a candy store. I wake up and I'm excited. Oh my god. I'm gonna speak to Joe Rogan today I'm happy if I weren't speaking to Joe Rogan. I would be working on the next paper So this positionally I'm someone who's happy Which I think protects me against the lunacy because even though of course I get stressed of course I get beaten down my innate disposition is to Be smiling and so in a sense I'm lucky enough to have got to have won the genetic lottery of being someone who views the world through an optimistic lens And I think that's what allows me to to fight the fights that I do because otherwise I think I would have beaten down long time ago I mean the only way that as you know you could survive in the cesspool of academia Saying the things that I say is first of all to be as you said happy and optimistic But also to be so I talk about in chapter eight of the book. I talk about you know Activating your inner honey badger The honey badger is an incredibly ferocious animal as you know Joe So he could withstand the approach of eight adult lines the honey badger is the size of you know a small dog How could it be that lions are intimidated by the honey badger? Well because he's ferocious and so While I may have a happy disposition as you know if you've seen me in some of my battles in social media I'm also an intellectual honey badger if you come after me. You better come correct because I'm gonna come after you I'm gonna come after your ancestors. I'm gonna come after your dead ancestors And so I think you know the tenacity coupled with the optimistic outlook is kind of the the right cocktail of traits to have To be able to fight the lunasing you're also a person who embraced early on alternative media in terms of Your ability to spread your word YouTube podcasts all these different things you recognize that there is a real benefit in particularly long-form conversations where you're able to express yourself Unchecked uncensored and really get your full idea out there so people can understand like you're not some bizarre Reactionary who's not making any sense you're a man who has studied this your whole life And you've thought through this very deeply and written about it, you know, it's very accurately Exactly and I think I might have mentioned the story before to you on the show, but it's it's worth repeating It's actually a story that I've discussed in the book. It relates to you so You know when I went to Stanford Business School several years ago to give a talk, you know as you might imagine That's a very you know highfalutin elitist environment The the host who took me out that evening prior to my talk the night before my talk Said oh, you know, I hear you're going on Joe Rogan. I said yeah, yeah, you know We're friends, you know love to go on Joe. It's such a great forum to spread ideas and he was very hot He's well, you know at Stanford. We don't support You know doing research so that you could appear on Joe Rogan. I said well what do you mean? You don't think it's a good idea to appear on a platform that allows you to spread your ideas to 10 million people instead of Writing a paper that will be read by you your mom two reviewers and an editor Well, I guess he didn't like that response, but the reality is that that's the kind of elitism that you see in academia where I mean I'm happy to see that a growing number of academics are coming on a platform like yours because it is insane to not take advantage of such platforms Look, I am in the currency of creating knowledge and then spreading knowledge Well, I could appear on Joe Rogan's podcast for five minutes and have greater impact than if I published 10 papers in the most elite scientific journals So so yes, I embraced those forums because pragmatically it's a wonderful way to have fantastic conversations, right? It is and it's beautiful that brave academics are being rewarded the people that are willing to go on my podcast and other podcasts You know that you know my kit looked down upon by these scholars, you know They they get rewarded by enormous audiences and also curious people that you know Maybe have full-time jobs Maybe didn't go to college, but are curious folks that want to explore these ideas and explore them being described by a person such as yourself Who has deeply studied them Joe do you know how many and I know you know this already? I don't have to tell you how Incredible your platform is I could be walking on a beach in Bahamas and that that literally happened by the way Where a local Behmian will come up to me and say oh my god Aren't you didn't you appear on Joe Rogan? So I mean and I don't say this to to talk about fame but to to demonstrate the kind of Platform you've created where I could be in a bathroom in some little town and someone's going to recognize me because I appeared on the show And I say this not because of the recognition factor or the fame, but again if I am in the business of Discussing ideas. I should use every possible tool whether it be your podcast or if I create my own podcast any way that I can Spread ideas. I'm gonna jump on it I think a lot of academics don't do it because of an ego defensive Reason which is they know that they may not be able to pull it off appearing on Joe Rogan and therefore they denigrate those who can Right because they've mastered one form of communication which is you know the the rigid academic paper that they can do well And that's great I mean we are professors we shouldn't be publishing academic papers, but why not try to Tip your toes on you know so that the public can get excited about your ideas, right? Well, I've had a lot of academics on the show and I Plawed them. I'm happy that they're willing to do that, but I do understand that the environment of academia It's kind of a thought bubble right like they're all They're all echoing sort of the same ideas and reinforcing those ideas within each other and you know But in their defense this is how it's been forever. I mean social media and Alternative media like podcast and YouTube. We're talking a decade or two. It's not that much time I mean this podcast is 11 years old. That's nothing But doesn't it suck that Academ, I mean I always analogize academics to Navy seals right when we choose Navy seals We're picking people who hopefully have athleticism have great courage bravery So shouldn't we be picking similar traits in our intellectuals? But we're not right so we don't create intellectual seals who are willing to go and uncharted intellectual territory Rather we create you know, Tepid sheepish academics who stay in their lanes who never rocked the boat and as you and I know the world is shaped by people Who are unorthodox right whether it be sigmund Freud telling us about the unconscious mind or Charles Darwin developing his theory of Select, you know natural selection or galileo or Socrates the world is shaped by those who weren't Fenceitters right you became who you are with your podcast because you decided to step out of the bubble and create something that no one else had created before a Three-hour intimate conversation with incredible guests So I always tell people yes, you can play it safe But no one will remember you if you take risks the great rewards will befall you Well, honestly the risks they're not that great. That's what's crazy Like that especially this podcast rewarding me it's hilarious because I never Intended to do this in the first place. This is all just an accident I started this podcast smoking pot and talking to my friends on a laptop and it became Like slowly but surely a place where I could get guests and then explore things that I'm interested in and I don't even remember how you and I first gotten contacts with each other I know we have in common your nephew Well, Ariel Helwani who is an MMA journalist for ESPN and I've known Ariel for years But other than that how did we even get in contact with each other? I think it was through Twitter Maybe I was communicating with R.E.L. or vice versa We got onto a thread together and that's how we first connected and you said hey come on my show and so on and of course I was very excited to come that's I think how it started it was through some You know connection through R.E.L. I don't remember the details But look where we are now man what do we have? 21 25 hours of content between the two of us? Yeah, and when was the last time you were on? How long ago was it? I think it was December 2018 so almost two years Well the podcast is probably five times six times bigger now are you kidding me? Oh, yeah? Are you are you able to share any metrics? Just so you could make me super envious hundreds of millions of downloads a month That is insane. Yeah, it's insane. The weird thing is that when we went over to Spotify It actually got bigger like the the numbers on YouTube and iTunes didn't shrink They just we just picked up new listeners. It's very bizarre I expected that the numbers would drop on iTunes Because we have this new platform, but since we're on both platforms now What happened is we just gained new people on Spotify that really maybe we were Spotify loyalists That you know just had always been accustomed to it And they said let me check it out and then the numbers on Spotify just keep growing and growing so it's real weird How do you I mean when you wake up in the morning? Can you can you believe that you've become this cultural icon that sort of Moderates all these unbelievable conversations with all sorts of incredible people. I mean isn't it incredible? It's incredible in that it's not credible It doesn't make you think I'm always modest right but but I'm also honest This is not I'm not really Because I'm not qualified. That's probably why I'm qualified because it works because I don't have the the barriers Like I don't I don't have the I don't have the the sense to say Well, this is probably not a good person to have on for my career Or like this is not a wise topic of discussion is gonna I'm gonna get a lot of criticism for this because I don't think that way. That's probably why it's worked I'm gonna tell you two things if I may number one I think it's your intellectual curiosity and that's one thing that I always tell my graduate students What they're looking you know to do their doctoral dissertation and so on You could be the hardest working person and the brightest person if you don't have that intellectual curiosity Right sort of waking up every day excited about things that you're going to learn that day Then you're not gonna be a good scholar let alone a great host on a podcast like yours And I also think it's exactly what you said is your your honesty right? There's that comes through on the camera That there is no BS coming from you and I love the fact by the way that you said that you don't modulate who you bring on So and let me let me share my own personal experience I was just contacted a few days ago and if she's listening now I'm sorry if I haven't responded yet. I will I was contacted by a Very famous former porn star. I won't mention her name. I didn't actually know her work but I have since gone and done my research on her and And if my wife is listening it was completely for research purposes And so anyways, so so I she reached out to me said hey, would you come on my show? You know, I'm a fan now if I were the typical academic I would be doing all sorts of machinations in my head and calculation as well Is it good for my brand to be speaking to a porn star? Doesn't it make me look less professorial and actually I it never even entered my mind I saw that she had a sufficiently large platform That she was certainly an intelligent person and I'm very likely to reply at her and say hey Let's let's do it So and I think that comes across with you. There's no pretense Let's just sit down and have conversations with interesting people. Of course in my case My show is infinitely smaller than yours But it's been successful within my sphere for I think similar reasons to why yours has been so successful The porn star thing is very interesting because people avoid even the topic of porn But yet clearly a lot of people are watching it And a good example and I don't mean to throw this guy under the bus is the The journalist from the New Yorker who Unfortunately was on a zoom call recently and thought he had muted his video and did not and why was it work on the zoom call decided to start masturbating And didn't know the Did we do it? Definitely do it I wasn't gonna say his name. I just want to say that you said his name and not me I feel terrible for the man because First of all because I masturbate I know that's gonna sound crazy But I do and I know There are many men who masturbate You're married so of course you masturbate Well, I even before I was married I masturbated. I'm gonna be honest with you I am a lifelong masturbator. I think I discovered it In my teenage years and I've been an avid pursuer of it ever since I think it's a clarity device But it's also I mean in terms of like when you get horny you get very confused Like a man who are horny have one thing on their mind and it's uh It's a good tool to eliminate that one thing from your mind and you could But uh You don't want to be fixated by something if you're hungry you should eat You know you don't want to be just like starving all day just eat I'm sorry, but my point is We all sort of want to pretend that we're not doing that It's very straight like intellectually we all know that we do it We everyone knows we do it everyone does it Pretty much everyone does it But when you discuss it people like oh they roll their eyes They pull their head. It's out of shame. It's a very strange thing There's we have biological needs and if you don't attend to these biological needs I believe that you can have very confusing motives and People that are Accessively horny they they're distracted So it's too Two Seinfeld references that speak exactly to that point. You ready? So the first one is actually one that I discussed in my first book my 2007 book The evolutionary basis of consumption where I was talking about how you can analyze cultural products including you know Sitcom themes via an evolutionary lens And so I take the example of the classic episode from Seinfeld Master of my domain right where Remember that so yeah, so my domain of course is a euphemism for Who could withstand their master britory urges the longest and then I say well Let's analyze that plot line of that particular show from an evolutionary perspective and so The first thing you might remember is that they are three male characters and one female one They all recognize that she has to put in more money into the into the pop the the the bed pop Because it isn't as difficult for women to resist their master britory urges so that was the first point Then as each one was losing the bed meaning they were succumbing to their master britory urges It's interesting to look at what was the trigger that caused them to lose the bed So in the case of Kramer it's because he is seeing a gorgeous young woman Scantily clad doing all sorts of sexy positions as she's exercising So what triggered him to masturbate was the visual imagery whereas when it came to Elaine losing The bed it's because she fantasized about becoming the long-term partner the wife of John F. Kennedy Jr Right, and she wasn't she wasn't masturbating over the kabana boy who was 18 years old with a nice ass And so that spoke to the differences in terms of the content of the fantasies of men and women and then the second point I want to make But is also from Seinfeld is there's an episode where George decides to Forgo sex and by freeing his mind from having to focus on sex He starts learning a whole bunch of new languages and he's solving chemistry equation problems because 99% of his brain is no longer focused on You know sex and so there you go. Yeah, that's that's a real issue with people But again discussing porn or especially having a conversation with someone who participates in the the actual production and acting in Paul say acting with air quotes It's uh, it's forbidden. It's taboo. It's it's uh, you you get looked down upon for some very bizarre reason Probably has to do with our pure tannical shame The I'm not sure if we've discussed this before but even if we have I think it's worth repeating It's probably many years ago that we discussed it So in in one of my other books I talk about the you know evolutionary explanation of pornography and I specifically talk about uh porn that is directed at heterosexual males so evolutionary explanation of pornography. And I specifically talk about porn that is directed at heterosexual males. So, typically you might think that because men are interested in sleeping with you know, many women that pornography is going to have one man sleeping with multiple women in a particular scene, right? And that's called, polygyny, one man, many women. Whereas, actually, the study has been done, scientific study, it turns out that there's a lot more what's called polyandrous depictions in porn. Polyandry is one woman with multiple men. So, why is it that porn directed to heterosexual men has a lot more scenes with one woman having sex with multiple men. And there it turns out that the explanation comes from something called sperm competition hypothesis. The idea being that men and actually males in many species get a rise literally in seeing other men having sex. So, for example, when you are trying to get a stud, let's say a horse or a dog, to mate with a female, you often will make him watch another male having sex and that will get the rise out of him. And so, there's some really interesting scientific ways by which you could study a product like pornography, which of course is one of the most, you know, the products that we spend the most money on. That's so bizarre. So, the sperm hypothesis theory, there was a, wasn't there, it was a book or a paper on sperm wars that was later discredited. Yes. Yeah, so that's actually, I tried to get that guy on my show. His name is Robin Baker. It's, you're exactly right. It's a book that came out in the 90s called sperm wars. And at the time, he had retired. And so he replied to me very graciously and said, look, I'd love to come on your show. But, you know, I'm out of the whole thing. So, thanks, but no thanks. Now, so let me just mention what his theory was and then what people have said since. So, he argued in his book and in several studies that he had published that when men ejaculate, they actually have three types of sperm within their ejaculate. There is the traditional sperm that you could think of, sort of the fertilizer, right? The, the traditional, you know, the head with the tail that's looking for the egg to fertilize. But then he argued that there are also blockers. So, these are kind of mouth-formed spermatozoa that actually don't look for the, for an egg. But rather, place themselves at the entrance of the reproductive tract of a woman so that it could stop at the incoming new sperm from other men. And then there are killer sperm that don't look for the egg to fertilize. But look for other men's sperm to kill. Now, if that theory is correct and you're exactly right, that there's been contentious points about whether it is as accurate as he said or not. And I think the jury is still a bit out. If the theory is correct, this basically argues that women, evolutionarily speaking, would have been extraordinarily promiscuous because sperm within a woman's tract is only viable for about 72 hours so that if men have evolved the chemical weaponry to block other men's sperm and kill other men's sperm, that means that evolutionarily speaking, women would have been very likely to have made it with at least two guys within a 72-year, 72-hour period. Now, when I mentioned this theory in front of a crowd, the feminists will come up to me and say, thank you, Dr. Sad, what a great lecture because that theory supports the idea that women could be just as salacious in their sexuality as men and that supports the feminist argument. If I propose in equally, if not even more sound evolutionary theory, that doesn't support the feminist narrative, boo, Dr. Sad, you're a Nazi, boo, boo. So it shows you, so it shows you what happens when you use ideology to judge the veracity of a theory. If it occurs with my narrative, you're a great scientist. If it doesn't occur, you're a Nazi. And anyone that knows your past, if you've described your past and your history on my podcast, the idea of calling you a Nazi becomes incredibly offensive and ridiculous. Isn't it fantastic? I mean, it's happened many, but most famously was the time when, and I know you've become very good friends with the Jordan Peterson. Jordan and I had been invited in 2017 to speak at Ryerson University, which is a university in Toronto. And the title of the talk was the stifling of free speech on university campuses and guess what happened to that speech in God canceled. Because you're a Nazi? No, no, no, well, because you know where these controversial guys and the people who are the agitators who canceled us put out Facebook flyers where they said, you know, neo-Nazis and white supremacists are not welcome in Toronto. And so when I wrote and said, well, but I'm Lebanese Jew, that didn't alter. I was still in neo-Nazi. And so it shows you what happens when people are completely personized by political tribalism. It's insane. Not just a Lebanese Jew, a Lebanese Jew who feared for his life and fled Lebanon because you're a Jew. Isn't that amazing? It's disgusting. It's just such a stupid way to discredit someone's ideas instead of instead of having conversation. This is one of the weirdest things about our current climate is that instead of engaging with people on these ideas and discussing them, they look to discredit and they look to discredit with these disingenuous labels. And it's very unfortunate. And it's an anti-intellectual approach. Oh, it's unbelievable because you know why? Because it's a, so there is something in psychology called a fast and frugal heuristic. So right? So most of us when we're making a decision don't necessarily sit at all the pros and cons of a multi-attribute choice that we're making. Rather, we want to use some simplifying decision rule to arrive at a choice. Well, to label your debate opponent, one of these names in a sense is a ugly manifestation of a fast and frugal heuristic, right? Because it takes very little cognitive effort for me to deploy it, right? I don't have to really engage the merits of your point. You're a Nazi, shut up, we're done. And as you said, I mean, it is the height of anti-intellectualism. And by the way, it's not just, you know, the typical social media blue-haired person who does it. Even academics engage in this form of anti-intellectualism. And that's what upsets me the most, that they should know better and yet they succumb to the same kind of facet fascist strategies. Well, there's a spectrum of intellectuals as well, right? And some of of them are simple-minded in many ways. I mean, although they're intelligent and although they're well-read and they're scholars, they still, they, I hate to use the word, but they're lazy. They don't want to engage in this intellectual, gladiatorial combat about their ideas. And that's what it is. So certainly that, and I would also say that academia has regrettably created, if you like, the reward mechanisms for hyper-specialization, right? So when you're thinking about becoming an academic scientist, you really can sort of follow one of two strategies. You can become an unbelievable expert in a very, very narrow area because that creates economies of scale, right? I don't have to continuously go back and check the literature because I really know everything there is to know about this very, very small area of expertise, or you could be a polymath, you could be a broad thinker. And regrettably, much of academia promotes the former rather than the latter. Now, if you look at my own scientific career, I haven't done the things that I should be doing according to the rules of the academic game because if I were trying to maximize you know, according to the rules, I should only be publishing in journals that are within my narrow area of expertise, evolutionary psychology, consumer psychology, psychology of decision-making. But if you go and look at my CV, I've published in medicine and economics and psychiatric issues and consumer behavior and evolutionary theory and bibliometrics. I don't care where I publish. If you have a problem that I think I could contribute to, sign me up. And that kind of speaks to what we talked about earlier when we were talking about willingness to speak to all sorts of people. It's an openness of spirit, of mine. I'm willing to go to any intellectual landscape, as long as it triggers my interest. I don't play by the rules. I like to be free. Well, it's part of being a curious human being, isn't it? And it is. Shouldn't that be encouraged? I mean, it seems like when a a person is intelligent as yourself chooses to take your mind and apply it to other different disciplines and different ideas, that should be rewarded. I've been told the exact opposite. I've been told by colleagues that they were looking at hiring me at some other university. But then when they looked at my CV and saw that I had published in all these different areas that it looked like I wasn't focused. I was scattered. I didn't do it. You see what I mean? So, and I'll give you a wonderful example of the strategy of non-beaks scattered. So, when I was a doctoral student at Cornell, one of the famous psychologists within my department was a lady who has since passed away, Professor Alice Eisen. And she was a great noted psychologist, but her entire career was about affect, not affect, affect, right? Your feelings, right? So, she studied how does affect, affect variety seeking? How does affect, affect, word completion? So, it was basically affect and fill in the blank. So, for 40, 50 years, that's all she did. So, if you talked about, if you talked to her about affect, she certainly was the queen of the hill. But if you talked to her about anything outside of affect, she was probably a babbling imbecile. And I apologize for saying that, may she rest in peace. She wouldn't be able to get on the Joe Rogan show unless you talked to her for three hours about affect. To me, she may be a great professor, but she's not an intellectual. An intellectual is one who can go to different intellectual landscapes and engage in great conversations. And regrettably, there are very few public intellectuals today who have that capacity. But someone like Christopher Hitchens, whom I think you know, have you ever met Christopher Hitchens? No, unfortunately he died before I could meet him. I'm a huge fan of his work. This is the kind of guy that you want to be handy out with at a party. And by the way, he wasn't a professor. He wasn't a professional intellectual, but he was a true intellectual in the old style of European intellectuals. You could sit down with him and talk about art or literature or science. He was well read about everything. And in a sense, again, not to blow the proverbial smoke up your behind. I think that's what you do. Yes, you may not have the fancy degrees, but you come with that intellectual curiosity so that you could speak to Sir Roger Penrose one day and to a comedian whose every second word is F this and F that. And you could pull it off with both. That's the secret of your success. Well, I had a conversation with Eric Weinstein about that once and he was like, imagine what it would be like for someone who didn't know what your podcast was about. And they tuned in and saw Roger Penrose on one day. And then Joey Diaz on the next day, they're like, what the fuck is this show? But this show, if at anything, it represents what I'm interested in. And I'm interested in a lot of things. I think the term intellectual is such a grandiose and ridiculous term for someone who's a cage fighting commentator in a standup comedian. But I am curious and I'm very fortunate that I do have friendships with people like yourself and Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson and that I could get a guy like Roger Penrose to sit down and talk to me. And many other brilliant people that I've had the pleasure of talking to. Are you aware that he won the Nobel Prize? What? And what? Oh, I want Roger Penrose. Yeah, I thought you meant Jordan Peterson. I was like, no, no, no, no, no, no, Jordan. It's because you can't really do this. And I think that Jordan Peterson does. Right. No, I am aware that Roger Penrose wanted. It's amazing. I mean, isn't that I mean, that is I think the last time that I appeared on your show and someone maybe Jamie can check it, either he was the guest before me or after. So based on predictive models, I should be booking a flight to Stockholm to receive my own. I don't know if it works that way, but maybe it should. Yeah, he was one of those guys where I was sitting down. And as I was talking to him, I'm like, what the fuck am I doing here? How is this? Who talked this guy into doing this? And I have to, you know, do my best to not mess this up. Now, does that is does it stretch? When you and I are speaking, of course, we can get very academic and so on, but we can also joke because we're friends and you know, we're both, you know, funny and so on. That does it intimidate you when you speak to someone like Sir Roger because you don't have sort of that camaraderie outlet that otherwise you might have with other intellectuals with whom you are personal friends with. I don't think it intimidates me as much as it confines me, but I was so curious to hear his thoughts on things. That was fortunate that I had a lot of questions for him. And I really did want to dive into his intellect and try to find out, you know, what how he thinks about these things and what he's studying and what his thoughts were. So it was very fortunate that I had a deep curiosity about the subject. But it was certainly intimidating, you know. Are there any guests that you've yet to have that would be sort of ER my top three. I mean, I know you recently had Kanye West. What are some people that you think sort of are, are, you know, you must have them before this whole ride ends. None zero. I don't have that thought. Yeah. I mean, even even yeah, even Kanye, I mean, I guess what's wrong it says, I kind of avoided talking to him for a long time because I was worried it was going to be not good for him because I'm such a fan of his as an artist. I think he's a brilliant musician, but I also think that because of his, I mean, he's been diagnosed as being bipolar or whatever you want to say, whatever mental issues he's had. I think they contribute in some ways to his art because he's so prolific. His mind is going in a million different directions all at once. And someone who is like that, but very different, of course, is Elon Musk. His mind is going in a million different directions all at the same time as well. And his, his ability to focus on so many different subjects simultaneously is stunning. Kanye is the same way, but in a different realm, right? His focus is on design and on rap and on now, uh, religion. I mean, he's become very religious and, and even politics, but he's very misunderstood. Kanye is a very misunderstood person. And I think that he doesn't do himself any service by calling himself a genius and all the, but all the, that all the chunks, similar to Trump, right? He's kind of, you know, he he pats himself on the back and pumps himself up and talks about his accomplishments and his financial success and all those different, and for whatever reason those put some people off, they don't put me off, but they do put some people off. But I understand why he does it. I understand that he's, he's kind of looking to affirm that he's on the right path. Like he, like these are markers of success that he could point to. Like you can say, he's an idiot. You can say all these different things. But hey, look at all these accomplished. Look at what he's done. And if you listen to his music, I mean, he's brilliant. There's no doubt about he's brilliant. He's insanely prolific. And his stuff is great. He has never put out a bad album. They're all great. And he's married to an Armenian woman as is your good friend, God's sad. So that's a common answer that we both share. Well, there you go. I'm a big fan of Armenians in general. I really have why is that? Well, there's been a lot of great fighters that were Armenian. Um, well, greatest kickbox of all time. One of the greatest kickbox of all time is Georgia, Patrosian, who is an Armenian who lives in Italy. He's a, I'm a giant fan of his. And, you know, there's just been many, many fighters in the UFC that have been Armenian. And I just, I'm a fan of, uh, they, they embrace masculinity. Yeah. Yeah. Even though it's, uh, the term toxic masculinity is so, uh, bandied about today in Armenian culture, masculinity is, uh, is praised. And did just, they're just openly masculine. You know, I like it. I like them. Yeah. You know, I receive many, many, I don't, you know, maybe hundreds of emails from women who will sort of lament the fact that they no longer can meet a man who exhibits that kind of masculinity. Right. Because what's happened now as, obviously, you know, is men are so confused, right? Am I supposed to pursue a woman or will I be accused of a pro-trape? If I give her a compliment, will that be considered compliment rate, right? Because all these words are now served, right? Is he just compliment rape is a real word? No, no, no, I just made that up. Jesus, he's scared me. I thought we've gone so far. But, uh, but, uh, by the way, uh, you know, I had to do a, um, one of those mandatory sex education, uh, tests at the start of last year, uh, at university, all professors, all students, everybody has to take it. And one of the questions, I don't remember the exact words was, you know, if you see a guy, you know, cat calling a woman on campus, is that a form of sexual violence or something to that effect? And, you know, I knew what was the, the answer going through is I, I, and I answered no. And then it kind of prompts you and it's like, no, it is a form of sexual violence. And then they kind of explain it to me as if I were a three-year-old child who hasn't yet mastered the dynamics of being social amongst human beings. And so, so while I might have been satirical about the compliment rate, we have gotten to the stage now where it is mandatory for university participants, whether they be faculty members or staff or students to take these mandatory sexual, uh, you know, uh, training manuals. It's insane. I kind of understand why they want people to think differently about harassment. I get that. I mean, I would hate to be, look, I've been hit on by gay men and, uh, you know, it's, uh, it's odd. It's complimentary. But when you get it, but I've been hit on only a couple times in my life, but a few times where it was aggressive. And I was like, what's different is, first of all, the man who was doing one particular guy who was doing it, there was the most aggressive that I remember was not physically dangerous to me. Like I could have killed him if I wanted to. Right. So I was like, listen, man, stop. But it wasn't, it wasn't, I wasn't, it was the the roles weren't reversed. But like, if it was Mike Tyson who was doing that to me, I would feel terrified because if he wanted to beat me up and have his way with me, it's not a lot I could do, you know, because I would kind of be written and it's also called prison. Yeah. So I don't have the understanding that a woman would have on a woman is being approached by a man as a very real concern that she could be raped. This is I don't have that same concern unless someone's drug me or done something. If the man is weaker physically than me, I don't have that concern. But I tried to look at it from a woman's perspective and I get how cat calling, if you're a woman, particularly if there's a large group of men and they say things to you, that's terrifying. It could be terrifying. I could understand. But it's not violence. The problem with the word violence is you start using that word with other like silences violence. No, it's not violence is violence. Silence is not violence. You can't bastardize these words. You can't distort the meaning of these words because as soon as you do, you're, you're, you're forcing people to comply with your, your, your resetting language, your changing definitions. You can't do that. You can say it's very disrespectful. It's rude and it's intimidating to cat call a woman. I would agree to that. And I would say, I've never done it. I'm not a type of person who a girl walks by. I'm like, Hey, baby, that's not, I'm, you know, I've, I've never been raised like way. I've never, I don't, I don't do it. I've never done it. I don't appreciate it. But it's not violence. It's just gross. It's, it's, it's intimidating. It's harassment. And if I was a woman, I would fucking hate it. But, uh, we need, we need clear definitions. We need to, I mean, words are noises that we make that convey intent. When you say that it's sexual violence to cat call, you're fucking with language and you're, you're fucking with it in order to re, because everyone knows violence is bad. Right. Everyone, everyone knows violence is evil. Everyone knows violence should not be tolerated in a polite society. So when you, you attach an extreme definition, an extreme word that doesn't apply, but you force it in to a situation where you're, you're fucking with the, the, our definition of the way people behave and think and you're doing it to sort of force compliance into your ideology and what you, what you feel the way people should, should act and behave. And so I've, I've got a psychological mechanism that I explain in the parasitic mind, uh, about how you redefine realities so that you can get the victimology narrative that you want. And I call it the omeostasis of victimology. And so let me explain what homeostasis is. So if you think about your thermostat in your room, it is a homeostatic machine, because what it basically says is, okay, I'm going to set the temperature at 70 and it's going to sample the air. If it's too hot, it will release the air conditioning. If it's too, uh, war, vice versa, right? So our bodies are made of many homeostatic systems, right? If I'm hungry in my blood sugar goes below a set point, I have approach behavior to food, right? So many of our physiological systems are homeostatic. Many of our psychological systems are homeostatic. And so I argue that this ever, never ending redefinition of words and, and context to make it seem as though they are rape or violence or misogyny is what I call the homeostasis of victimology, which is what basically, there is a set point that we need so that we could always argue that our society is evil and sexist and racist and so on. If the reality is that you can't identify that sexism and racism, you simply redefine words, redefine concepts so that you could get your set point. You follow what I mean? So, and there's a similar concept that's called concept creep from an Australian psychologist that argues along the same lines, right? And it's exactly the reason, by the way, why someone like Jesse Smollett will engage in, you know, full victimology because he is basically saying, look, I need to reach a set level of victimology so I can have the right currency to ascend the apex of victimology. And if, if I don't have that narrative, then I will manufacture it and hence the homeostasis of victimology. Well, in his case, it's extreme, right? Because literally, it's fraudulent. I mean, literally created a fake attack. And but this is, you know, we know that I hate the narrative like no one would ever fake an attack or no one would ever lie about being harassed or attacked or even raped. Of course they would. People lie about everything. Like the idea that human beings would never lie about something, that is such a gross generalization. There's a reason why there's a word called lie. There's a reason why there's a concept because people engage in it. And because we can't read minds. And since we can't read minds, people can conceive and whenever we're allowing people to willingly distort language, we're in some ways, at least encouraging a form of deception. Exactly right. And I mean, isn't it incredible how the onus unbelieving changes as a function of the political affiliation of the supposed victim, right? So when, when I can't remember her name, Blazie Ford came up, you know, the night before his Kavanaugh's confirmation or whatever to say that 36 years ago it may have happened somewhere and I'm not sure where I don't know if it happened. I don't have any details. Well, hashtag believe all women when a woman came up for against Joe Biden with apparently more evidence. Now, I don't know the veracity of each of their accusations, but it was certainly the case that the the abuser of Joe Biden had as convincing evidence if not more than the former case, but now it was no longer hashtag believe all women, right? And so it demonstrates to you how ugly these hashtag fast and frugal strategies are rather than sticking to first principles, which is people are presumed to be innocent unless there is overwhelming amount of evidence. We either fry someone or not as a function of political expediency. It's grotesque. It is grotesque. And I'm glad there's someone like you out there that describes these things in a very clear way and explains the mechanisms behind does it frustrate you that we are moving? It seems like even further in this direction as a society. And do you see a way out of this? I think the way out of it is and I'm not sure that what I'm about to say is easy to implement because we are tribal animals. Sorry, I'm putting my glasses because I start to get in fuzzy. I'm getting I'm getting older. Look, I always tell people belong to the tribe of truth rather than to specific political tribes. Now, what do I mean by that? If you come to me and ask me, you know, it's hard to pin you, God, are you are you conservative? Are you libertarian? Are you liberal? And I will usually answer, well, it's hard to pin myself because I am an issues guy. So if it comes to the death penalty, I might give you a position that you might think I'm conservative or when it comes to immigration, you might think I'm conservative. When it comes to social issues, gay rights, transgender rights, I'm about as socially liberal as they come. So I don't belong to a group. I'm not conservative. I'm not liberal. I am a one idea at a time guy. Why? Because I use first principles and my ability to engage in critical thinking to espouse a position on any topic that you wish to discuss with me. But I don't think that that's the natural state of most people. Most people are I am Republican, I am, you know, whatever, Democrat. And therefore I must told the line on issues one through 37. And so what I implore people to do is don't be that like that. Even though it's a natural reflex to want to belong to team blue or team red belong to team truth if you can achieve that possibility. Yeah. In the United States, at least, I'm not really that familiar with your political system in Canada, but the United States, it's reinforced because we really only have two parties. And so much so that Brett Weinstein created this thing, unity 2020, where he's trying to bring together conservatives and liberals together and find some common ground. And he was promoting this as an alternative to the two party system. And they were banned from Twitter, banned from Twitter, they banned his personal Facebook page and then tried to say that it was an error. But it was not was the conscious decision. What, you know, there are people that work for these social media companies that have since left and now talk about it openly that they did have the freedom to edit things. They did have the freedom to delete things. They did have and that they sort of took pleasure in doing so and that you were sort of given this leeway if you felt like something was ideologically opposed to the terms and services of whatever social media organization you're working for, you were allowed to make that distinction. It's very subjective. You were able to say, well, this is negative. whatever social media organization you're working for, you were allowed to make that distinction. It's very subjective. You were allowed to say, well, this is negative. This is negative towards our election. This is promoting something that's gonna damage the Democratic Party. So we're just going to ban the Twitter account for violating terms of services. It's never been clear. It's what still ban, the Twitter account is still banned. And they just do this based on their own personal political beliefs. It's not about truth. It's not about the freedom of expression. You should be free to express the idea that the two party system has major flaws. And one of the flaws is human beings' natural inclination towards tribalism. We're very aware of that. And if you find support within your tribe and you have steadfastly, steadfastly adhered to these ideals that the left has or the right has, you'll be rewarded. Like you're a part of us, yay, good job, gad, or good job, Joe. You have adopted our conglomeration of opinions. And you have stuck to them. And they're so predictable on both sides. On the left, you're supposed to be pro-choice. And the right, you're supposed to be pro-second amendment. And we have a series of these different things that you have to adhere to. If you're on either side of that line. And people take comfort in knowing that there's other people on their tribe that also think that way. And they find some commonality in that. And they find this camaraderie in their knowledge that this person that they're talking to has also agreed to stay within these lines. Oh, indeed. Look, I quick story that recently happened to me regarding all these social media platforms. I posted on all my social media platforms, including on LinkedIn, a post where I basically said, hey, Joe Biden might have been a parasitic nothing for the past 47 years. But just wait next year when in the 48th year, he's really going to solve diabetes and cure cancer. There was a satirical thing where I was arguing that he hasn't done much throughout his public life. LinkedIn removed it because it violated their community standards of harassment and bullying. Well, who was like harassing and bullying? I mean, I was harassing and bullying a public figure who's running to become the president of the United States. But that was bullying to him. That's the world we live in. So I think guys, like, I don't know if you know these guys and you might want to consider if they're willing to come on your show to have them on. Guys like Senator Josh Hawley, Senator Tom Cotton, and Ted Cruz have been trying to reform the legal taking the social media from being un-butter. So they don't get the protection anymore. They're actual publishers. Actually, they don't get the protection of, hey, you can't sue us if we do stuff. But of course, most of the Republicans and Democrats never want to go after the social media platforms because the ability of all of these top players to fund the politicians, whether they are on the right or left side of the aisle is so great that most people turn a blind eye. But I really can't see this being something that can be tenable in the future. Because just like Brett Weinstein was kicked out, look, the New York Post's account was removed. Isn't it shut down because they were running the Joe Biden story? Well, it was locked out and Jack Dorsey has since stated that they have amended their policy and that if the New York Post wants to post again, they can. And then they can post the exact same story. What they have to do, however, is they have to go back to their original post, remove it, that will reinstate them, and then they can repost the exact same story, and then they'll have no issues with that whatsoever. And he said that in a conversation that he had with Ted Cruz, it's very confusing. I think that might just have to do with the way their social media platform is structured. Jack Dorsey, though, I can speak from knowing him on a personal level. He is a man that believes in free speech. And I think that inside the company, he's fighting a battle. But he is personally a person that believes that Twitter should be open and that it should be an open platform and he believes in free speech. I don't think that idea is, I don't think it's embraced by the vast majority of the people that make decisions over at Twitter. And I think that his idea is probably on popular, but he agrees with the original sentiment of the internet, the ability to distribute information for all people. He thinks that all these people that have been de-platformed should have a place and that the internet should be treated like a utility and that it should be available to everyone. He believes that. I know he does. But I think it's very difficult when you're CEO something that is a publicly traded company and enormous company that's arguably one of the three or four biggest platforms for disseminating information on the planet Earth and was never intended to be that. They didn't see it coming. I mean, I obviously sound like a Twitter apologist, but I really like Jack Dorsey as a person. And I think he's a very honest and he's a very interesting human being. And I think he gets unfairly maligned, but in my conversations with him, I think he really does believe he's actually proposed that there'd be two Twitter's, a Twitter that is that there is some moderation and a Twitter that's a Wild West. Oh wow. I actually have had him on my show also. And just like you, I mean, I got the feeling that he's a real genuine person. He really cares about the world. But I think you're exactly right that there are so many different constituencies that are pulling him in different directions that even though he may be fully supportive of the freedom of speech that you and I would be behind, he's kind of beholden to certain different camps. And so I agree with you. Do you think that there'll be eventually regulatory mechanism that kind of sets all of these social platforms straight or do you think forevermore were going to be beholden to their BS? I think it's the only way out of this. I think that someone has to step in and they have to impose first amendment some protections on free speech on the internet. Right now the internet, these social media platforms are their thought of as private companies. They can make their own decision. You know, like maybe if you had, you know, a party over at your house and someone came over your house and they started saying a bunch of really offensive things. You can kick them out of your house but that's your own house, it's a private house. But when your house is the world and you get to decide what's offensive and what's not and other people disagree, the problem is but you're stifling free speech and you're stifling the ability for people to make up their own mind as to what is and what isn't offensive, what's correct and what's incorrect. And you know, it's been said a million times, I've said it a million times, but the answer to bad speech is not censorship. It's better speech. It's more accurate speech. It's like you have to win the battle of ideas and much like a lot of these intellectuals that you were talking about that want of silence alternative perspectives on campus, you see the same thing on social media. People that have these ideological perspectives where they've steadfast adhered to this left-wing agenda, they don't want to engage with anyone that has a disparaging opinion or a differing opinion. They don't want to. They just want to kick those people off, deplatform them, deplatform them. And they yell it out because it's been effective with people in the past. They've gotten rid of people like Milo, they've gotten rid of Gavin McGinnis, and Alex Jones, and a lot of these people, they've canceled their voice, but I think by doing so, they've done themselves a disservice whether they recognize it or not. They've done discourse, a disservice. They've done free speech, a disservice. And they've created this tyranny of information where they've decided that they're the ones who get to decide what gets disseminated and what doesn't. It's very dangerous. Yeah, you know, 10 years ago, I think it was in 2010. So I started, I have a column on psychology today where I published these short psychology articles on all sorts of interesting topics. I haven't been writing for them as often these days, but when I started in 2008, I was a very heavy contributor. And at the time, probably the most popular blogger at psychology today was a evolutionary psychologist by the name of Satoshi Kanazawa, who is a professor at the London School of Economics in England. And he was a very sort of bombastic guy, very politically irreverent, used language that was, perhaps at times, you know, unadvisedable. And he had published an article where he was talking about research, not his research. He was describing someone else's research where they had done a study looking at differences and how, you know, women across different races were perceived in terms of their beauty. And the results had not come out in a way that was politically correct, if you follow what I mean. And now the way that he had handled that particular topic seemed maybe a bit bombastic, maybe it wasn't the right words. But right away, there was a huge call to get rid of him from psychology today, which happened, but they also wanted to get him fired from his tenure position. And I had written an article, and I think I was the only one who had written a public article where you could still go find it on my column, where I said, you know, purging a blogger sets a dangerous precedent. If Satoshi Kanazawa's words are wrong, what better punishment is there than to keep his words up there? Because the light of the sun will forever more condemn him, right? What's the point of getting rid of him? But of course, people didn't listen to my warnings. And now it's become common ground to get rid of anybody with whom we disagree. Yeah, I go back to, if you've ever seen the documentary where, what is this name, the concern? William F. Buckley. Oh, yes. And was the other gentleman he was, thank you. My back, Mary Suck, that a gorvidal and William F. Buckley did a series of national debates on primetime television in the 1960s. Yes. And they were fascinated, fascinating to watch these two guys go back and forth and debate ideas. And two guys who really didn't like each other and hate each other. But for the United States to be able to tune in to television, just regular television, and watch these open debates of liberal and conservative ideas, I think was very rewarding for people. I think we don't do that now. We don't have that anymore. We don't have these open discussions where an intellectual on the left, like Gorvidal and an intellectual on the right, like William F. Buckley can engage in this sort of intellectual combat. And we could see who rises and whose ideas resonate with more people. And I think it was around that time where Thomas Sol was smacking down what we, today would call social justice warriors. When we were all in diapers, right? I mean, I think if you go back to the 60s and 70s, some of the interventions that Thomas Sol had on many of the issues that were still debating and discussing today, he was doing that in the 60s and 70s when we were in diapers, right? I mean, this isn't God, by the way. I don't know if you've ever reached out to try to get him on your show. This is someone that I think you'd want to have on your show. I would love to have him on. Yeah, I would love to have him on in person, but unfortunately that's not really possible right now. But Thomas Sol's the guy who's quoted regularly on Twitter and oftentimes by people that you would think of, I mean, what he's done essentially is how this entire career of doing this, like well ahead of the curve. Like he's, and started out his life as a liberal and sort of along the way, reformed his opinions and changed them and became more pragmatic. And yeah, I'd like to see honest discussions with a guy like Thomas Sol and someone who disagrees with him. And I guess to do it on prime time now would actually be a waste. Really, we want to do it on a form like this. We want to do it on the internet. Where do you think there would ever be a context where some of the powers that be will kind of wake up to the power of your platform and try to replicate it in mainstream media? Or do you think it's simply too corrosive to actually allow two people who have different positions to share the same stage? I think the only way to do something like this is to have a very small amount of people involved. And when you do something on mainstream media just by definition, you're going to have an enormous group of people. You're going to have investors, you're going to have network executives, you're going to have producers, you're going to have writers, you're going to have all sorts of people that and many of them, a vast majority have a very liberal and left-wing ideology. And to have the ability to have on whoever you want. You really need a singular person, a singular voice, like a singular mind who is curious about a bunch of different issues, who's not easily influenced by people on the outside and their criticisms and their intimidation. Like people are intimidated by attacks and criticisms and insults and so they'll change the way they participate, the way they communicate and what they put out based on that intimidation. The only way... What happened? I'm sorry, that happens by the way when there are presidential debates where the moderators are typically less than ideal in terms of their expressed bias. And that's why I was very excited. And I think I had even shared when the rumor was coming out that you'd be willing to moderate the debate between Biden and Trump. I thought, God damn, that's a great idea. Whatever happened with that, then either of their camps reach out to you or did you connect with them? What happened with that whole story? Trump was all in, he was all in. He wanted to do it. Yeah, he tweeted it. I mean, he wanted to do it. He contacted people that contacted me to do it. I never reached out to the Biden people. I felt like if they wanted to do it, they would reach out to me. And if they did, I would have done it. But I just don't think that's a good forum for him. I mean, as we've seen, the debates themselves, specifically the last debate was not good for him. But what I would have done is like when he was saying that I've never said I was gonna ban fracking, Jamie would have just pulled up video of him saying, I'm gonna ban fracking. And that would have been horrible for him. It would have been much better in terms of getting some clarity on what he's actually said and what he's actually done. And then the other things about saying that his son never received any money from Russia and that's a lie. It's been disproven. It hasn't been disproven. He knows it hasn't been disproven, but he knows that he can say that on the air and no one's gonna call him on it. I would have stopped the moderation. I would have stopped the thing. I go, sir, we're gonna pull up these articles and I want you to tell me what about these articles is in factual. Like what's a lie? And are you sure that's, would you be willing to say this in court? Would you be willing to risk perjury? Would you say this in front of a judge? Like if you, cause you could be in real trouble if you did that. But you could just lie in a debate and the moderators don't check you. No one says anything about it. No one Googles it. But can't they just pull up a story? Pull up a video. There's, I mean the fracking thing would particularly agree with you. Yeah, well there's only one Jamie. He's right here. We're not giving him up. But someone could have done that. And it would have been much better for the American public to just stop everybody in their tracks. And also like why do they have two minutes to answer? That's so antiquated. This is so ridiculous. The idea that you're talking about something that literally can affect the free world. The decision of who gets control of the United States of America. Who, what party is in control? And that you're gonna put some arbitrary two minute time limit on these discussions is crazy. It's so ridiculous. And also the format is confined by these time blocks that they have this 90 minute time bug. You should have a 90 minute time block. You should start it at like agreed upon time, 60 minute or 6 p.m. or whatever, whatever you wanna do. And then work it out. Like Abraham Lincoln and some of the speeches that he gave when he was running for president. There were hours and hours long. And he was talking without a microphone. You know, like a town square and discussing these ideas that he had. And they would last forever. And that's how you find out what a person thinks and believes. You have to, and, but now with the tools that we have available, the fact that they don't use those tools during a presidential debate. Fact check Trump. When he lies about something, pull it up. Show that he's not telling the truth. Show what he actually said. Show what he actually did as opposed to what he said. He's calling out on it, called Biden out on it. Let's get to the bottom of this. But, you know, even though those tools are available, mainstream media would have to give away control. They would give away control of their ability to navigate and steer this narrative, right? The narrative that they're trying to steer, you know, the bias that they're trying to exert on our election process is really offensive. It should be offensive to people. It should be offensive that they have the ability to Google whether or not Joe Biden really did say he would never ban fracking. And they didn't. Why would you not pull up a video that's readily available online and say, sir, we're gonna pause here for a moment. We're gonna play this video and tell me what you meant when you said you were gonna ban fracking. Tell me what you meant when you said you were gonna embrace the Green New Deal. Tell me what you said when you said that you were going to do whatever the fuck you lied about. And pull it up. I think for me what amazes me about when he says things and I suspect maybe we can say the same thing about Trump although I can't remember quite the same types of lies. Trump usually lies about, you know, my penis is the biggest. The women have told me I'm the greatest lover ever. Look at the number of people. Right, it's bombastic boasting, right? Where is the other guy, right? And the other guy is basically saying things that are demonstrably false. And the only thing I can think of that could explain sort of the hoods of the of engaging in these types of lies. It's as if Joe Biden's brain still exists in the 1940s where he doesn't know that there is this thing called Google and computers where we can quickly have Jamie fat check you, right? Because what, right? So in the same way that he does the corn pop story which is difficult to know if he's telling the truth or not because again it happened in the 60s or 70s or whatever he could say something thinking that it can't be falsified because how else could you logically explain that he would engage in such lies, right? Well, not only that, like how was the Democratic Party not saying, hey, this is a mistake. Like, and the whole idea that there's a deadline to this process that all has to be done in a certain amount of time. And this is how we have to do it. It's like, boy, it's so weird. It's so weird that such an important decision. Sorry, I'm just stretching my neck from where I'm sitting. Sorry about that. Do you, are you willing today to make a prediction? I'm not asking you to tell me who you're voting for, but are you willing to make a prediction in terms of who you think is going to win? I do not know who's going to win. And my concern is it's not going to matter in terms of a sense of peace in the United States. My concern is that if Trump wins, people are going to be furious and if Joe Biden wins, people are going to be furious. And that's a little bit of visual. I think there's asymmetry. I think that if Trump wins, the lunacy will be much greater than if Biden wins. I think if Biden wins, of course, people are going to be disappointed and upset. But the manner by which that disappointment will manifest itself, in my view, won't be as drastic as if Trump wins. I think if Trump wins, I'm going to be hiding under my desk forever more. Yeah, I don't know. Maybe you're correct. I hope you're not. I really wish that people, one of the things that Trump said that was really interesting during the debates, or was it no? Was it during the 60 minutes interview, which was, I don't know if you saw that, but would it I saw the one that ran on 60 minutes, not the one that he released. Did you see both? Yes. You should see the one that he released. Because the one that he released, it's like, this woman was so antagonistic, the way she interviewed him, it's not the way to interview anyone. And it's definitely not the way to interview someone who's going to be the president of the United States. I understand that he overpowers conversations. I understand that he does that. But I also think that this is also a function of the fact that you only have 35 minutes to talk to this guy. And so he can just fill a buster. He can just keep going. He can just talk over you. He could ramble. He could say things that aren't true. He could rant and rave and do the things that he does when he does a campaign rallies. It's not the ideal way to get to him, to really find out what he's really all about. The ideal way would be like this. Sit down at a podcast and have him here for four hours and have him sit down and talk and then stop him when he says things and stop him and go, hold on. OK, understand, sir. Let's check that. And tell me why you said that. When he said the biggest attendance ever for his inauguration, and then you go and see this big open field, and then you compare it to Obama's inauguration, whatever it's packed, so many more people. Like, clearly, there's more people in this photo. Like, why is that? Is this propaganda? Did someone photoshop it? Or are you exaggerating? Because you kind of exaggerate. And I know it's part of his personality. Like, to make fun and exaggerate, he's an entertainer first, right? He's a businessman first, but became an entertainer. And knows really well how to say outrageous and then oftentimes reprennable and make clips out of these things. They become sensational. And that's also how he got elected in the first place. The mainstream media thought that what they were doing was exposing what an asshole he was. What they didn't realize, they're giving him free press. They were constantly talking about him. I mean, it was really a brilliant strategy. He would say outrageous things. They would take those outrageous things, put him on TV. People would laugh. And they would go, I like him. And the mainstream media was like, no, what have you, this strategy didn't work, it backfired. Did you feel as though a lot of the media, it's as if the humor module and their brain is completely lacking? Because I watch when Trump does his trolling. And again, people always wrongly presume that whenever I fake some position, it is a manifestation of the fact that I must have posters of Trump in my bedroom, which my wife and I use as foreplay aid. Which of course is not the case at all. I'm just coming as an impartial guy from Canada. I don't have a dog in the fight. And I'm always telling people, wait a second, aren't you being a bit too tribal? And so that's really the extent of when I engage the topic. And so I will objectively listen to something that Trump said, and I will crack up laughing. Because I actually think it's funny. And so for example, when he says, I guess when I finish my fourth term running, of course, because he is trolling, right? Because so they go crazy, he's a dictator, he's gonna. So how do you explain the fact that a adult with a functioning brain who's called a journalist is unable to recognize that when he says in my fourth term, he is just joking. What explains that disconnect in your view? Well, I don't think that they can ignore it. Because I think that they have been programmed to catch people saying outrageous things and expose those things. So when he says outrageous things on purpose, they can't help themselves. And they have to, and then people go, but you know he's just joking. And they don't, they don't, they see that juicy carrot, and they just run towards it. And they don't realize it's on a stick. And they're like, where's the fucking, give me that fucking carrot, and they can't get the carrot. It's very strange. But it's also, he's playing on their strategy, which has always been to catch people saying things that are unfortunate. But he says unfortunate things on purpose. And so it's so confusing to them, he's hacked their little system. So your my feeling is that if you sat down with Trump, you could have a fun time with him, but it will always be on his terms. He needs to be the funniest guy in the room, the coolest guy, the guy with the biggest dick. And so as long as you grant him that space, he can actually be a fun guy to have dinner with. Whereas again, from, from, from, from distance, when I look at someone like Barack Obama, I don't get the feeling that I would like this guy. He strikes me as hearty, arrogant. And again, I'm basing it simply on the fact that I see how they act from a distance. What's your view? Do you get a similar sort of personal feeling about these guys? No, I don't. I have a completely different opinion on Barack Obama. I think it'd be a great guy to talk to. I'm a big fan of his as a human being. I like the way he communicates. I think in terms of a representative of the United States, you can never find a better person. He's well educated, extremely eloquent. He's, he's calm, no matter what. He's always reserved the way he communicates, he's as smooth and I feel like his invention is exactly as strong as that. He's a statesman, a perfect statesman. Probably the best one we've ever had. And I think that he, there's one benefit of a guy like that, is that we look at someone who's a president as a representative of the best aspect of the United States. When you look at a guy who came from a single mother, came from poverty and rose to become a lawyer, a senator, and then ultimately the president of the United States, and you see him and you go, wow, that's an admirable person. Like to be that, that was my son, I'd be immensely proud of the way he speaks, the way he carries himself. Now, if you wanna get into policies, if you wanna get into some of the things that they've done, it's not as impressive as you would have hoped when he was running from president, particularly in the defense of whistleblowers. Like their, their take on whistleblowers in the press is some of the worst that any administrations ever had. But you also could say, I don't know how much the president actually has control of that. How much power they really have. I tend to believe that our view of the president is grossly distorted in terms of their real, their real amount of influence over policy and decision making, particularly in terms of national security measures, whistleblowers, things along those lines. I think the intelligence community has far more power than we believe. And I think once a person gets into, and not just the intelligence community, special interest groups, lobbyists, the money and the power that got them into that position, leaves them so ultimately compromised, that they get into office, and that they realize the task at hand. And also I think then they're probably briefed on the real problems internationally, the real problems security-wise in the world, the real problems that we have with our national security issues, I think it's probably terrifying. And I think they probably have to amend all the ideas that they had, these idealistic notions that they had when they're running for office, and then they have to sort of regather and just have a new approach. Obama's positions on a lot of things that he had when he was running for president, like first of all, how did he never legalize marijuana? How did he never federally legalize marijuana? God, who smoked it? A guy with his photos of him smoking it. Like why would you want to keep people locked away? When you know that the United States States is incarcerated so many people of color for decades and decades for a plant that makes them happy. Like how was it possible that you got out of office and didn't do that your entire time? I don't understand. How is it possible that you didn't exonerate a lot of the people that were in jail for nonviolent drug offenses? How did you not reform our definitions of like, what is what's legal and what's not legal? You know, what is schedule one? What is schedule two? our definitions of like what is what what's legal and what's not legal you know what is schedule one what is scheduled to what is schedule three how did you not change the laws in terms of like what people can be locked in a cage for and when you're seeing states like Colorado then ultimately California and all these other states becoming states that where it was legal in the state why is it not legal federally we all understand that it's it's safe for the and people could say well why do you worry about marijuana because it's a personal freedom issue and this is and it's not it's not real like the the the the dangers the the reasoning for keeping it illegal they're not real they don't work we know it's propaganda we know it's bullshit and we know it especially when you look at the revenue that's been generated by these states like Colorado and California and Washington and Oregon all these states that have made it legal you realize it would be great benefit to these places and now there was an article recently about Texas doing it it would be of great benefit financially amazing that people are still buying it they're just not the United States is not getting the taxes from it and it's foolish you could only you could only say that the there's got to be some other motivation and that motivation is probably the people that run farmers who to go companies and all these other special interests that don't want it to be legal because it would fuck with their bottom line and it would it would interfere with their the money that they have coming in and so that that's very disappointing to me very disappointing that Obama didn't do that yeah and I hear you and I guess from that perspective you would like the fact that Jordan Jordan Justin Trudeau did legal I like it although I did notice that your views on your boyfriend Justin Trudeau has changed greatly from the first time when I told you that he is a schmuck you now believe he's a schmuck but you used to think he was a pretty boy like a lovely guy right here man it's beautiful very handout yes but I want to come back for a second too so as a psychologist who studies psychology of decision making of course I'm interested in how people make decisions and in this case consequential decisions in terms of who's going to be president back in 2003 I had published a paper looking at the decision rules that people use when choosing presidents and perhaps to your dismay or perhaps you're already you know you already have the intuition that this is happening people don't use heavily cognitive justifications in choosing their presidents they use these very emotional driven fast and frugal heuristics in making decisions so for example when you and I were both speaking about about Obama that you know he's majestic and he has a maleficuous voice and he speaks with the cadence of a southern Baptist minister and he's presidential all those things might be true but it's exactly what I think I mentioned once on your show I'm gonna take this to be a akin to the court of a wine bottle there's an expression an Arabic that says getting drunk by simply smelling the court of the wine bottle right you don't actually need to drink the whole wine before you get drunk all you need to do is smell the court and you're already drunk and I think this is exactly what happens to people they look at Trump they get drunk by the court bottle which basically says what he's vulgar he's grazing he's aggressive he's grotesque they don't listen to his policies and similarly say with with Obama and I wish people would spend more time actually as you correctly pointed engaging the policies so I'll give you an example I could have a colleague who hails against critical race theory and how dreadful it is and then when Trump bans critical race theory as a you know something to be taught to federal employees he simply can't give him the kudos because you know bruh he's so disgusting that's what I'm angry about that people lose their ability to objectively look at people's policies rather than at the superficial clues of he looks majestic or he looks like a vulgar ogre you see what I mean I do I do and in that sense he does himself a disservice in a lot of ways well a lot of people had hoped that once he got into office he would become presidential like he would shift you know that was that was a hope and that it absolutely didn't happen and you know when people catch him saying things that aren't true when he argues with them about it it's just like you then you're feeding the fire but also you have to realize he's he's made enemies with so many groups particularly groups of power that have been in place in the United States forever like the intelligence communities he's the enemy of a lot of the intelligence communities particularly FBI I mean they've shown that they were actively trying to get rid of them and then there was a lot of the people in the intelligence community that decided that he was going to be someone that they attacked and that's just crazy I mean we talked about it yesterday with Glenn Greenwald where he discussed how Chuck Schumer had openly said that it's so foolish for Trump to attack the intelligence communities and become an enemy of the intelligence community and that's going to prove to be foolish and as a threat like that the intelligence communities were going to go after him and they obviously have that yeah did that seems to me to it's it's fascinating to see it it's fascinating to see these mechanisms being put into place in these stories like you know the steel dossier where he's got Russian hookers peening on him and all that jazz like in the fact that that was printed and that they talked about that on CNN and was printed in major newspapers as you know a possible true story like all that is the so bizarre to say it's so bizarre to see his personality flaws amplified and weaponized and did not concentrate on just the policies but in many ways he's done that to himself yeah he's you know do you know who Victor Davis Hanson is no I don't he's a he's a class assist who is a fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford who who has written a book I'm promoting his book now rather than my own but that was written a book about you know why you should have voted for Trump and so on and and because he is a class assist who has studied you know Greek mythology he he analogizes Trump to the classic example of a Sophocles of the tragic hero right you know you get the feeling that Trump simply wants someone because maybe because he is narcissistic he wants someone to say good job he is where it was and and the fact that he could never get the mainstream media to even remotely be minimally fair you know if you ban critical race theory or if you support you know you know absolute free speech you should be congratulated for that irrespective of your political strife but yet because they simply could never give him any kudos for anything then his bombastic sort of bragging gets amplified because he is the tragic hero saying look what do I need to do to get you to just tap me on the back ones and I think that Victor Davis since Hanson's and the analogy analogizing with the classic tragic Greek hero is exactly spot on for Trump but it is unfortunate he has his desire to get them to pat him on the back because yeah he's never gonna get it he's never gonna get it you're right by the way you mentioned Glenn Greenwald you know in the past I sort of always thought of him as kind of you know lefty progressive you know don't pay attention to him but I've seen him several times appear on Tucker Carlson which is of course a show that you shouldn't appear on because it's Fox News and so on and I've always found them to be incredibly fair so my esteem of I have to apologize to him here on the record that I thought of him in the past as sort of this really annoying kind of progressive guy but I actually find him to be incredibly fair-minded in the way that he handles these types of issues I mean do you agree with that I couldn't agree more and I think that's one of the reasons why he decided to go on Tucker Carlson the first place is to expose his way of thinking to a lot of people that may have had these predetermined ideas of him this prejudiced ideas of him you know it's funny because he actually had the same opinion to me you know like what when we did a podcast yesterday was like I saw you before I thought he was some guy who platformed too many of these alt-right assholes and he hates trans people and he goes then I started listening to your show he's like oh he's not he's not that at all and you know it's easy to do it's easy to have this sort of reductionist perspective of someone and decide oh that guy he's a wacky leftist progressive just ridiculous ideas but Glenn Greenwald is an honest man and he's a man of principles and and he's courageous and that's why he released the Snowden papers and that's why he's done a lot of very important work in Brazil and he's hated for it by some groups and love by others and that's you know he's taking a lot of chances and I find him to be incredibly intellectually honest and and he's also willing to discuss some real landmine issues real hot button topics you know and we got it we got into some of them yesterday and I respect him very much I mean he strikes me as the journalist that we had 20 30 years ago that the real truth seeker who yeah of course we all come with our political preferences yeah but once you put on the hat of the journalist you're supposed to keep those at the door and he really strikes me as a journalist of a bygone era and so kudos to him hats off yeah I respect him a lot I think there's there are journalists like him Matt Tyybe there's quite a few of them out there that are sticking their neck out and you know they and they take a lot of attacks because of that but we need more of them we need we need more people that are going this world is going mad and we have to we have to look at things accurately we have to look at things for what they really are rather than what you want them to be or rather than the description that you say where you know you're going to get love for your from your tribe because you've you know drawn the correct line in the sand yeah I got a can I switch yeah popx surely sure so I wanted to ask you something and and I hope it's not an appropriate for me to to bring it up so you recently obtained a you know huge deal with Spotify of course putting you in a whole new category in terms of wealth has that reality altered your felt level of happiness and let me explain why I say this because I receive countless emails from people who say similar things to you of a similar things to what you told said at the start of our show today where you said you know you're always seem so happy and positive and all this kind of stuff and I always try to give them an answer in terms of you know what are some pathways to happiness and maybe I'll write my next book on this topic and I always tell people that you know don't rely really on money I mean money in a sense it's an inverted you up to a certain point having more money makes you happier but beyond that point it's diminishing returns there's an inflection point where it doesn't really alter your level of happiness in any way would that be correct of you in that the fact that you've got this huge deal doesn't really alter your you know global holistic level no it doesn't make me any happier no um I'm happy when I could do stand up and I can't really do stand up right now I'm happy when I could do podcast I'm very fortunate I could do that I'm happy my family's healthy I'm happy I have good friends those things are still there those are the things that make me happy I'm happy to be able to talk to someone like you I'm happy to be able to express myself um you know I'm not a guy who needs a lot of money for stuff I don't I don't I don't live the most extravagant life you know I dress like a bum I just uh I haven't really um changed much about that kind of stuff I think that if anything it brings more pressure because once people realize you're making a lot of money and they put you in a different category and then they start criticizing you more whether it's because of jealousy or because they realize you you know you're a more viable target you know it resonates with people more especially during this climate where so many people are losing their jobs so many people are losing their businesses to see someone make a lot of money it's like fuck that guy fuck him and then you find more reasons to say fuck that guy and even distort uh that person's opinions and perspectives because it fits your narrative and it helps you criticize them easier um no it definitely hasn't but also I didn't trust um I think it's good to be in with a company that has an interest in your your show being successful instead of just being on a platform where they benefit from you but they don't really have a vested interest in you the communications that I had with the head spotify and the the people that made this deal they want the show to be successful they have an interest in it being successful financial interest in it being successful and also the head spotify was a fan he likes listening to it he didn't want it didn't want it to change and we've gotten insurance that it wasn't going to change and you know a lot of people are really concerned like now you're going to have a different kind of a show and no I'm just going to do the exact same show there's been zero input in terms of like someone telling me hey don't talk like that don't say this don't bring these subjects there's been none of that as much as people speculate their has there's been none of it um but it doesn't make you happier you know you're happy when you don't have to worry when you don't have to worry about your bills that's when money makes you the happiest that's that's the big leap because I remember when I was when I first got my first development deal and I went for being really poor and not not having any idea how I was going to pay my rent to having a lot of money in the bank having like six figures in the bank and then there's a huge weight lift off my shoulders I remember that feeling I remember the feeling like once I looked at my bank I'm like who like I don't have to worry about my bills like first time in my life that there you were on the increasing part of the curve right you were in other words more money led to greater happiness yes but then you get to a point where there's diminishing return whether you have 10 million or 30 million or 100 million does absolutely no doesn't add one millimeter of happiness to your global no it doesn't but what it would it can do is add more pressure and that can actually make you less happy and then you also like I said you're the target of more criticism that can make you less happy if you pay attention to it but what I've done is ramp up my physical exercise my meditation and my as in California at least my yoga I haven't really been pursuing that out here but I've been doing a lot of exercise and as long as I have physical struggle like like a tremendous amount of physical struggle I really good at letting the rest of it just wash off my back because I give myself so much physical struggle like my workouts are so intense that whatever the pain or the frustration or the difficulty of criticism or those it pales in comparison to what I do to myself so and it sounds like a crazy person's approach to things but I've really got a method to my madness in terms of the way my mind works you know I work out like I'm training for something like I've some insanely difficult physical task ahead of me that I have to prepare my body for but I really do that that task is maintaining sanity that I have a lot of my body has a lot of requirements and because I am in this high pressure sort of stressful situation with this weird this place that I find myself in where there's a skeleton crew of people me and Jamie mostly that reach millions of people all over the world like how did this ever happen and like if I just sat around and thought about all those people listening and all the people that are mad at me and all the people that love me and the expectations and the criticisms I'd lose my fucking mind I really would I and if I got into it and I started engaging with those people and arguing with those people all day I would have no time for my family I have no time for anything so I consult with myself I think about it myself I spend time meditating I do deep breathing exercises in the song and I work out like a fucking terrorist and then at the end of the day I'm and I can keep doing that do you ever have you know that that's sort of the noisy brain where you're trying to sleep but you're thinking about 33,000 things because I'm thinking of someone like you who you know has multiple careers so that the stressors could become yes not as though you're only a podcast host or only you know an MMA guy so is there particular area where it's difficult to shut off your brain because you're uniquely worried about those particular stressors? The biggest stressor are my own feelings the biggest stressor of my or my own errors and the things that I've done wrong those are the things that bother me when I've had a show where I wasn't at my best or I said something that wasn't accurate or I said it in a way where I could have done a better job of expressing myself those are those are the things that bother me I am not a so my biggest self-critic you know it's so funny you say this because I'm going to relate what you just said to something that is drives my behavior so when people tell me well what do you take on all these fights you know to fight against these bad ideas and it adds so much stress to your life I always tell them that I have and it's going to speak exactly to what you said about yourself I have a very exacting code of personal conduct so that I am truly my you know my most severe critic because I set the bar very high so that at the end of the night when I put my head on the pillow in order for me to not suffer from insomnia and to not feel like a fraud I need to know that I've done whatever I could to contribute to the battle of ideas now however big or however small I don't have Joe Rogan's influence but I certainly have some influence and so for me to be able to go to bed with my whole personhood intact I need to feel as though I've done all that I can and that's what compels me to engage in the way that I do and so I really do appreciate what you said about sort of having this introspection where you're now it could be exhausting right because you become your worst critic did I say the perfect thing did I say the right thing was I at my best but in a sense maybe it's best for you to be your own critic rather than others to be your critics right yeah I always tell people I'm not a fan of my work like if anybody has criticisms believe me I've worse criticisms but I think that's a great regulatory mechanism and some people say always should take time to smell the roses I do outside of my work I do I love friendships and I love life and I love my family and I love I love a lot of things I love a lot of things but when it comes to my work I'm pretty ruthless on myself but that's a great regulatory mechanism for keeping sanity yeah with something that's public because you're doing it publicly so you are exposed to all these people's perspectives and views and criticisms and praise and and both of them are equally toxic right the criticisms can change the way you feel about yourself to the point where you could you know lose all self-respect and hate yourself and and you know and just want to argue with everyone who doesn't like you but also the praise you can get delusional and you could start to think that you know you are someone special you are different than the rest and you won't you don't have to try as hard and everything you do is amazing and that's probably worse I think it's probably better to be like ruthlessly self-critical than ruthlessly self-congratulatory I think that's that's actually probably more not actually I definitely think it's more toxic and the people that I know that lean in that direction they all turn to shit like that their work suffers they they they lose their ability to understand whether or not they're doing something good or bad and one of the things that people always say when someone becomes successful is like how do you remain relatable like how do you how do you maintain clarity but that's that's the introspective part that's the ruthlessly introspective part like I don't think I'm any different than anybody else and I'm constantly telling people like all I've ever done is just keep working and grinding and so like if you're on a path and you're you're running and you're running for five minutes well you're gonna get you know you're gonna get X amount of feet thousands of feet ahead a mile ahead or whatever you're gonna get but if you're running for five days you're gonna get further it's just natural if you run for five years you're gonna be further you're gonna run for 10 years 15 it's it's just a grind you just keep going and if you find yourself 10 years into the run and you go look how far I've gone I'm amazing I am the best I am a but no no no no no no no no no no you just kept going that's all you've done anybody could keep going and you get better if you pay attention you pay attention to what you're doing and you are ruthlessly critical and you do have those days where you do something that you don't like well then you don't do it that way anymore and then you think about what you did wrong you think about what you could do better and you apply that information and you apply some hard work and some discipline and you keep fucking going and as long as you do that you're gonna get better even in something that doesn't seem like you get better at it like with conversations but you do you do get better at it you get there's an art form to conversations where you can make it in a way where the people that are listening it resonates they it's nice to hear they like yeah yeah I think more than anything it there's an intimacy in these conversations right I mean right now I could completely presume that there's nobody listening to us and it's just two guys talking to each other in a very you know familiar intimate way and I think people pick that up and even on my own show I think that's exactly what happens I often notice when people come on the show before before I turn on the camera they're nervous but then I you know September at ease and I say look forget about the fact that there's going to be some people watching just have a normal conversation with me and then within five minutes you see the the more fallage of their face change because they really just get into it yeah and and I think it really speaks to you know there's this old kind of adage that you know people have short attention spans they want you know clips to be three minutes long and my goodness has your show proven that to be you know about us incorrect as you can get because again people are you're speaking in people's brains right by the way people were so upset when my latest book I didn't do the narration because they had so gotten used to my voice that I received I mean I don't want to say hate mail because they were very polite they were fans but they said we are so disappointed that you didn't narrate your own book because people didn't you so I yeah thank you for asking I asked my publisher so my publisher sells the rights of the book to an audio publisher and I proposed to the audio publisher look I can narrate it myself and they said no you know we have in house narrators and that we're just going to go with that so I don't know if it's because they don't want to set up the system for me to do it or maybe they thought it wouldn't alter the bottom line sales but they I proposed it they said no and I said fine so that's a huge error on their part and I wish I talked to you before and I would have had you insist that you narrate it yeah I agree with your fans fuck that next book redo this one man redo I always tell people when you have as deep and as silky a voice as mine if I were to narrate my own voice at my own book it would be distracting so maybe I'm doing them as service by having azo guy read the book no is there a way to fix this can you contact him and redo it maybe round two oh man they should do it right now they should do it right now yeah so 100% you should be narrating your own book for sure first of all they're your thoughts and your words and you're writing who better to read your writing than you it should only be you there should never have been a consideration that anybody else would do it I mean my only concern to be honest with you was I mean yes you're right that the whole book should be narrated by me but because I use a lot of sarcasm and humor and satire and the book has a lot of personal anecdote I was worried that the narrator might not be able to pick those now based on what Michael Schurmer listened to the audiobook early before it was released and he said that the guy did a reasonably good job so I'm going on his opinion but maybe you're right maybe I should have done it well Schurmer's being very terrible it's good it's good a job is that guy could be it's like listen if you wanted to have someone read George Carlin's act wouldn't that be offensive when you want to hear those words from George Carlin's voice you would you have the same way with your work man you there should have been no consideration whatsoever to anyone else doing it I'm going to take that small clip that we just had and I'm going to send it and shove it up the behind of my publisher they're foolish they do that all the time they did it with my friend Steven Rennella and then as the rights ran out he eventually got the rights and read he has a book on the American Buffalo it's a fantastic book and it's a really a brilliant book about his own journey to understand native American Buffalo and it's a great book but it's greater with his voice narrating it and he was upset because the publisher did not want him to narrate it initially just like they did with you they had someone else do it they had no attachment to the words they didn't resonate with it didn't mean anything to the to the guy he was just an actor reading and I'm sure the guy reading your shit is just an actor too that's crazy have you have you thought about maybe dipping your polymath tools into writing a book yeah I have I actually I write a lot and I've been writing a lot lately especially during the pandemic I spent quite a few hours sitting down and thinking about that very thing I had a book deal in the past but the the interaction that I have with the publishers and with an editor was so frustrating that I gave them their money back but this was what was what was the problem they just wanted to be like stand up they wanted me to write stand up essentially and they even offered to pay me to just take my act and just transcribe it and I said that's ridiculous that wouldn't work like don't don't do that like that's crazy then what's the audiobook going to be me doing stand up with no audience that's so dumb like that's ridiculous I'm not doing that and I and then I wrote some things and they I wrote some weird things like my thoughts about sometimes I act as if life is a simulation like act with the knowledge that life is a simulation I like I literally go I and I approach every every interaction of my day occasionally with the idea that life is a simulation I did it in a humorous way but in a way that you know the concept is of course you know this if there is a simulation that's so good you cannot discern whether or not it's a simulation how do we know whether or not we're in it right now and when you talk to you know really intelligent people that have studied this over and over again they say that's highly likely but that is the case we will one day reach the point where simulations won't be discernible how do we how do we know if we're in one right now and I was I was saying that I I spend some of my time behaving as if I'm in a simulation and that this is these these are the benefits for that they're like this is too weird and I'm like yeah I think weird like sometimes I think weird like this is I like and they were like we wanted to do like have like punchlines in each each sentence like stop I'm gonna give you a little back yeah I gotta tell you I mean so this is for aspiring authors who are listening to this show you touch on a very important point the relationship between the author well and the publishing house in general but the editor who's handling your book is really akin to a marriage because you are ultimately sharing with that person the first draft of your intimate thoughts right your book is your baby and so in my case my editor with for this for the parasitic mine was just the perfect guy because you know when you send off the first draft I mean you're scared right because you you think it's a great book you thank you've done a great job but you don't know nobody's looked at it yet this is gonna be the first guy who's gonna actually look at it is he gonna say what the hell are you talking about or is he gonna be and so the feedback that I got from him was really just one main thing there was very little he said look your book is too long we need to make sure that when people are reading this book they can't put it down you currently are at I think it was my first draft your book is too long. We need to make sure that when people are reading this book, they can't put it down. You currently are at, I think it was my first draft I gave to him was 93,000 words. He said we need to scale it back to about 70,000 words. But he was very polite in sharing that feedback because he knew that it's tough to tell an author who spent time agonizing over every syllable, hey, cut off 23,000 words from your baby. But I think you have to come with the humility. You can't be the type of guy who says, I am not going to change a goddamn syllable in my book. And so I actually took his feedback to heart. I did make the cuts and I think the book is much stronger for it. So I really think there's got to be this unbelievable trust and intimacy between the editor who's handling your book and yourself. If that relationship doesn't work well, I think the book will suffer. I don't blame the publisher or even the editor. This is before I got the book deal before I had a podcast. So I don't think they understood that I just like to talk about shit sometimes. They wanted me to approach it like a stand up comic writing a book with a lot of comedy in it. And if anybody goes back and reads my old blog entries, they weren't like that. Some of them were humorous and some of them were just weird. Some of them were just strange thoughts that they have about life. And oftentimes that's how I would write stand up in general. I would write essays, long essays. And out of those essays, I would extract a few sentences. Those sentences would become bits. And that's how I would come up with comedy. I would do it like I was mining. Like when you're mining, you're not getting all gold. You're getting a lot of dirt and you got to like shift through that dirt and then I'd find the nuggets. And I'd set those nuggets aside. And then that was my process. But in the process of doing that, I would write a lot of things where I was expressing myself on unusual and bizarre topics. And they weren't into it. And it's the first time that you shit that you introduce new material to someone. Is it, for example, will you do the bit in front of your wife before it goes out on the road? The first time is in front of an audience. Always. Always. First time in front of an audience. Always. Occasionally, I'll say something on a podcast and it's funny and that becomes a bit. But most of the time, I have an idea. And the first time I said what I'll do is I'll make a shit sandwich, meaning I'll do a bit that I know works. And then in between that bit, I'll sandwich in this new stuff. And then if it sucks, then I'll go on with a proven bit afterwards. So it's beautiful if you have material already because you have like little scaffolding. And so one of the things that I do every time I release a Netflix special, you have a special and then you have all this time off after the special where you have to write a new special. So I have usually about three to six months between the filming of a special to win it airs. So during that time, I make a lot of shit sandwiches. So I have those bits that I know work and then I sandwich in this new stuff. And then some of the new stuff is great right off the bat. It's rare, but occasionally you have a finished product like from the paper to the audience and it works right away. And you nailed it. It resonates. But a lot of times it's not. Like some bits they take forever to figure out. And you got to figure out, you got to attack it from all these different angles and it could drive you crazy. I saw a recent show that you were on or whatever a documentary. I think it's called the comedy store. I'm really enjoying it. And actually my wife got into it too. And the last one that aired last week, it was, you know, it featured you heavily where you were talking about, you know, the comedy store. What is the name of the woman that ran it? Mitzi Shore. Mitzi Shore. And I remember I mean, I'm going to link what I'm about to say to what we talked about earlier in terms of Trump getting the approval, you know, that he wants. And I was, I was moved by how you were moved when you first had Mitzi say to you, hey, you're funny. I mean, that in a sense demonstrates that we're all looking for that ego stroke from the person that we care about. And this particular case for you, the Holy Grail was for Mitzi to give you her imprimature. And once you got it, it was like you had one that no problem. Right. Yeah. It was one of the happiest moments of my life because it was like that was Mecca comedy store for when I started out doing stand up in 1988 in Boston, I had heard about the comedy store from everyone. Everyone talked about that is where Sam kennison started. That is where Richard Pryor used to perform. And you would hear about all the great Robin Williams, all these different people who worked out at the comedy store in LA. And you would see video of it on television. And you would see these, these comedians that you knew were the greatest of all time. And they all came out of this one place. And there was this one woman who was her vision. And she's without a doubt, the most important person in the history of comedy outside of comedians, it's Mitzi Shore. She's the number one. She, she allowed the lunatics to run the asylum. And it's, it's a bizarre family there where the only currency was, are you funny? It didn't matter if you're a woman or a man or gay or straight or black or white or Asian or East Indian or whatever the fuck you were. Are you funny? And if you're not fuck you, that place was ruthless. It was, but if you were funny and you made it and you became a paid regular, you were, you were in this very small group of human beings. There's probably, I would say a thousand legitimate professional comedians on the planet Earth. Out of those, 1,000, there's maybe 500 that are really good that can headline in, like in a theater or an arena or a sell out of comedy club. They have a following people come to see him. It might be less than that. It might be being charitable. It's a small group of people because it's such a brutal business on yourself, a steam. It's such a brutal business on your emotions and it's so hard to get good. You know, you could start off kind of good, but to be consistently good over and over and over again, to put out consistent specials, to consistently improve. It's so much work and most comedians, and this is a terrible thing to say, but it's true, they become good and then they start to suck. They get to a point where they get that adulation, like we're talking about, and they embrace it, and that's all they want. They don't want to grind anymore. The comedy store forced you to grind because you weren't just performing for your audience. If I was going up on any given night, I'm not just performing for my audience. There's people there that are there to see Whitney Cummings, they're there to see Eliza Slussinger, they're there to see Joey Diaz, they're there to see Anthony Jesslin, I'm just one of many, many, many people that are on the lineup and they're all killers. All these comedians just be, you know, Ali Wong, they just be smashing, smashing, smashing, smashing, and you go on after them, you got to bring the heat and you're also trying to work out new material and it's a gym and it's like, it's also, there's like a family aspect to it. Everybody's like, especially over the last decade in particular because comedy over the last decade, we realize that it's not, we don't have to have a famine mentality anymore because everybody in the past was all competing for a limited amount of slots on television. Everybody was competed for parts in a movie or parts on television shows or the host of the tonight show and it was like a very doggy dog sort of environment. Then with podcasts, the atmosphere changed and then it became, no, we help each other. You get on my podcast, we have fun. I tell people to watch your show. I tell people you're going to be at the Chicago improv and then everybody realized like, oh no, we're in this together and then it became like a brotherhood and a sisterhood. It became a family thing and now it's much, much, much more supportive than it's ever been in the past. So then the comedy store became instead of this like antagonistic sort of battleground. Then it became this place where people go to like refresh and see their peers. So everybody would go on the road. One of the best nights of the comedy store was Tuesday night because no one was on the road on Tuesday night because the Tuesday night, everybody would come into town and so the people like Sebastian, Manasao, or all these people that would do Madison Square Garden on the weekend, they would come to the comedy store on a Tuesday night to work out new material and we'd all see each other. So you'd go there on a Tuesday night and it'd be three sold out shows on a Tuesday night. It was madness and the lineups were just insane. You'd look at the lineups and you'd go, look at this line up. This is crazy. Like anywhere in the world, you'd have to pay so much money to see this lineup. Dave Chappelle would stop in. Chris Rock was there and you would pay $20 bucks and you'd get to see like the greatest comedy you've ever seen in your life. And the word got out and it became this place where consistently it was sold out seven nights a week. And that all happened within the last 10 years and specifically from 2014 on when I returned because we had been talking about it and that was what that episode of the comedy store was all about. We talked about it so much on the podcast and we talked about me and I would advertise so often about what a great place it is. And I'd have guys like Tom Seger and Bert Kreischer and Ari Schafir on my show and we talk about the fun times we have and people were traveling from all over the world to come to this place. And we were there because of the vision of Mitzi Shore. We were there because of one woman because she in the 1970s said the only way this is going to work is you let these fucking crazy people do whatever they want and find themselves on that stage. And all that matters is that you're good. It's all that matters. Are you funny? Is the audience laughing? Well then you're doing your job. Anything else? I don't give a fuck about. I don't care about the industry. I don't care about agents. She wouldn't give free passes to anybody. And all the other clubs like the industry and the agents, they would all hobnob and come to these clubs because they were social plays. They would get free tickets and free drinks and they would sit there and usually they would become a problem. They would talk too much and they'd get loud and they weren't listening to the comedy and they were drinking too much. But not at the comedy store. The comedy store. Fuck you. Pay the money. It's 20 bucks. Oh this is someone from ICM. She would say, I don't care about agents. She didn't care about anything but comedy. Are you funny? And so. Well yeah I was going to say I think that you mentioned earlier that you know it's a very tough business to be in because of the rejection and so on. I think rejection is such a fundamental part of life right. So for example when I send the paper to a journal to be peer reviewed I mean the rate of rejections and top journals is in the order of 90 95%. I mean so stop for a second and think what that means right. You've just spent two three four years working on a scientific project. It took you another six months, eight months to write it up. You send it to a journal and you have a 90 95% chance of it being rejected. And so I always tell my students that you know rejection is really part of being anti fragile right. Are you familiar with this answer? Yeah yeah it's not very good right. So it was a very kind of like also a fellow Lebanese right. So anti fragility is something that I mean as long as something doesn't kill you right the old adages squeaky doors don't break which is basically rewarding the concept of anti fragility. You know you and I grow because of the rejections right. And I think a lot of my graduate students oftentimes are disheartened by the odds of a paper being accepted. My god I'm going to spend the next 30, 40, 50 years operating within a domain of interest where the likelihood of my work being rejected consistently is in the order of 80, 90, 95%. It's a tough bill to swallow but ultimately the process ensures that that which does get published is top quality. And I guess in a similar sense it's the same for you guys that the person who ends up making it is hopefully funny. I think you told me on the first show that I ever came on your podcast you had compared what I do to yours and I probably of all the things you've said to me that's the one that I remember the most you said you know there's something very similar in what you do and what I do in that it's impossible to hide the audience will find you out right. If you get into a ring as an MMA fighter you can't fake it. If you get into in front of a stage and you're not funny you can't fake it. If I get up in front of people and I start espousing stuff that's garbage I'm going to get scared. And so I really appreciate that because it shows that yes what we do is risky but it's honest if you're good the crowd will tell you that you're doing a good job. And the way to get better is through struggle and the best moments of my career have come after the biggest bombings. Like there's something about bombing that like wakes you the fuck up it's such an awful awful feeling it's like you got to get better. So if I look back on the beginning of my career like there was moments where I had horrible shows where I just ate shit on stage but after that I had a big growth spurt because I realized what went wrong I never wanted it to happen again and I restructured and I got better and I worked harder. And that's what was wrong usually is that literally the joke or the anecdote that you're telling is you've overestimated how funny it is or is it that the delivery the timing what is it that's not working that you say this bit is going into the dustbin. It could be any factor. There's a number of factors it could be your attitude that you carry with you on stage. You could be too cocky or too confident and not engaging enough not not not not I don't want to see not even it's not humble but connected to the idea of expressing the bit rather than you killing on stage. Some people just want to go up there and be great you know but what you really have to do is don't don't think I want to be great. What you think is what is the best way to get this into people's minds and one of the best ways is to be completely tuned into what you're thinking and what you're saying to to be locked in focused and also you it's got to resonate with you you have to really think this is funny. You mean and it takes a while to figure out what about it is funny to you because you're so close to it you wrote it you're sitting there with it you don't have to you've written it and rewritten it three or four or five times maybe it's not even that humorous to you anymore you have to figure out how to make it humorous and the way you got to do that is a lot it's one of the rare art forms where you need an audience to really put it together to create it and you might get a bad crowd you might get a crowd that's drunk you might get a crowd that just had a heckler thrown out five seconds ago and people are upset you might get a crowd where the person before you had a terrible said and the audience is like why we even hear this show sucks and then you got to kind of re energize them and re engage them they might have a preconceived notion of who you are when they look at you women have a problem with that there's a lot of women that go on stage and men are like a girl she's not funny so women have like a bigger hurt I think I think comedy for women is probably at least 50% harder than it is for men I really believe that I did like perceptions that a lot of men have are very prejudiced towards whether women are not with women are funny or not there's so many different factors that I think I might have discussed this on a previous show but one of my former post docs his doctoral dissertation was on an evolutionary study of humor and the argument was that humor is a sexually selected trait meaning that humor serves as a proxy for intelligence right and so to the extent that there are sex differences in the frequency of you know top comedians an evolutionary perspective with with argue that there are stronger selection pressures evolutionary pressures for men to be funny as part of their elaborate courtship rituals then there are for women to be funny so so for example you know never have the following words been uttered sure Linda you have a gorgeous ass but you're not funny enough we're not going to have sex right but the other way it certainly has happened where a woman sees a gorgeous guy but he's a dud he's not funny he's not engaging and she decides that he's not the right you know partner for her right that's why women can consistently say I want a funny guy because they're effectively saying I want a smart guy I mean it's hard to be funny and witty and be a dumb guy correct and so you're right that it's much harder for women to be comedians but in part evolution explains why there are sex differences in terms of the frequency of comedians does that make sense yeah it does going back to Christopher Hitchens he wrote a bit about it exactly about women not being funny and people I don't have how do you explain that using an evolutionary perspective I don't think so right I don't remember his perspective was that women who are funny take on male characteristics they're usually very butch and you know and very you know and you use like I think you use Roseanne Barr as an example and some other women who you know have like a brash almost masculine perspective on comedy and it's it's uh but to get back to the point there's a lot of factors when you bomb and uh I do believe that the the bar is higher for women I think it's more difficult because of perceptions but I just think for everybody it's um it's about how much fun you're having up there it's about how much focus and time you put into the material how much how much much time you've spent doing it too there's like comedy is in this sense it's a form of hypnosis you you learn how to get the audience to think the way you're thinking and when someone's on stage is doing really well for me as an audience member I let them think for me like when they're they're going I just I I abandoned all my preconceived notions and I just allow them to take me on a journey with their words and they're they're acting it out and it's it's fun I love it I I and it's one of the things that it really has helped me throughout my career is that I'm still a fan of stand-up comedy and some comedians lose that you know they lose the love of watching it as an art form unfortunately. Have you ever met a comedian who when you saw their acts you thought they were very funny but when you got to know them personally they were duds in their interactions because you I mean you would think that's what it was you have okay oh yeah there's a lot of things how do you explain that this guy why would you be funny in your personal life but funny on stage I mean shouldn't they translate from one to the other? No not necessarily because it it's like a musician when they when you know you meet someone they're a great singer should you be like enthralled by their speaking voice? Yeah okay yeah it's when there's a lot of comics that are very introspective and very almost they're almost shut-ins and they only come alive on stage some of them are miserable and like they only they only become really funny when they're in front of a crowd and they get to do their thing. Richard Jenny was apparently I didn't know him too well when he was alive on met him a couple of times and this is the one who committed suicide? Yeah he was one of my favorites he was brilliant but notoriously a miserable person like I would always ask when the old days when I would do clubs back when radio was a thing they'd take you to morning radio in a town and he's usually a guy at work for the club maybe even a local host who would pick you up at the hotel and then they'd take you and I would always ask like hey who's like the worst person you had to travel with? Who's the worst person you had to bring to radio and a lot of them would say Richard Jenny that she just didn't want to be there. He wanted to be a TV star a movie star and it never really worked out but it what he was was one of the most brilliant comedians ever but even though I love to go see him do stand-up that's not what he wanted. You know it's like that Billy Joel song the piano man you know I'm sure I could be a movie star if I could get out of this place like that that was him he wanted to be something that he wasn't but what he like he didn't want to be on the road all the time just working in the clubs but what he was for us other comedians was one of the best examples of what a stand-up comic could be he was so fucking good you know it's so hard to see his specials and to really appreciate how good he was live. I mean you get a lot off of his specials he was obviously really funny and brilliant and his writing was great but you would see him live and you would go god damn he would you would have comics like leaving the show shaking their head like I will never be that good he's so good but miserable in real life just not not happy and not necessarily a funny guy off stage but on stage he was one of the great. But you know it's funny because when you said that he was miserable in the fact that he was a comedian rather than a movie star it kind of if we circle back to one of the first points that we talked about when we started this conversation where you said you know you're a happy guy and so on it speaks to the importance of really pursuing something that on a daily basis makes you happy I mean I get tons of emails from people who say hey professor I finished my bachelors in this what should I study for my masters what is the marketing what is the market suggesting I should and I always tell them no please don't look at it that way because you're going to have to wake up every I mean the place where you spend most of your waking time is at your job right and the fact that I am happy sure I'm dispositionally happy it's just my innate personality but I'm also happy because I have a job that I love to do whether I'm writing a book or speaking to Joe Rogan or giving a lecture you know I'm always excited by what I'm doing therefore it's hard for me not to be happy so someone like this comedian this regrettable thing where he committed suicide that that mismatch between where he wants to be and where he is every day is a terrible for most people they don't commit suicide but they do wake up at 57 saying you know what I never wanted to be an accountant I became an accountant because my dad told me it's a safe job or a dentist or a doctor or whatever and I always tell people I mean I know it sounds cliche you have to find what makes you passionate and if you can do that I think it's one way by which you can guarantee happiness it's one of the only ways that's I always speak of this quote because it's one of my favorite quotes ever by throw most men live lives of quiet desperation right yes that is not where you want to be and everyone's different you know some people love to do stand-up comedy some people love it some people want to be a musician and they're and unfortunately they make furniture you know there's a lot of that out there and not everybody can be a rock star right not everybody can be a famous painter and I don't know other than what I do and what I've done my path I don't know what it would take for someone to be successful in their chosen field it's not mine I don't know but for Jenny he he was of an era where if you really wanted to make it you had to be a movie star that was that was he looked at guys like Jim Carey and you know and all these people like Jerry Seinfeld became a television star that was what everybody wanted they wanted a thing they wanted stand-up to be the thing that got you to the ultimate goal and now comedy is the ultimate goal for the this generation of comics you know so it's become a different thing fortunately is there something I hope it's not too personal question but that's what your podcast is all about so there's a theory in psychology that looks at the psychology of regret so when you ask people what do you regret most and there are two possible sources of regret regret of action or regret of inaction so regret of action would be I really regret that I did this in my life regret of inaction is I really regret that I never pursued that in my life and it turns out Joe that for most people the greatest source of regret for them are stem from inactions right I regret that I didn't do this so if I were to put you on the spot and say right now today what is the thing you regret most in life what would it be I don't have a lot of regrets because I'm I'm of the belief that everything that I've done even the mistakes that I've made they have given me the information and the knowledge that has allowed me to be who I am today and who I am today I'm trying my best always to be the best version myself I'm not always successful but I try my best to be the best version myself and failure is a part of that mistakes are part of that and it when it comes to the regret of inaction I don't have any of zero regret of inaction not of you know what I thought it was dream of clinical psychology we clinical psychologists would be out of business as everybody was made up of Joe Rogans well I've been insanely fortunate I have three dream jobs you know I'm a color commentator for the ultimate fighting championship I'm a lifelong martial artist that's a dream job I'm a professional stand-up comedian I work the biggest venues I have the most fun I have great friends dream job podcasting which I never even thought was a job has become this amazing job and it's a I love doing it I love it I know when when I was leaving my house today no one I was going to get to talk to you online nothing but happiness just I was looking forward to it nothing nothing regretful about it at all I'd have zero regrets in terms of inaction all any regret that I have of action the things that have done wrong or you know people I've wronged or things I said that I should have said has made me a wiser person so I don't even have regret in that I mean sorry to interrupt your eye I would I also say that having a a family home that's a true solace is a is really an important part so for me you know when people ask me you know how do you how do you handle the stressors of your life well I know that when I come home I have my children whom you've met I have my wife and they really are my solace it in other words there is nothing I'd rather do when I have some free time than to be with my family than to be with my wife she really is my best friend and of course there is no prescription for how you can guarantee that you can pick the right life banner but really try to make that decision as carefully as you can because that itself can be either a source of great happiness or terrible misery oh terrible misery I know so many people whose lives have never really worked out because they've chosen the wrong people and they've had these insane relationships these terrible you know combative relationships with their significant other it's but you have to be the person that attracts a person that is a quality human being true that if you don't have anything to bring to the table you're you know if you're filled with self-hate and loathing and anger and all the jealousy and pettiness and that you're not going to get a person who is a good it's not it's not going to happen you got to fix yourself like so many people think they're going to find a person that person going to make them happy now I think people enhance your happiness it certainly makes you happy or but you have to figure out who the fuck you are you have to work out your own bullshit if you want to have a good person in your life because a good person is not going to be attracted to someone who's all fucked up they're not going to want to be around you you're going to be a problem for them and you should in a non selfish way you shouldn't want to have a good person in your life if you're a mess because you're going to fuck up their life you like it that's but I agree with you having a family and having people that you love and love ones if without that you don't feel complete people need love and it's such a you know it's it's such a cliche thing to say you know all you need is love it's not all you need you need food and shelter and but if you have everything but you don't have love you will be fucking miserable there's so many people that are successful but they they don't have love and those people that's some they've it's an imbalance right I mean this the standard cliche of the the billionaire CEO who works sixteen hours a day and is you know it has on his fourth marriage and has a bunch of kids that are drug addicts because he was never there and you know on paper he's successful but his real life is a shambles because he spent all of his time concentrating on accumulating wealth and accumulating power and none of his time on himself and how he interacts with other people and being a good father and being a good husband and being a good friend and and and being a just a decent human being and sometimes those are father and being a good husband and being a good friend and and and being a just a decent human being and sometimes those are the hardest things to do. It's easy to concentrate on a task at hand. You know, if you just distract yourself from your own barbaric humanity and just think only about accumulating numbers in a bank account. I mean, that's a that's a Michael Douglas in the movie Wall Street, right? just greed is good with that. Without giving any names, I have family members who have been of that type who really have never fostered long term friendships. Oh, and I say family members. I don't mean my own family. Right. I mean my my family. A birth. Yeah. Where they've become they became very wealthy where they collected Ferraris and Aston Martin's and I've told I've worn these family members that, you know, life is long and if one day you were to lose your money and I hope that you don't, the trajectory is not a good one. And I hate to say it that it's it's turned out that way because you know, love is a protective belt. I mean we get older, right? So and when you get, I mean, you should always be accompanied by great quality people around you. You should certainly have those great quality people as you enter the golden years of your life. And I think regrettably for some of these high flying kind of players, they think that the party is going to go on forever and it isn't. And so yeah, you know, choose carefully who you're going to go to bed at night because that's one of the sources of happiness. Yeah. And also if you get if you're concentrating only on success in terms of financial success and that's what a lot of people do that are in business, right? You're really your life is fixated on numbers. Your life is fixated on accumulating numbers and it's just it's an empty pursuit, but it's also a pursuit that becomes insanely addictive. Because you compare yourself to the people around you, you know, Mike's Mike's house is 4,000 square feet per my house is 5,000 square feet. And then you're happy with it until you realize that Steve's house is 7,000 square feet. You're like fuck. And he lives in the the the the really the the the best neighborhood. And I live in a not so desirable neighborhood. It's not as desirable as his and I have a portion, but he has a Ferrari like, oh my God, you're losing your fucking mind. So you're just being up with the Joneses, right? I mean, the positional the positional economy is a real term that captures exactly what you just said, which is by the way, it's not so much. And for many things, what makes us happy is not so much some absolute level of whatever the currency is, but that we have more of it than someone else. So I think I might have even mentioned this on a previous show on your podcast. So for example, if you ask people, you know, that, you know, are you happy with your sex life. The amount of sex you have is less important than the fact of you having more sex than your close friends, right? Which shows you again how much of a hierarchical species we are. We use social comparison to decide whether we're happy or not, right? Yeah, it's weird. Like what what is I think that for a lot of people goals make them happy achieving goals, you know, like having something that you're working towards. I don't necessarily just mean financial goals. I think that's where people get tripped up is just thinking about financial goals, but accumulating skills getting better at things. To me that that that makes me happy or at least keeps me engaged and satisfied. There's something about learning new things that's very rewarding getting better at things very rewarding. But not if all you're concerned about is numbers. Not if you're just doing it to try to achieve bigger and greater. Like you're talking about the point of diminishing returns that it comes to financial wealth. I think for, I think challenges are important. Like having things that you're working towards because they give you this sense that in doing these things and getting better with getting better at playing chess or getting better at tennis or what I pick a thing. There's something about it that develops your overall human potential when you get better at something you flex the muscles and exercise the muscles of getting better of figuring out problems of it being engaged when you're stagnant and just doing the same thing over and over and over again with no change your mind. And you're, well, it speaks to what you said earlier when you said using the COVID lockdown for self improvement. So for example, one of the things that I did during the COVID lockdown is I said because I am now addicted to this step counting thing. On my iPhone, I said, you know, I wanted to always maintain at least 14,000 steps per day. So it was a very concrete goal, right? I knew that I had to reach that benchmark and it didn't matter if at, you know, 10 o'clock at night. I have to go walking around the block eight times so that I could hit that mark. I was going to do it. And so by doing that, it gave me great satisfaction because I could look now at the last seven eight nine months and see that my pedometer is showing that I've maintained this very specific objective and so that feels good. It's funny because there's a book that I read recently by Adam Altar. It's called Irresistible and it's about addiction to technology. And one of the things that he talks about that's one of the most addictive things for people is these fitness trackers. Yes. People get addicted to step counts and, you know, how much exercise and exertion they put forth in a day. And either even though it can masquerade as a positive for some people, particularly people with addictive personalities, it can become a real problem. Yeah. Yeah. In my case, it's been good. By the way, I was recently on, I don't know what you think of her, but I was on the podcast of Jillian Michaels. That was super fun. It was really, which by the way, again, shows you all of these incredible connections that today we have. And what world would I, you know, a professor of evolutionary psychology and so on have connected with Jillian Michaels, but apparently she was a fan of my show and invited me on. So again, the social network stuff allows, you know, meetings of worlds that you would have never thought possible 10, 15 years ago. Yeah, really does. I don't know much about her. I know she's like a weight loss lady. She makes people lose weight, right? She gets a fat. That's original claim to fame. She was on the big loser show what she does after. I don't know, but I joke through there at the start of the show. I told her that, you know, when I invite people on my show, I have all sorts of illustrious people, most of whom my wife never batted in my, but what she found out that I was appearing on Jillian Michaels. She said, I'll tell her I'm a fan, tell her I'm a fan. So apparently I finally got street cred by appearing on Jillian Michaels. Yeah, she's supposedly like a hard ass, right? Like she is a tough lady. She makes you get after it. Yeah. Well, I'm a fan people. I feel as though there's you've been remiss and pointing to the fact that I'm about 20 pounds lighter than the last time that you saw me when I was on your show. I think a little shout out from Joe Rogan saying, well done. I would have been the appropriate thing for you to do, but I'll forgive you. How can I know all I see is your shoulders in your head? You don't see a bit the face is thinner a bit. Nothing. You look good. I'll tell you that. I don't know. It's the last 20 pounds. Oh, that's great. I still have a lot more to lose, but certainly from my maximum point. I'm about actually a bit more maybe about 25 pounds down. That's great. What did you do to do that? You know, for me, it really has to be about almost turning into a Gestapo concentration camp. My wife keeps track of my calories. She turns into Dr. Mengele. She makes sure that, you know, I'm getting this thing. Once I deviate from that sort of narrow path, then I become a sumo wrestler very quickly. Yeah, it for me. It's pasta. Oh, yeah, it goes right to my gut. There's something about pasta and bread. I can just swell up on pasta and bread. When I cut all that stuff out and I just eat vegetables and meat, I just slim right down. It's my weakness for, I guess it's the Italian in me. My weakness is pasta. And I don't need a small amount of it either. I eat preposterous amounts of food. I have always eaten ridiculous amounts of food. But when I eat meat, I'm pretty easily satisfied. But there's something about carbohydrates, like especially pasta. I could just keep funneling that stuff in my face even after I'm like, I'm already full. I know I'm full. I shouldn't be eating more. I'm like, one more. And then after that sugar, eating cake and pie and whipped cream on it, I just, you know, I get gluttonous. I'm a gluttonous person. There's an ongoing joke now. I'm sure you probably don't check it because, you know, you probably get tied a million times on Twitter. But oftentimes I will post something decadent. I'm eating. And then I will write, please forgive me, Joe Rogan has to have Joe Rogan. Somehow you've managed to incorporate yourself in my culinary conscience so that every time I eat something bad, Joe Rogan is on my right shoulder, you know, insulting me. Well, I'm sorry about that. Or maybe I'm not sorry. Maybe it's helping you. I mean, sometimes like that's the thing. People love that term fat shaming to use it as a majority of. But there's something about fat shaming that can motivate you. If someone says it's like we were talking about earlier things that feel bad. Like oftentimes they'll force you into action, you know, and I don't want to hurt anybody's feelings. But sometimes their feelings need to be hurt a little in order to prod them into action. And you can do that with people. It's just like who do you do it too? Who needs it? Who would be thankful and who gets really badly hurt by it? Actually, I had written an article on my psychology today column defending Jillian Michaels whom we just talked about a second ago because she had gone after, but in a very polite way, she had gone after Lizzo saying, well, sorry, but I'm not going to celebrate her body because it's not good for her to be this overweight. And suddenly she was this monster Nazi because how dare you not celebrate Lizzo's body and so on. And I said, I mean, are you insane? Why should she be celebrating? She's a fitness expert, a health expert. Why should she be celebrating someone being 300 pounds overweight or whatever she was? And so I had actually defended her. So you're exactly right. Truth sometimes hurts, but we need to say it. Well, someone especially like Jillian Michaels, I mean, that's her expertise. She's a fitness trainer. You know, for her, the idea of getting that big is preposterous and the idea of celebrating and say everybody's beautiful. Well, that's ridiculous. That's not the case. You know, beauty is rare. That's why it's so celebrated because someone does achieve an amazing body. We know how hard it is to do, especially how it is to maintain. I mean, Jillian Michaels has had a beautiful body for a long time. I mean, that means she's incredibly disciplined. Of course, a person like that is going to look at someone who's not disciplined at all being celebrated for her body and go, that's ridiculous. And she's right because there's health consequences to being that big and to ignore those health consequences just to make yourself feel good that you're making someone else feel good about being morbidly obese. It's not right. It's not smart. It's not good for anybody. I mean, it's not nice to just make fun of her and shit on her and say terrible things about her. That's not nice either. It's not nice to say you look great no matter what. That's not really the case. It's not true. And of course, by the way, there are marketing campaigns that have become famous in selling that BS. Right. So, Dove does exactly that. It doesn't matter how overweight you are. We're all equally beautiful. So, it is what's on. I teach that same marketing in my, in my, the business school. I say, yes, it's a very effective advertising campaign because it empowers women. But if you are a truth purist, you're really peddling BS because we're not equally beautiful. Beyonce is not as desired as Lizzo. Beyonce is more desired. I mean, it's such a desire being more desired. It's more desired than Lizzo. Clearly. Yeah. Yeah. She has a perfect body. Yeah. Well, the weird thing is that that doesn't apply to men. Like nobody looks at a man with a fat gut and goes, you're beautiful no matter what. Nobody says that. Like man, he doesn't get more. Well, because I mean, of course, women do look at men's physical markers, but not to the same extent because in a sense, men can compensate for some of their physical shortcomings by doing well in other metrics. Right. So you could have a guy who's very funny who's maybe not the tallest, but he has great personality or a dominant personality. But when it comes to physicality, it's difficult to compensate for that. You know, you either are facially symmetric or you're not. Right. So on some traits, we can compensate for them on others. They're sort of deal breakers. Right. Yeah. I guess. But it's in a way. It's really sexist to women. Right. Because we're saying you're only valuable if your body looks good and will lie to you. And so you, you, you, you body looks good. No matter what girl, you look beautiful. It's like you're treating them like their children. Whereas with men, you know, you see a guy who's fat. You look at that slob. You know, and you're allowed to and no one will say you're fat shaming. No one says you're fat shaming men. It's always fat shaming is always in response to someone saying something about a woman's body. I'm, I mean, you never, men who are fat are funny. It's like it's humorous to see like my friend, Bert Kreischer when he goes on stage. He takes the shirt off. So he could see his gut. And he does stand up. It means in Chicago recently, he did an outdoor show. It was 30 degrees outside. So he did it with no shirt on. I'm like that is hilarious. So committed to showing everyone his gut that he did it. If he just, but he's, Chris Farley, Chris Farley, perfect example, John candy was another great example. Like, but, but for a guy like that, like there's no fat shaming. It's not like, you know, you say to Chris Farley, you're beautiful no matter what because that's not true. You know, it's not true. But it's okay that you say it to a man that it's not true. It's, it's okay that you tell him he's fat. But again, that's just because the personhood of a man is not as clearly tied to his physicality. That I don't think that that's sexism. It's called, it's called evolution. Right. For example, the trajectory of the mating value of men and women changes throughout their life history. Right. The woman is more desired. All things considered when she's 20 than when she's 80. That's not because life is ages. That's because it's called biology. Whereas a man's mating value increases. Right. You and I were more likely to be rejected when we were 20 than we are today because we have more status today. So I don't think that life is sexist or ages. They are certain incontrovertible truths about our reality and we just have to deal with them. Isn't it funny that the people wanted to deny those incontrovertible truths about reality if they don't make them feel good. Exactly. Exactly. That's, that's, yeah. It's really unfortunate. But it's really funny that some of the people that also say that you shouldn't body shame. They're the same type of people that make fun of Donald Trump or having small hands. You know, it is. It's like whenever it's convenient, you will, you will forego those rules. Well, that's, that's hypocrisy. One of the curses of the human condition. Yeah, there's so many curses of the human condition aren't there. It's funny. It's even if we're aware of them, we still can't help fall into those pitfalls. That's why there's something called the seven deadly sins, right? It's because moral philosophers and theologians were well aware of many of the quick Sam traps that we could fall into and they put them into a easily digestible list for us, right? So that's why it's important to have psychologists like yourself who explain exactly what's going on in the mind that's forcing you into these weird little traps and holes. Thank you, sir. Do you, so your book that you put out the parasitic mind we've barely talked about it. This the book is it out right now? It came out on October 6 so far is doing really well. Very excited by it. It basically is the story of many of the things that we've been talking about all the years that I've been coming on your show, which is there are a bunch of these terrible ideas, these idea pathogens that were spawned on university campuses because it takes intellectuals to come up with really dumb ideas. And so I trace what these bad ideas are, how they originated and then I offer solutions for how we can protect ourselves against these bad ideas, how we could vaccinate ourselves against this ordered thinking. Now I'm sure these ideas and the way you're describing them make some people uncomfortable. Like they they upset people. Have you had, have you had a lot of criticism about this book? So far not too much criticism because I like the thing that I've done a pretty good and tempered job in presenting the evidence. So one of the things that I try to explain in the book is that each of these bad ideas start off with a kernel of truth, but then in the and some noble cause, but then in the pursuit of that noble cause, the idea gets distorted and it becomes parasitic. So for example, when it comes to feminism, equity feminism is a great idea because it basically says that men and women should be equal under the law. There should be no institutional, you know, sexism. We can all agree to that. But in the pursuit of that original noble goal, we shouldn't then say, as do militant feminists say that there are no innate biological differences. So we need to make this due to a social construction. We need to make men and women indistinguishable in the pursuit of the original goal. When it comes to transgender activism, it's the same story. You and I can both be fully in favor of transgender rights as I think we both are, but that doesn't mean that we reject biology. What I call biophobia in arguing that a 275 pound guy who set six foot seven, who decides to call himself Linda tomorrow. He can fight the MMA against women who are one third his size. And if you say otherwise, you're a transphobe. And so what I basically argue in the book is that each of these terrible ideas started off from a good place, but then it met a morphosized into a complete departure from reason. And then I offer ways by which we can sort of retake reason and logic and science from these parasitic ideas. Now, when you construct a book like this, do you look at it in terms of how people could potentially criticize these ideas and what arguments they would have against what you've proclaimed? Well, what I try to do is offer a way by which it becomes difficult to argue against me because the evidence is too great in my favor. I always tell people that when I walk into a room, if I walk with the requisite squagger, it's because I know what I know. I also have a systemic humility, meaning that if you were to today ask me, Joe, give me your position, God on the legalization of marijuana. I would tell you, you know what? I simply don't know enough about the story. I haven't done my homework. I haven't built to use a term for my book. I haven't built the no-mological network of cumulative evidence that would allow me to pronounce a definitive position. So I think if I've done a good job in the book, I will have communicated to people a way by which when they are constructing arguments, they can do it void of hysteria. If I want to prove to you, Joe, that toy preferences are not socially constructed. I can prove it to you by bringing data from across cultures, from across time periods, from across disciplines showing to you that toy preferences have a biological signature. I don't need to get hysterical. I don't need to get emotional. And so I'm offering people an epistemological truth in establishing when to know that something is true for, not does that make sense? Yeah. Have you ever debated someone who disagrees with your positions on these things? Someone who has maybe a social justice warrior's perspective on these ideas? Yeah, it's called Tuesday. I mean, I spent 99% of my waking life doing nothing but that. My blood pressure is higher because of that, right? So yes, but in all seriousness, I face it both in my public engagement, meaning, let's say on social media, whatever. Also in my scientific career, as I think you and I might have spoken in the past, I've always faced that consistent debate because many of my colleagues in the social sciences, even till today, are very, very resistant to accepting the idea that biology matters when it comes to human affairs, right? I think we've discussed in the past. And so it's really, in a sense, this book, I've been writing it for 25 years because I have seen, you know, I tell them in chapter one of the book, I basically say that I faced two great wars in my life. The first war was the Lebanese Civil War when I was a child. And the second war has been the war on reason, logic and science that I have experienced as a professor of 26 years. And so the stuff that is being taught and promulgated at the universities is absolutely insane. I mean, it's people think that I'm making it up that I'm being satirical when I say these things. But you now see the downstream effect on all those bad ideas, right? You're seeing it in HR departments, you're seeing it in the training in the military, you're seeing it in political parties. And ideas start off in the universities as some esoteric nonsense. But with enough force, they become mainstream stuff. And well, these people graduate from those universities and they go on and to the workforce with these notions that they have. And these notions are reinforced by the other people that are their age that graduated along with them. And they want to reshape society in this, these, these ideals. And then one day they get older and then they get a mortgage and then they get a job and they get a family and they go, what the fuck was I doing? But they've already started this process. It's interesting to say this denying of biology and it's effect on human affairs. It's such a strange thing because it's clearly a factor. It's clearly it's a significant thing. It's a real, it's a real thing. But the denying of this particular factor is very strange because it makes it closer. It comes from a hopeful place, right? Because imagine if we can argue that your child and mine has equal probability to become the next Lionel Messi or Michael Jordan as Lionel Messi or Michael Jordan. They're all born with equal, equal potentiality. We're all born on equal footing. We're all born. Fabula. So again, that speaks to my point earlier, right? These idea pathogens free us from reality, but they do so in the service of kind of a feel good noble cause. But it is perfectly detached from reality. Men and women are not biologically the same. We're not all likely to become Michael Jordan. Transgender people have every right to live free of bigotry, but they shouldn't compete with biological females if they're trans women. So again, I think the difficulty is that for most people who are social justice warriors, they think that we can't chew gum and walk at the same time. I could be for all of these noble causes without ever murdering a millimeter of truth. And the physical issue is very strange too because physical variables, they're so real. And to deny that as a factor as a real factor in who you are and what your potential is. And the reason why sports are so interesting, right? Like a person like me really doesn't have a chance to compete against LeBron James. I just, you know, just it's not going to happen. It's not on the table. And to deny that it seems foolish to deny physical differences. And it's one of the reasons why sports are so interesting is you get to see these freaks. You get to see these rare people that can do things that you know for a fact if you had a million years to practice, you could never achieve the things that they're doing. But by the way, John Watson, like one of the founders of behaviorism, argued basically, and I have the exact quote in the book that you know, give me any 12 infants. I could turn any one of them into the next beggar, the next surgeon, the next athlete. So he was basically arguing for exactly the position that you are so rejecting. Hey, I could turn you into the next LeBron James. If you give me the right opportunity to properly condition you and socialize you. It's insane. But by the way, even for example in psychiatry until very recently something as clearly organic as schizophrenia was blamed on the environment, right? And I had a skin so frigenic mother, right? Who hugged you too much or didn't hug you enough? Of course, today we look back at that and say, who believe this nonsense? Well, Freudians did, right? So again, it's not as though these ideas are not espoused by otherwise very smart people. John Money of Johns Hopkins University who has one of the original sort of gender is a social construction used to advise surgeons. Well, don't worry about it. And he will be a girl because it was thought that gender is completely due to social construction. It has nothing to do with biology. So these ideas have real consequences. They're not just some esoteric thing that we talk about in the humanities department. Well, at one point in time you were one of the first people that was arguing the dangers of this stuff leaking out of the universities. And people thought it was foolish. Like you're concentrating on something that's a small faction of people that are in the universities and has no bearing on the real life. But then we've seen like particularly like the protests in Portland where they went on for like, I mean, I think they're still going on. It's over 100 days of, you know, them trying to light federal buildings on fire and riding in the streets. It's still happening. Like that that is literally those chickens coming home to roost. No kidding. Exactly right. Look, I know we've talked about Justin Trudeau previously on your show. Justin Trudeau is a walking manifestation of almost every single one of the bad ideas that I discuss in the parasitic mind. He's into postmodernism. He's into diversity inclusion and equity. He's into cultural relativism. You know, every single one of the dreadful things that I talk about in the book. He exemplifies it. Why? Because he is a product of that educational process. That's what you're supposed to think as a progressive. And now that he is prime minister, he institutes each of these ideas. They have real consequences. I'll tell you a quick story that just happened to me recently. My daughter came to me and told me that her science teacher had an avatar of BLM in their dialogue and their whatever zoom or whatever it was called. And I thought that was very objectionable. And so I wrote a very polite but firm letter to the principles saying that I didn't think that it was appropriate in the pursuit of her pedagogy responsibilities that a teacher with signal, you know, political affiliations to young children. And secondly, I then said, but never mind that if you look at some of the positions that are espoused by BLM, they're truly grotesque whether it be the Marxist stuff, whether it be the blacks of premises and whether it be the clear anti white propaganda. And so I thought, is this something that's appropriate for a teacher to be doing? Well, within a few hours, it was taken away. It was taken off. Right. And that was, in a sense, me activating my inner honey badger. Right. It's not that I just got on a Joe Rogan show to talk about these ideas in my own personal life. I got engaged. And I think that's what everybody needs to do. You need to be engaged in the battle of ideas because they have truly severe consequences on our children and their children. There's a lot of people that are afraid. They're afraid to engage in the battle of ideas because they don't want to be labeled a bigot and they don't want to cause people to attack them and they'd rather just keep their mouth shut and complain quietly to their friends. But earlier we were talking about all of the different frailties that the human condition suffers from. I think cowardice is something that I've always said should be added to the long standing list of seven. different frailties that the UN condition suffers from. I think cowardice is something that I'm always said should be added to the long-standing list of seven deadly sins. We should have an eighth sin called cowardice because look, I don't want to sound hyperbolic, but the young folks who landed on Normandy weren't given a guarantee of safe passage. They knew that most of them were going to be mowed down like little mosquitoes by the machine guns of the Nazis. And yet they said, hey, I'll go, I'll do it. And they did that. They made that sacrifice so that Joe Rogan and Gatsad can today sit in a free society and have this great conversation. So I understand that people are afraid of real repercussions. And I'm not suggesting that people should be reckless martyrs. But what I am saying is that you can't simply say, I'm too afraid and I've got too much to lose. Let Gatsad, let Jordan Peterson, let Joe Rogan put their neck on the line. They've got this. They can handle it. No, we each have a small part to play if we all grow a pair and speak out in unison. We'll get rid of these ideas by next Wednesday. If we don't, it will be a long ride to hell. Here, here. I think that's a great way to end this. We just got two three hours, believe it or not. And that nuts. Just for you. I could sit with you and thought, I felt like it was three minutes. You're just the best man. You're honestly, listen, I feel the same way about you. I appreciate you very much. Your book, the parasitic mind needs to be read by you in the audiobook. Please, whoever's listening, audio people, the people that are responsible with the publishers, please, let God read it. Please. Thank you. Thank you brother. It was an honor as always. Take care, my friend. Bye bye. Bye bye.