Go run and find it! The Joe Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night! All day! So cool. Okay, let's ride the road. You need the headphones? I'll never. No? Okay. It's okay with you. I know I've seen it both ways. No, you don't have to wear them. Okay. You were telling me about your cane. That cane is amazing. It's amazing. It's card by the Ogon people who were in Mali. And the family that's been doing it for 100 years. And many of them were killed in the Rwandan wars. It is. It's heavy. It's beautifully done, I think. And it's been a close companion of mine for many years. It seems to be indestructible. It's pretty awesome, working. It looks heavy. The DOGAN people have a very strange origin story. It's a fascinating origin story that involves... It involves like... Here it is. I didn't want to misspeak. So here it is. Centers on the Supreme Creator, and the cosmic journey of the amphibious water spirits known as the Noma. So they have this crazy cosmic origin story that's a part of their mythology. Oma then attempted to procreate with the earth, but the pairing was flawed. So they have a very strange descendant of the ark, according to the DOGAN traditions, the Noma descended to earth from the serious star system and a giant ark like vessel. The vessel contained the eight original human ancestors, along with the seeds and animals needed to populate the world. Those are the DOGAN traditions. Amazing. Amazing. That's amazing. Crazy story. I have a daughter who is a nature of a photographer. I mean, there's a lot of work in Africa. And she knows all about that stuff. So you were telling me before we got rolling, I said, save this for the air. That Vladimir Zelizki and his wife have seen basic instinct how many times? 15, at least 15. There's a recent biography that said that. It began when they were recording and they had known each other before and the ones they she saw him with his tape in his hand. She said, what is it? And he said, basic instinct. And they saw it together. And it has such an effect on them that they played it together many times, at least 15 times during their anniversaries. Now, I'm not sure what that says. And I know that some people think the movies had a kind of amateur way effect on them. But the other thing that's interesting to me is if you see it 15 times, does it really fuck you up to the point where you go to war with the budget? I mean, is that the real key to why it happened? Well, his defense, Putin attacked first. Absolutely. And I like Zelizki very much as a figure. And I'm very sympathetic to the Ukrainians because I've got an Hungarian background in 1956, there were Russians devastated on green and similar freedom plates. So maybe it maybe had gave him the balls and the wisdom to go after Putin. Maybe it just went warning. Who knows? Might have nothing to do with the war. Why, it might not. You made some crazy fucking movies, man. It really did. It welled been there. 18 of them that have been made and there have been like 34 scripts that had been 16 that have been made. And I don't know. I get around and I say there's a twisted little man inside and they've listened some spot that I'm not sure where exactly is. But he's 29, born 29. He will die 29. And with anything that has a relatively strong sexual content, he wrote the fucking thing. I'm just an old guy giving him the space. So when the reason deal was made for a record amount of money for basic instinct 3, because there was a sequel to it that was a double piece of shit and I had nothing to do with it. But this would be three and my title for this is basic instinct Jezebel. The twisted little man can put together this story that I think people have fun with. But it continues in that same vein and it seems to be as special. So let's see what happens. I like how you refer to yourself as like another person. It is the man. There's a sandwich with little kids where they haven't had a companion and invisible companion. Right? And the twisted little man is my main one. I have others, Mark Twain is one. And interestingly Jesus of Nazareth is another. And these people are very, very close to me. The twisted little man is a darker presence than the others are though. Twain is a cross between the two of them and I absolutely love him. So when you were writing things like basic instinct, do you really feel like you were channeling like another person? Is that what it felt like? It felt. Well, let me back drop the, I wrote it in 13 days. And I felt like it just poured out of me. There is a background to it and that is the cancer and tramellic character and then the Nick current character. Many, many years before in college, I had an affair with a, I was an 18 year old kid and I had a fairly faculty member's wife and a serious affair and the, we, she was sophisticated, smart, beautiful, is a sassy and exactly the kind of woman that we've always fallen for. And the, and she had a profound effect on me. Now at the end of the, at the end of the year, she moved down and I discovered that there was a different student that she was with each, each year and that it has been the fair the way. The whole machine, 39. And I, when I was 18, I was a very green 18 because I grew up at the Cameron kid. The, the, the, I, I fell in love easily. Also meant a lot in terms of learning things because I, I was an immigrant and I really didn't know this country and I was shy. And, and I learned a lot sometimes I think more from the, from the women that I was together with the, the, in college and through the rest of my life than, and I preferred the company of women always. And because they weren't armored off in, in nail macho. But, but, anyway, she was stuck there in my memory and then when I was a police reporter, um, almost a decade and a half later, um, a decade later at the plane dealer and I had a buddy who was a cop that I liked very much who had been involved in three or four shootings. Um, and when we got to know each other and we spent time drinking together and we did a a lot of that. I started wondering how, if he really liked the shootings, was it an H.E. trigger finger or did he just get off on it? So somehow these two characters were in my head and, and, and then I thought about them a lot. But they didn't come together and then I think thanks to the twist of the little man. One day the two came together in, in, in a love story and that was the, that was the genesis of basic instinct. Um, and by the time I wrote it, I had thought about it really, really did subconsciously and, and directly for a long time. I would wake up in the middle of the night and then John notes down, which happens to be sometimes when I'm very involved in a script. Um, and I wrote it in Hawaii. Um, I went off to Hawaii by myself. I looked at the sun beating me up. I started some coke, um, the, uh, which I was an habit in those days. Um, and after 13 days of, of all of that and the other thing I did was listen to the stones all the time. I love the stones. I love the blueish of the time I was an immigrant kid and the stones just blew everything else out during that period of time for me. So I listened to that at the end of 13 days that I had this script and then I went back home to Marin. Um, I typed it up, I sent it, almost sent it to my agent with the title Love Hertz and I was going out the door. I went to a little man, I had another thought and I raced back inside and wrote the words basic instinct. Send it to my agents. They all shined it. Um, 10 days later, my main agent, Guy in that co- became my big brother and, uh, and, uh, and one of the people I really loved in life. Everybody bit on it. Um, the wound up selling for a record three million dollars. Um, and then it became a towering hit to this day it trend. And, and, and, and, and, and, and, and I was gotten the critics at the beginning were critical. The mildly critical. They're actually the critics were really out to the movie. And then through the years, um, the critics have had a change in mind and isn't that funny? Yeah. It just, it, it's woman named Camille back later was a main feminist critic. Um, who went up against the movie very strongly recently, not recently, but in the past five or 10 years has come around and said that, that, that the movie is the example of it's a post feminist classic. She says, and it's about women who don't, who don't have to hide their sexuality. Um, so Instagram. That's wild that she made such a turnaround. Yeah. Yeah. I wonder, did you ever have a conversation with her? No, I, I've never met her. She teaches, I'm somewhere on the East Coast and then she has a towering reputation, but I never met her. I usually don't listen to critics. It's her, the 18 films, I, you know, I don't, I don't listen to critics. I worked with a director Richard Mark Wanda, who directed Jagged Edge and the arts, excuse me, and it hurts her fire and we worked. I don't know another one together and Richard has said to me that, um, critics should be taking that into the backyard in the shot. Okay. I worked with another director Mike Vegas. I'm one nightstand who said that critics should be taking out the backyard and head butted to death. I was sympathetic to both and to both things. It's so wild that your views were formed by this relationship that you have with your 18 with an older horny smart lady who's like, you know, kind of wild. Yes. And then a cop who might have been a shady cop. Yes. And how did two game together and in this twisted thing called creativity, you know, and you can come out of this maelstrom. Now the other thing I'm sure was an influence is by the time I did that I had been through four years of police, lead experience covering cops. Um, two in date, no, I own two in Cleveland. And excuse me, and that consisted of that point driving around in a company car that got the police radio and responding to whatever was going on. occasion you got there before the cops got there. Um, and then the one that really stuck in my head and I got inside and he was, was there was one of them in the report of a shooting, a sub-remed agent and I got there. Um, there were no cops there that the front door was wide open. I walked in. I passed the body of a guy who shot himself in the butt all over the ball. And then a woman was his wife that he shot and I heard someone in the back of the house screaming and crying. And I walked, went back there and the thing that was really got to me is she was screaming and crying and Hungarian. Um, and it was an old lady who was the mother's mom and then of course I spoke fluent on Korean and grew up on Gary. And, and there was something about the scene that that's with me to this day. The other police being experienced, I had Joe, there was, there was a, it was a removing was a, I covered the big land bill urban uprising in Cleveland. It was a big one and there were, I think, six or seven policemen shot and killed. I was crouched behind a car on the street, ducking down with, with, the 10 feet in front of me was like he was a cop bleeding, badly bleeding, moaning. And the, the, the, and at the same time there were gunshots coming from this apartment house. And I heard that the, the gunshots were, it's coming from a group of so called Black Nationalists led by a man, man Fred Ahmed Evans. I knew both men. I'd run from the police beat on the, the, the, the cop was Hungarian. This name was the owner of Joseph and he would come around to the little office in the police bed all the time and I knew him. And, and the Black man was named Fred Ahmed Evans and he would come by and as the sheke, he sometimes had two in the morning because I worked the overnight shift sometimes. And we had the greatest talks, you know, drank a lot of beer, it smoked a lot of dope. And he got to be pelt. And he was leading the group of Black Nationalists and it would be, we're shooting these policemen and I was behind this, this, this car's wheels, a few feet away from the whole shit. And I, and I found the whole thing. So frightening and so disturbing that I pissed my pants. The, the, so the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the other incidents I covered, the urban uprisings and, and, and Detroit to, to an equivalent and one in Newark, the, it was very involved in the civil rights movement. The, and I, you know, the, that's what I did. I, I covered whatever was breaking in much of it was dark stuff. So by the time that will come happened between Catherine, Catherine, and they occur and it was a lot that went into it. Yeah, I could imagine like what, the insane life experience to be able to see all those different crime scenes and the witness all that. And, you know, what happened was that I happened to pick a field. What, that journalism, I thought. And then the circuit hunter, if they wanted to think about, we became friends. We were both poor kids and we both dreamed of being novelist. Novelists. We had a hundred Thompson. Yeah, a hundred Thompson. And the, the way that we chose to begin that was by doing journalism because no one made a living, writing novels and we both had to make a living. Under the road set up for the National Enquire and then moved on to Rolling Stone and all of that. And I did it on an on a local level. And the, the, that put us into a culture that was exploding. The Americans' society was exploding. The black situation vis-a-vis white racism was horrendous. So there was a dynamic in the country that we were on top of because of what we did. So I saw a lot. I saw a lot on the refugee camps because I was in, I began my 70 years in refugee camps in Austria and then grew up, dirt poor in an urban city. The, and I saw a lot of, a lot of stuff there as well. That was, that was dark and moving and, and, and profoundly effective. Also also when you're writing, you're writing from real world experience. Which is so much more effective and makes sense why your stuff was so dark and wild. Yeah. It doesn't make sense. The, and the, you know, I mean, and when I was a, there was a kid in Cleveland growing up. We lived in, in a very poor part of town near West Side. There was a boy next door. And the, you know, he's, he's sleeping in the, on a couch in the living room to serve, overlooked the bar. And when the one night, and I was looking out the window because I always was the, the neon lights and Puerto Rican hookers and all of that stuff that really interested a little kid who has spent most of his time playing with my smart train set with this pecker. You know, it's in there. So this was all very exciting stuff. And the, and what, what, and there's a watch we won the one day and I saw this man on this stab another one to death and fall down and bleed to death. How old were you? 12. Oh, Jesus. Um, yeah. So there are reasons why, but the other thing with my scripts is almost everything in my scripts is somehow comes from with some kind of personal die. You know, big shots, which was a little movie that there was very popular with kids came from my son Steve's experience in Marin County with a black friend and how they tried to make that adventure pork. And that's what the movie is. It's a little movie about two kids are like getting a black kid and try to become friends. The, the, the, the, there was a movie I did called checking out which I have Daniels. And there was about mid-life crisis in Sunday at now at the, in my early in mid thirties. I scared shit was going to die for, you know, I am at fucking 81 talking about that. I didn't do something. Um, but, but so there was a comedic thing that came out of that. Um, basic came out of where it, where it did. But there was almost with everyone and there was some kind of betrayed. It came out of, out of the notion that at that particular point, if you remember, there was all this right wing craziness where, there were militias that were shooting people and, and there were jamborees where the, where the right wingers got together. One was this betrayed, which came out in the late 80s. There was several incidents in Oregon and, and, and, and North West parts of the country, which got a lot of publicity. It was before Timothy McVay, um, but, but all roughly in that same period. So I decided under, under a false name to go to one of these jamborees and see what the hell is going on. And essentially my journalism experience, I went into it and then out of it I concocted this romance between Deborah Winger and Tom there and said, so, but they bailed some kind of a tie telling lies in America, which is one of my favorite little movies with Kevin Bacon and Brad Renfro. He sent my out of, out of my graphical in terms of the issues I had as an high school kid and with bullying and all of those kinds of things and the, and becoming an American citizen. Um, and the, they were shot and incidentally right where I grew up in front of the apartment house where we lived. Um, the, um, and I remember hearing a TV reporter and clean one interview and old man, um, was watching the, the, uh, the shooting and saying, um, did you know Joe and he grew up here? And he said, yeah, it was a bartender there. And he went and said, shit, Joe is just a fucking refugee trying to make his way in the world. That, that, you nailed it. I mean, that's really what, not a complicated thing, but that's really what happened. The only, the only, the only one that, other things and my thinking have been said about me through the years, but the only other thing that's, that I really treasure and I'm sort of love is, uh, like covered in interview, it always was ready. And I'd be for he was killed in the plane crashing Cleveland and the, and the, um, we started we began speaking around midnight after a show at a place called Leo's Casino. Um, and, and, uh, and, uh, we began talking around midnight and talked till 3 30 in the morning. Um, and the, uh, we did a lot of beer, we did a lot of gym beam. We spoke a lot of really powerful ties stuff. Um, and had a great time. And at the end of it, when he had a, there I go, going in, he's like, give me a fucking hog and I came up and he said, you know what you want? He said, you're a fucking white nigger. That's what you are. And I love that stayed with me all the time. The old times that he's a force of nature, people said his Shakespeare alive today was named B. Joe S. Ross, book old dad's bullshit. What all this said and what the old man said, I thought was really great. You know, well, here in that, I was writing with such a legend. Oh, he was, he was great. He died so young too. He died. He died. He was really, I was in a 30 something. Listen to this, the interview didn't, I went on the next day to play in the other I was doing Sunday and I was working literally the day after the interview. And so I'm sitting there and then this hall like Cityroom and the, the I see a city editor that the, the social press wire machines start dinging. And in those days, if it had more than like four or five days, there was some bad thing that happened. So I said, I, so a city editor come from the city desk to this dinging machine. And he's staring at it, the fucking thing is still dinging. Staring at it and then he looks in the like that and then the cityroom and they looks away. So I made my, so in the head and then I got up and went to the dinging machine and the audition his plane had net crashed. The, the weights and other gig and I was probably the last man who really spoke in it and like the, I left the office right then and the fucking for the rest of the day. There was a bar across the street. Um, during myself, silly, I went home with the waitress. I mean, you know, just horrible. But I saw a lot to get back to your point. I did it in in different ways. And then I tried to write a movie about all this called Blaze of Glory. Um, and the, the, um, we put it together. And then in John at that it was going to direct it and it was announced that Cuba Gooding was going to play. Otis and the, the old thing fell apart at the last minute for financing reasons into the days that we got. But, um, I'm a writer. What else can I do with someone that I love that I made? I just have to write about them in that way. Right. So with anybody who writes interesting things, the way you do has to have had some interesting life experiences. You don't get those kind of scripts that you wrote from a, a sterile environment. No, no, I agree with that. Yeah. Sometimes, um, not that they would be after my, my conversion to Christ. The Christianity laid in my life. I wrote three, um, Christian scripts and none of them were made. Um, and one of them wasn't made, it wasn't made because the, one of the priests that evolved with potentially getting Christian financing, I said we need more incense. And my response to, to somebody you interview and the about it was, I don't write fucking any incense, I write flesh and blood and so, no one who wasn't made. What did he mean by you need more incense? Well, they, they have to make it more, him like to make make and give it a sense of piety, um, they would, they would, they would make it inspire the people so that they become, um, Catholic and this specific case. And that it was too secular. Um, and I think what happened to me with all three is that I fell between views and between, so called Christian films and secular films. And, and so they, that's why we never got to finance our all three of them. We see, fell between Christian films and secular films. Yeah. You mean, in the way you were writing it, they weren't writing it specifically as a Christian film or specifically as a secular film. In ways that way I was writing it naturally, the idea with that. Like you wrote everything else. Yeah. But that political considerations are, they're, they're, they're said in their, great, political is a clerical considerations. I was just writing it for my heart. And that was to gritty the get Christian kind of financing it on the other hand to religious, to get the secular finding. That's too bad because that bridge is probably what would bring more people to Christianity where they can relate to it. I agree with you absolutely. And then my argument was, you know, these could be ad movies. And because my movies in a lot of cases have been, these could be ad movies. And that's more important than than than than spiking people with insights. It's interesting how Hollywood is always rejected those kind of religion film, religious films like the passion of the Christ. No instance. That was a huge movie. I was not a university, which movie, but in my mind, it was like a prayer. You know, the, I watched it, it was a huge movie beautifully done. The, the, it wasn't officially endorsed by the Catholic Church, although I saw, I saw in Cleveland a meeting where, where priests organized a preview, on the screening of the movie. And they had like 700 people to full-haul watching it. There was such an interest in it. But part of it, part of the reason I think, you know, you raised a good point because I think part of the reason, um, it was such a towering it was that it was real. It wasn't, it wasn't in sense, filled. They was real. There was, you had a figure who bled and you really show what happened up on that cross and how awful. Yeah. And I kind of pain it and I, and it, the movie really reflected that. No, it was horrific. And then there was also that Willan DeFoe film. What was that one called? The, the last temptation of course. That's right. But it's quite a scary, scary. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I agree with that. I love, I love, that vote. I mean, I, one of my favorite actors, um, and, and I like to, it's also very real that, historically real. Yeah. And I think that the, the, the notion that that Jesus of Nazareth, um, you know, was this Fred Rogers figure, um, who wasn't really real man. Whereas the Bible says he was a true man and true God. Um, the, that church really showed us that film really showed us the human side. Yeah. And, and my conception of Jesus, who I revered and who was one of my, what are my close friends that I speak to on most days? Um, the, uh, is that he was true man and true God. He was a Jewish, that's a freedom fighter against the Roman Empire. Um, he was crucified by the Romans. Um, the, the, as freedom fighter, he hung around, blue collar guys and, and, and, and fishermen and brokers and tax collectors who were the lowest, as a low back then, as they should be now, but they're, of course, in a low back then. And those were the people that he prayed primarily, but he ran with. That's, that's Jesus of Nazareth and, and that, that side is completely ignored by most films except the two that you mentioned, specifically, they were like, you know, the last time I should have the Christ, I don't remember. I remember there was some controversy around it, but I don't, I was too young to really be paying attention to like how it was. to be very fact that Jesus had a relationship that was clearly indicated as being sexual with Mary Magdalene who was depicted as a prostitute. Now, the truth is, historical truth is in Mary Magdalene was a few years older than Jesus and a woman of means who had advised, um, advised Roman builders in a, in a city called Serifen and then was one of the people who financed Jesus as he swept through Galilean and the rest of Judea. I mean, builder isn't a difficult servant. And then was one of the people who financed Jesus as he swept through Galilee and the rest of Judea. There's another scene in the Bible where an unnamed woman goes to Jesus and the watch is his feet and then watches his feet with his hair. This unnamed woman by a pope in this eccentric, Gregory de Greate was picked up in Mary Magdalene. It'll connection in Mary Magdalene. There's nothing that says that Mary Magdalene was a whole curve in a kind. And then there's no proof for that in any way. So the fact that the last temptation of Christ did that and brought the two of them together in a sort of semi-love story without, of course, any real sexuality to it on film is why it was so criticized. Of course, these owls was picketed. And I think the studio at that point was run by Lou Wasserman, whom I knew from Cleveland because he was a red or a gray-white or Cleveland before he went by the legendary man. He was owls with it, was picketed as well. So was it just Catholic people and Christian people that were upset about this? Mostly. Yeah. Yeah. But it was very unusual for a Martin Squirce's Sazy film to be a religious film, too. Absolutely. Like a depiction of Jesus. People were much more of verse back then. I feel like sometimes religion goes in peaks and waves. And I think there was a wave of atheism back then. And Hollywood was very non-Christian to put it mildly. It wasn't that the Christian themes and films were never promoted. Yeah. It was absolutely right. It's not as bad now in that sense as there was in those days. And I think that part of it, it would frustrates me, is that there would be an openness to that. And Christian films, if they were real, if they weren't full of incense and piety. You know, what we've done to Jesus over the years is making my kind of red rogers figure. You know, he wasn't that. You know, I'm not even sure that Jesus really said, do not resist violence. Jesus also said, if you have a cloak, but not a sword, sell the cloak and buy a sword, he also said, I come not to make peace. I come not to make peace, but with a sword. So there's been a lot of a church stuff. And then especially I think Catholics are more and a guilty of this. They're romanticized and sort of cosmeticized with figure of Jesus and that sort. Well, there's always a problem when human beings add their own interpretation to an ancient story. Absolutely. And do it to fit their own narrative. Absolutely. It's a great problem. In this case, there is historical evidence on the other side. And they simply ignore that. Pretend it doesn't happen. The Nazi gospels are full of so-called revolutionary things. And the truth is that the Nazi gospels were written 40 years, 30, 40 years after the death of Jesus. Whereas the Nazi gospels, the ones that the churches have accepted were written 80, 90 years after the death of Jesus. So they had to have been taken second hand from people who said they saw things where with the previous, there's a shot that people directly saw them. The people in the church gospels who are named like Nazi Mark Luke and John were not the people who were in the gospels. Isn't that a Mark Luke and John? Then nobody knows who write them. They took it those names. But they were not those people. Really? Yeah. I had no idea. Absolutely. No doubt. Even the churches in with that at this point. 2000 years is such a hard time for us to conceptualize, to put her into our head, how much time has passed. Such a, you know, to try to get an accurate understanding of what was going on back then, it's insanely difficult. I have become a sense. Since my, sort of, conversion to Christianity, and I would sound myself a devout Christian, but not a devout Catholic, even though I go to Mass. And I love the Mass and believe in it. But since 2001, when this process really began, I become the real student of the historical Jesus. And I learned more and more, and more and more, and more astounded, had once been done because made a size. This man who is Jesus or Nazareth. Well, it's also he had some of the most profound and insanely resonating teachings, like even today. The words that he spoke 2000 years ago, there's still today people, I mean, they resonate with people. And if you live your life by the teachings of Jesus Christ, you will be a better person. Yes, you will. It is a great framework to live your life. Yes. Which is incredible when you think about a person that lived so long ago. He is a much better person to pick as your, imagine companion and then Mark Twain. And you're a magic companion. Let me ask you this one, because I have a long conversation with Mel Gibson about this. What do you think about the shroud of Turin? Well, there was a study done, a major study that was done by my Catholic Church, led by the John Paul too, whom I really admired. A lot about through the years that this is a scientific study that discovered that the shroud of Turin came from 13, 13, and 20. Now, you'd controversy about it. And there are those people who feel that that absolutely is Christ. And I must say that when I look at it, when I look at that figure, and I've done that a lot. And in my house, we have several blow-offs of Turin's Christ. It's very, very moving. But the evidence, what there is, seems to indicate that it comes from the 1300s. Yeah, I've seen that as well. But then I've also seen people that say that evidence. There's some controversy about that evidence. And that some of the cloth, they believe dates to far earlier. And it's the type of cloth and the way it's made, seems to indicate that it's far older. I don't know how much of the cloth they've carbon tested. That is also an issue. And whether or not it had been repaired, or not there had been additional pieces. I don't either. But you know what ultimately, when I look at that, when I look at that, Jesus. And then I've done that quite a bit. That phase really moves me. So in a sense, I don't give a shit. At the very least, it's an insanely compelling piece of art. Absolutely. At the very least. But there's also a lot of very strange mysteries as to how that was created in the first place. Because it's not a die. And they're not exactly sure what caused that image to appear. Or how if that is a piece of art, they don't know how that art was created. And the fact that they really only could see the accurate representation of it once they saw it as a negative is also very interesting. Because who's going to make a piece of art where you can only really appreciate what it looks like when you see it as a negative? Especially when you're talking about something that you're doing, you're making something in the 1300s? Hundreds of years before photography's ever created. So what are you making? And why is it so compelling when you look at it in the negative? And if you're talking about something that was created by an insane burst of energy, which is what the proponents of the Shrout of Turin being legitimate think. They think it was created by this insane burst of energy on Jesus' resurrection. I'm not hypnostic on it. I don't know idea whether it's real or not real. But I find it fascinating that they have no real explanation as to how it was created. The, I'm pretty much of a completely can arrange this on anything that I have to do with science. I've liked non-algebra and geometry and even biology, although I caught up with biology from personal experience. But I just don't know. It doesn't matter to me ultimately, because I moved when I look at that, when I pray before that image. And I look at it. I moved in. So as far as I'm concerned, for me, it's real. It may not be for other people. Well, and the legacy that it's at the very least, it's an insanely compelling piece of power. Absolutely. Absolutely. But the thing that I don't want to dismiss the possibility that it's real, because I'm fascinated by just the mystery of how it was. Can you pull up an image of the negative version of it? Yeah, it's kind of a bunch of stuff. You guys are talking about them. There's no answers for you. There's no answers as terms of why I was looking for an accurate recreation. Someone's made, you know, in the last 200 years, and doesn't seem to be one. No, no one has. Yeah. When you look at the image and you realize that this is an actual negative of the original shroud, you just stop and think, like, well, what was someone, if this is the negative, like how would you create that as a positive? Because it, can you show me also the positive image of it? What it actually looks like? Okay, so here's this is one image. So this is what it actually looks like. This is the actual shroud. And when you look at that, you go, okay, I see like shadows and it's very interesting. And then switch over to the negative, and it all comes to life. And there's marks from the lashes, from the whip marks. There's blood stains from where the rods went through his wrists. It's very fascinating. Yeah, sure, right. And again, this is not dye, it's not ink. And they don't really know how it was made. And again, no one has been able to recreate this. Yeah, it's the cloth was made most likely from a loom that wasn't invented until like the 1300s. Okay. That doesn't necessarily mean that's where, for sure came from though, but. Right, right. But here's the image. This is like how is the image changed for the cloth I asked? Just, you know, does anybody have any idea? I've seen a video where someone gave some sort of scientific explanation, but I don't know if I could remember how to find it right now. Says it behaves like a photographic negative and show some 3D information, which is unusual for normal artwork. The chemical theories that body heat sweat or vapors reacting with the cloth. I example ammonia or lactic acid from sweat may have been proposed, but don't reproduce the shroud sharp, non-blurry details. Simple heat or scorched theories likewise fail to match the very shallow, non-burned discoloration of the fibers. Human or mad made image, human made image theories. Painting or rubbing from bass relief has been tested, but studies have not found pigments in the amounts or patterns that would explain the image. And there's no clear brush strokes. Primitive photography. Some suggest that a medieval camera using light sensitive silver salts and lenses could have projected a body or statue onto the cloth and experimental replicas show that it's at least physically possible, though historically speculative. And now here's the weird one. Radiation bursts of energy theories. Some researchers argue that a brief intense burst of ultraviolet or similar radiation from the body could have discovered, discolored, only the top fire rolls producing a non-contact image, even where cloth and body didn't touch. Proponents sometimes link this to Jesus' resurrection, but the needed radiation, billions of watts without burning the cloth is far beyond anything observed in nature. And this remains a speculative face-based idea rather than an established physical mechanism. In short, there's no consensus mechanism. The image transfer process is still unexplained. And every proposed method has serious problems when tested against the cloth's measured properties. Wild. That's amazing. I mean, there's no other piece of artwork that's that fascinating. Because every other art, Michelangelo's work, and all this incredible art, it's art. You see what they did. There's brush strokes. There's chisel marks. They made incredible sculptures. But it's clearly man-made art. This is a different thing. It's a very strange thing. If you can't recreate it today, if they could recreate it today, people would be doing it. They'd be making their versions of the shroud of charge. Absolutely. I don't know if it has been done historically. There's some nut bag that decided to do business over recreating this round of drinks. Is there a carbon test? And what are the arguments that it's older? Because I do know that there have been some very recent arguments that the testing was incorrect and that it's older. See if you can find out what that is. Whether or not AI, whether perplexity or sponsor has some sort of a bias. The thing is it's like pulling from all the, when you get an AI response to something, it's pulling from all these articles in the web. Most of the articles seem to indicate that people think it's at least either a hoax or a laboratory. The only carbon dating seems like it happened in 1988. So I don't know that they're done. Support us over an earlier date, argued that the 1988 radio carbon results, 1988 is a long time ago, sampled an anomalous or contaminated area and that other historical and scientific clues point to a much older cloth. Okay. What is the scientific arguments? Contaminated, repaired sample. Some research claimed the 1988 test piece came from a rewoven or heavily handled corner. So its carbon date reflects medieval repairs, not the original cloth. Alternative dating methods, X-ray or crystal graphic aging of linen fibers has produced dates compatible with the first century. Though these methods are newer and not widely, widely accepted as definitive, pollen and dust. Analysis reports, pollen grains and mineral dust consistent with the first century, Middle East rather than only medieval Europe, which proponents say supports a much older origin. Image property, some argue that the image's microscopic features and bursts of energy type characteristics require technology or phenomena unlikely in the middle ages implying an earlier extraordinary event. Well, why don't they do a re-testing? They probably don't want to know that it actually is from a 13-hull. Yeah, I just felt like they were. John Paul, who really believed in it. He went to see it in Turin several times. He said he was moved by it and they launched this big Vatican investigation. And he never said in any way that he agreed with the investigation. It just seemed to drop to all of you. And then from what I know, and never went any further. But he visited twice when out of his way. Where is it? It's in Turin's. It's in Turin's. It's looking up that too. It's currently in the chapel of the Holy Shroud. But so here's interesting was who found it and when and why or whatever. The earliest undisputed record appears in the 1950s, rather, in Leary, a village in France, where the night, a joffrey, de Charnet, displayed a cloth, claimed to be Jesus' burrow shroud. How he obtained it and where it was between the first century, the 14th century or unknown, later theories traded speculatively through Edessa and constant on lobe. I can't say that. I can't never say that. Constant and opal. But these links are debated. Interesting. What does it look like? How is it displayed? That's how it's displayed. Constant and opal was named after Constantine, who is the first Roman emperor who made Roman Catholicism, the National Religion. Right. Wow. So you can go check it out. And how big is it? Well, they got that sucker walled off, huh? I remember my impression, Joe. This was over the length of Jesus' body. Right. So it's longer than certainly I expected. Well, you can see it's both sides. So apparently it's folded over. I wonder what all those markings are, those small triangle markings. What is all that? Like these things? Yeah. One other picture was pointing those out. It might be the burn marks that I was saying, that there's burn marks on it. And again, it's 2,000 years old and theory. Just imagine if it's real. That's the thing. It's like I never wanted to dismiss the possibility that it's real, because imagine if it is real. I absolutely agree with you. And in my mind, it's real and I pray to it. And I don't make sure I'm not to worry about whether it's real. And I know that I'm moved. And that's good enough for me. What led to your conversion to Christianity? I mean, from a guy making these wild and sane movies. Jamie, can I ask you for some water? This is water right here. Oh, great. Thank you. This episode is brought to you by Chime. Chime is bringing something fresh to banking. JD Power just ranked them the number one choice for new bank accounts in America. And that's not a small thing. That means real people, millions of them are choosing this over traditional banks. That's because banking at Chime is fee free. No monthly fees, no overdraft fees, and thousands of free ATMs. But here's the real kicker. If you get their Chime card, it gives you 5% cash back to the category that you actually pick yourself. Your savings rate nine times the national average. That's crazy high. Go to chime.com slash rogan. Takes a few minutes to sign up. Chime is a FinTech, not a bank. Banking services and Chime card provided by Chime's bank partners, terms, and limits apply. Go to chime.com slash disclosures for more details. How long ago did you convert to Christianity? Well, I grew up Catholic. I was an altar boy when I was a kid. I knew one really great priest in my life who helped me with my life. I became a lab's Catholic. And then at the end of living in LA, in Malibu, actually, I was usually successful as a screenwriter, of course. And I was beginning to view it all over the place. And people were stealing mail from my mailbox and all that shit. And I should have been overwhelmingly happy with that, but something was missing. I felt. And I couldn't really put my finger on what that was, but something was missing in my life. And then I got the code cancer. And stage four, it's road cancer. Shortly after we moved back to Cleveland, the room that were malibu and the Cleveland Clinic, and then a surgeon named Marshall Stromed at a surgery that they had never done in this country at the Switzerland where they took some, they took a muscle from the left side of your neck and attached it to your larynx. Stage four was very dicey. And he was very honest with me about how dicey would be. And he did it spectacularly. And here I am at 81. But in the course of all of that, when I was terrified. And really, really frightened from one day to the other. I ran across the Jesus, reading him. And barley Naomi's influence, because Naomi, also grew up Catholic and he had a very strong, he had a very strong faith. And then I went to church a couple of times. And I loved the mass. The mass itself. And the course of recovery, and there was about three year recovery I've ever heard of for some time I couldn't speak. And then I spoke like Brando. And then I squeaked the in the course of my recovery. I did everything I could physically to help. I jogged and walked and did all of those things. And I recovered. And I felt afterwards that the reason I was able to beat a stage four cancer, had to do with my prayer life. And then I started reading, voraciously about Jesus of Nazareth, the apostles, all of that ancient church history, Catholic history. And some of that really moved me as well. So I started going regularly to church, the waves in Naomi, and then as a boy, we were born even with the boys as well. And as time went by, and I also started having issues with the Catholic church. I continued going to the mass because that was a very special thing to me. But I had issues with history of antisemitism in the church. The issue is with sexism in terms of not allowing women to be priests. The issue is with the Pope making so-called infallible decisions. And I just shut down most of that off, although in the process of it, my Christianity didn't suffer at all. But sometimes I feel like I was becoming a kind of an economic and non-sities Catholic. And my faith in Christ, and even as all of that happened is unvagged, I still pray to Jesus, very specifically to Jesus. And he continues to be a major and important to figure in my life. So your issues were with the organization as the Catholic church? Yes, yes. I respected Martin Luther's revolution because he revolted against the same kind of issues. But the, as I said, in the mass continued to hold me worship is terrific and I really believe in it. I actually, in the kind of worship that really moves me is his black spiritual worship. It feels scale emotional. I give myself to you, Jesus, kind of worship. And I felt, I didn't want to really switch, the switched religions because I had my basic Christianity. And that's, and he continues to be important to me. So you felt moved by like Baptist, black Baptist, like Baptist said, they're all emotional. Yeah. Throw up your arms and say, okay, here I am, take me, Lord. It definitely seems a lot more fun. It's fun. It feels good. They're having way more fun. It's fun. I, the I also have been very fortunate to the courts in my life to have black friends and to share the black culture. I was involved in, in the civil rights movement. I had a shotgun stuck in my belly by a deputy who'd been indicted for killings and told to get the fuck out of the show of a county. I had the good fortune to have lunch with the Reverend Martin Luther King. Oh wow. And we, I knew he's totally Carmichael. What was that like? Well, those little dreams and what's amazing thing. He was in town because of a, a, the death of a minister in a protest. And, and the, the, he was an unhearled appearance and I think it was partly before he became the tower and get a national figure. And the, the, the, he was getting back to the airport and he could have signed, he couldn't find his ride. And I happened to be right there. And I said, I can, I can drive you, drive you, drive you every day. And watch me and say, okay. So again, we, we, on the way to the airport, these are, you hungry, I'm hungry. Can we stop someplace? I said, sure. So we did. Yeah. And to be, what, what amazed me about the man is that he was more interested almost in hearing about my refugee camp experiences and what that was like and how that worked and all of that. He said he didn't know much about it. Then he really, then he was about, he was talking about the civil rights movement. Wow. He was very, very moving in a powerful figure. The end then I just drove him to the airport. But the, the, the, there was something about the man that was absolutely magnetic, you know, then, then, that I felt clearly. Yeah. And then, but then I also, and when I was in college, I had a relationship with the young black woman. The, and that brought me much closer to the black culture on, you know, there was an ethnic fucking kid, you know, in refugee and I certainly needed license and that old culture later and I got them. And then I sought them out. And when, when I was at the Rolling Stone, you and who was over in Oakland and he would come over sometimes. The, I think part of that, part of these aspects, because the, that Rolling Stone, we had some of the, my beautiful women in the world working there. We did have very connection and when I got real hot, they, they, they didn't wear a top at all. So what about that spread? So there were, there were topless. There were topless when the women were going to get real hot. What year was this? Is it in the 60s? I was at Rolling Stone from the 71 to 76. Wild time. It was right, right in there. And then the, in the years where the culture of revolution was exploding. Yeah. The women's revolution was, what is exploding? And then to be at Rolling Stone at that time was like being in the vortex of all of that. You know, and the, and, and, and, and it was a just a crazed time, you know, the, the, the, the sexual revolution was at its absolute height. And the, the, I always, as I said to you, I've always really loved smarts as he sexy women. And they'll obviously feel with, I'm sure. What year was the birth control pill in that? I have no idea. And I guess 65, 64, let me guess. I'm just taking a while, swing. I have no idea. Free foot of the FDA, it introduced the market in 1968. 68, 60, 60,000. 1960. Interesting. Yeah, well, that had a big factor. Right. Yes, absolutely. Because before, you know, women were in a situation where every time they had sex, they could get pregnant. Absolutely. And then all of a sudden, but then you've got this pill that's fucking with their hormones that we found out now that women that have been on it for a long period of time, they make poor choices in terms of mates and it does a lot of weird stuff. I mean, when you're in a parking lot of weird stuff. Yeah. And also it's very dangerous for them. A friend of mine, his daughter died. It does a lot of weird stuff. I mean, when you're in a lot of weird stuff. Yeah, and also it's very dangerous for them. A friend of mine, his daughter died. She was 17 years old. She was on the birth control pill and she was smoking cigarettes. And she, I guess, smoking cigarettes and birth control pills for some people can cause blood clots. I don't understand why or what, but that is an issue. You're not supposed to smoke if you're on birth control. See if that's still the recommended. Well, obviously they say, tell you not to smoke period. But I think there's some potential complication. Smoking while taking oral contraceptive that contained estrogen significantly increases the risk of severe cardiovascular events like heart attack strokes and blood clots. The risk is particularly high for women over 35. Quitting smoking or using alternative birth control is highly recommended. Joe Ann Moore funded Rolling Stone. And he had any other time in my life. I bet you did. I had John Winter in here once. Yeah, I saw him. It was an interesting conversation. He kept looking at his watch. Well, he was, you know, his John winner of 2024 or 2025, not John Winter of 1975. Yeah, absolutely. You know, not the John Winter that was the editor when Hunter Thompson was writing crazy stories. And you know, different times, people change. You are a big hunter fan. Huge. And then I know. And so mine. And I wanted to talk about it because I really haven't had chance to talk about it specifically. Hunter really wasn't the cause of my whole huge success, even as a street writer. Let me tell you out. The, I was a reporter at the Plain Dealer. And I had read Hunter, of course, when he was the National Observer, you know, it was kinds of pieces from Latin America. And before he discovered Gonzo. And I covered it at the Plain Dealer. I covered it. Asian name, Elz angel, shoot out of a bar called Barto was Cafe in Cleveland. And I wrote a story about it that the associated press picked up and put on their national wire. The, and I get a note shortly afterwards from Hunter Thompson, who had read this story on the AB wire and wrote me a note that said, I'm barely bear phrasing. Big fucker. Now there are two of us who know what I write about, Elz angels, that really pisses me off. All the best on dress, huh? That must have been a fun thing to get. Oh, man, I was excited about that as my two sons were to meet you, Rogen. They really, they really, it was really, really something. So, okay, time goes by. And I get a call from Rolling Stone. I know in a version of the first, I do a couple of freelance pieces for Rolling Stone, one on Kent State, one year afterwards and the other, I forgot what the other one was. But then I get a call from the managing editor, Paul Scanlon, who incidentally was the backbone of the editorial content, he'd come from the, from the Wall Street Journal. And he wanted to take on the New York Times for Rolling Stone. So, and they wanted me to do a freelance piece on narcotics agents, corrupt narcotics agents. So I go out there and I discover that Hunter had been after them to hire me because of that piece. And he like, I'm saying he's a good guy and all of that. Then when I'm at Rolling Stone, I write a book called Charlie Simpson's Apocalypse that Hunter loves by now. We know each other. And we're friends and then we enjoy each other's company. And I write this book and Hunter gets me as agent who is the top literary agent in the country and then gets me as publisher, which is Random House, to publish it. And then to boot, blurbs it when the book comes out. And somebody, a United Artist, sees it. Oh, and then the book becomes a finalist for the National Book Award, one of four finalists. OK. So somebody, a United Artist, reads the book, reads because if she reads the finalist, reads the book, calls me out of the book and says, you've got really cinematic talent. I thought about writing a script and I said, no, I haven't. And I go to meet them and they hire me and I write this. All of that, which led to my success and screenplay, then the cinema was the best owner. And the friendship we had was, I never, our friendship was in San Francisco. He lived in Woody Creek and he would come to town. Our friendship was in town. But we ran a lot together. We enjoyed each other. We drank together. We both liked drinking. On occasion, we wouldn't go down to San Francisco. It was famed for its stripper, barred area. I think around old Ferrell, sweet and stuff. And I went down there. Together there was a famous stripper show. One of those clubs. And one of the times we get down there, he, of course, would take acid before I've ever tripped down there. And I went to acid. I did acid once and under one, they're holding me for an hour. But I was a guy from Cleveland, right? What you always went, you know? We're doing it from fucking Cleveland. Anyway, I would start with some lines that we go down there. And we were waiting for about an hour. And the place is filled, but the girls haven't come out. And under a sudden, they get up. Her old his arms up in the air. That says, where's the pussy? We want pussy, right? Oh, great memories of my life. Quiz are sitting down all of that. And then when they find these are coming, they very loudly, he clearly was finally, finally, boys. He was a, you know, larger than life, no doubt, colorful figure. But also what he was. And then I discovered this. And he didn't really share this with many people. He was very, very well-written, well-written. He had a whole other side. There was a very sensitive and on APE, like side. I saw it most clearly once. I was married at the time to a former reporter at the Plain Dealer, it was very, very straight. And it really rejected the whole hip- hip- hip- hip- hip- hip and worked in California for a small suburban paper and dumped it. It never met her, but it hurt her. And he said, I'd be like to meet her. So we asked him to dinner. And the answer came to dinner at the small, tiny apartment in the vato and my wife at the time. The cooked egg, egg, egg, egg, and chicken, paprika, sugar. Okay, it's hungry, he's always famous, meal. And he sat there with us and what I discovered was that the boyfriend can tuck it was there underneath all of that firepower. And all of that, all of that, larger than my behavior. He was sensitive and quiet and they got along like gangbusters. And actually, I'm just saying they went when I drove him after dinner, I drove him back to town. For to ride back, he derated me because I was having an affair with what he called the sippy chick. He says, you have this wonderful wife here and you're fucking around with the sippy chick. I mean, it's a true b-racian, an anger and all of that. He had that side as well. Yes, he did. If we had breakfast, there was it for in the afternoon. And then what he ordered were four more burrito-sage beers and maybe, maybe, toaster with scrambled eggs. And in that sense, he had more tolerance than anyone that I'd ever seen. And my tolerance for booze, especially, was also very high. But I'd never seen anybody quite like him. He had a great sense of humor. As many, many years later, he would have needs to write the screenplay for Rumb Diary. And I hadn't seen him in a long time. And I just met Naomi, I was a producer of two. I've now been married 32 years. And he wanted me to go to asthma so that we could talk about it. And I called Jan and I said, listen, I hit over heels and blow with this woman. And Hunter wants me to go out there, tell me the truth is we're going to shape us in. And he said, well, he could. And then he's in other poison, he says. But the stones were in Denver and make and keep and decided to come visit him. So between Gia, so they hired driver and they drive up here. And they have a terrific time. But they're about three or four hours and they've got to gig that night. So they say, let's say we've got to go, we've got to gig you about love. And Hunter gets all upset and says, where you just got here and they said, no, no, we've been here two or four hours and so well. It continues to be upset and he leaves the house for their sitting there and suddenly they are gunshots. You had gone out and shot the tires out on the stone. So I never took Naomi there. I was fighting to fight with you. What he was this? Well, let's see, they was in the 90s. It's been 90 something for maybe, maybe he says somewhere around 5, 4, 5. And then three, 3, 4, 5, somewhere in there. He had been going hard for 30 years by that point. Yes, he had. He was very sad because in the sadness, he wasn't caused by the drug, it was caused by booze. And he was in the arms opinion and he was down so often in Woody Creek. And in his former wife's opinion, Sandy's opinion, it was the booze that did it. He has been his body, he's being big old and he needed a wheelchair. And he was a big old man. He needed a wheelchair. He could hardly walk. He was a machine. He drove him into the wheelchair at one time. I think in New Orleans when they were visiting Sean Penn on a film, he actually fell out of the wheelchair in the middle of traffic. He couldn't really pick him up. And so they'd get help and cars are going by and all that shit. And then he also broke a leg when they were visiting Hawaii at the Kahala. So he said in his suicide note, which I thought was the most he caught wrenching and also terrific suicide note. It was no fun anymore. The fun was gone. Not done with fun. No football, no this, no that, no fun. Well, when the fun goes. Yeah, it's hard to have fun. Yeah. And that's the problem with booze. Yeah, exactly. Well, the problem with many drugs. But particularly the problem with booze. You're breaking down your body over and over and over again. And with a guy like Hunter, he was doing it every day. Yeah. There's a famous piece that this reporter wrote when he went to visit Hunter. And he documented Hunter's drug and alcohol use throughout the day. Like six in the morning in the hot tub with champagne. Like that's the end of the day. And then him sleeping and then him waking up and doing all the drugs and then getting ready to write. And what's the guy's name? It wrote the, there's a guy who took me and my friend Greg Fitzsimons reading it out and turned it into an EDM song. Really? Yeah. No, no, no. It meant it says a member of Hunter's house that I heard just what it says from. Right, but the, but the, the singer, the song. Yes, the guy, I'm sorry. The guy who wrote the, yeah, yeah, yeah. It's like a electronic dance music song. We played it before many times. God, okay, I can't believe it's like a beardie man. Thank you. This guy a beardie man. Put it to music and it's hilarious. Oh, God, check it out. It's amazing. I mean, it's a tragic story. Yeah. And a lot of ways. Of course. But in his prime, the writing that he did was in many ways, it was the narration of an era. Yes, it was. And it was genius. You know, the, there was this thing called the New Journalism and I practiced that. And so did people like Gates at least and David Elvorsom and Larry Elkame. But then Hunter took that and created an entire new genre that the God's Art Journalism thing was his. And it was, it was a kind of humor that, that just knocked you down. And it would totally revolutionary. And the, the, the, the, the, the, Tom Wolf, I'm just saying it was of course, was one of the people that found it as the New Journalism said that he was today's version of Mark Twain in terms of what he was able to accomplish. Two books, especially I taught the fear-loading and Vegas, of course, and the campaign book to 70 to campaign book, which in my mind is the best political commentary, including all of Teddy White's books. That's fantastic. Yeah. Fear and clothing on the campaign trail. Yeah, I'm just 72 of you. And he also had this freedom that was very different from all his other reporters because he was a one-time guy. He was gonna go in there and follow the campaign for the entire time and then wrote this book about it. But Joe, these were all stayed. She would die wearing reporters and you turn this and this creature loose on them and then on the campaign trail. And of course they all fell in love with them and they did because he was such a free spirit compared to what their lives are doing. Of course. Well, imagine you're doing this boring thing, which is following a bunch of fakers. Is there telling you how they're going to change the country? Which you know they're not really going to do because you've been doing this for 20 years. Absolutely. And then along comes the guys like, let's do it. As for, come on, proceeds. Look at all of a sudden, you've got this fucking maniac who's drinking and saying wild shit and writing wild shit. And he doesn't have to be held to the same standards as everyone else because he knows it doesn't matter. If it's never happened back again, it's fine. I'm so sorry that Hunter was in here with Trump's time. Oh my God. Because that could have been fucking wild and hilarious. But there's also a party that says he would have liked Trump. I know this is heresy to liberals. You know, do you think that he's a, you know, he would have, he would have absolutely ate him and all of that. But I'm not certain of that. And I think that certainly in terms of his style, he would have liked things about him. Well, I think it would have liked the fact that he's this wild character. Absolutely. A completely wild character that has never existed in all of presidential politics before. There's never been anything like him. No. For good or for bad. There's never been a guy like him. He did today. And he's a shit fit with Netanyahu. Yeah. And he said, you know, the fucking crazy. Yeah. You would have been in jail except for me. I saved your ass. What other president for God's sakes has ever spoken like that? Not only publicly, but to us. Right. And in that sense, you know, I'm proud of being a deplorable. I'm from Cleveland. You know, the, the, the, I grew up from, like poor people and blue collar people. And he's the first president. And that didn't talk down, but tell it directly to us. Yeah. For good or for bad. I mean, for daily, absolutely. For, yeah. I mean, he's, he is who he is, which is very odd. You know, it's a very odd person. Because I am. I have a lot of questions in certain areas, you know, the ice area. And the father's maybe the whole, shit with the ballroom and all of that stuff. Well, the ballroom doesn't bother me that much. That's to me trivial construction, like whatever. The, the ice stuff. What bothers me is we're opening the door for militarized police on our city streets. As many people say, like, what, we've got to get these immigrants out of here that are illegal. There's a lot of criminals in this country. There's a lot of people that are committing crimes. I understand that. I understand that perspective. My perspective is not that you need to get the criminals out. It's that it is a very slippery slope when you give people and they're trained for seven weeks. They're not trained for very long. They're trained for much less time than police officers, much less time than military. And then you have this military militarized police force that has no identification in there on the streets. That's a precedent that you might like it when it's for a cause that you support. But that could easily be for a cause that you do not support. That militarized police force could be going door to door and confiscating guns. That militarized police force that you could find other ways where a different ruler could use this precedent in a very damaging way for our free society. That's my perspective. I agree with that. Being and being. When they start calling people, like my friend, the woman who was killed in Minnesota and the guy, the nest like Terrace, the abomination. Which woman is that? The woman who is shot by ice in Minneapolis and then the guy afterwards was shot by ice. And to call him domestic Terrace. But they gave credit that Trump got rid of Kristin. They got rid of that guy who was there at the time. A woman replaced. Yeah. Well, some home was already in charge. I was in a different position. But they did get rid of that guy. Also that guy had a very odd way of dressing. That was very, he wore outfits that were reminiscent of Nazi Germany. Like he had this very weird coat that he wore all the time. And a lot of people were saying, this is a very odd choice for someone to be wearing who's being accused of fascism. See, we found some photos of that dude. The coats that he was wearing were a lot of people. Like I had to make sure that this was an AI. I was like, is this real coat that he's wearing? This is a very straight, I mean, not accusing him of anything. It's just a fucking coat. But it was a lot of people online were pointing out. Like this is a very odd wardrobe choice for someone who's in charge of in many ways othering human beings. The other thing that's a problem with this whole ice thing is, and it's not the fault of the ice people or even this administration, is that many of these people were encouraged to come here. That's what's so fucked. Imagine if you're living in Guatemala and you're encouraged to come to America. You live in a terrible third world situation. You have a, wherever you're living, it's like the deep poverty. You're told that they'll help you get across the border. They'll literally transport you into America. They'll put you in these cities. And you can get on public assistance. If you have a bad back, they'll put you on social security. There's all these different programs that are incentivizing people to come to America. The Red Cross is giving you maps. People are showing you how to do it. They're letting you across the border. They're letting you into the country. And then two years later, you're being chased down. Two years later, you've got masked ice workers that are, I mean, it's like it's very inconsistent. Obviously, this is a completely different administration. But I feel for those poor fucking people that were told that they can come here and that there was going to be a pathway to citizenship. So they upend their life. They come to America. And the only way they know how. And when people say, oh, they should do it legitimately sure. A lot of people do it legitimately. And I understand their perspective that it's a very difficult path. And no one should be able to cut that line. And they went through it the right way. However, these people, that's not an option for them. If you don't have any money, and you're living in a third world country, and people encourage you to come to America, I most certainly would have come to America just like they did. Joe, I did. My parents did. I might be signed up by the American Dream in terms of what happened to me. They said in the camps, the streets of America are paved with gold. When we lived on La Reina Avenue, and Cleveland, there was an Hungarian poet. And that poet's name was Hachim D'Hu. It would go up and down La Reina Avenue, screaming in an Hungarian old one, old one, which means where is it? Where is the gold? Right, right. But look, I came in here as a kid. I couldn't speak for language. We knew no one. I got into Syria, Jew, and I'll trouble, like maybe. I got out of that. I studied. I was a total lot of a die-dact. I didn't. Wasn't a good student, but I did reading. The night went to college. The day I wanted to be a disjockey for a while, and they named Joe Anthony. Because they're selling to see the sad, so a secretary, right? And he kind of said, the went to college. And I did well in college. I won a big award. And the senior. I kept working. And I also, through the years, got a terrific amount of help from Americans. Couldn't have done it without him, beginning with a bus driver named Henry Jackson, a black man who had been adopted by Hungarian parents and spoken Gary. But moving on to people in college who helped, who I found him, a great deal of help. I couldn't have done what I achieved without the help of other people, and other Americans. And then to top everything off, the Hollywood and 18 films and all of that. Yes, I think that is the process of the occasion of the American Dream. And many of the immigrants who come here are looking for the same dream. And many of them are saying what Mad Atchima had said, I'm Lorraine Avenue, old one, old one. Where is it? Right. Yeah. And part of the reason that the stop in Minneapolis breaks my heart is that. These Latino people are my cousins and brothers in terms of not the killers and not the gang members, but people who are gardeners and who are working to store is and trying to make a buck and have kids that they're trying to survive. Well, it's also part of the story too. Yes, it's part of the ice story is that a lot of these officers are Latino, including the two guys that shot Alex Pretti, those two guys were Latino. And they took these jobs because these jobs give you, first of all, you get a $50,000 signing bonus to join ice. I mean, that's a significant amount of money for someone who's in debt or who's struggling. So this is how this guy dressed. Look at this guy dressed. That's kind of crazy. See that image? Yeah. Yeah. Look at that coat. Yeah. I mean, come on. That's kind of a crazy World War II military coat. Maybe. A little odd when everybody else is, you know, the other thing is the masks. I understand. I understand the need for them that they get docked. Their families get docked and it's very organized. This is not organic. These protests are not organic. I understand all these arguments. Yeah, but by the mask, it's a bad boy like to be. It's also, it sets a very bad precedent. Yeah. This is the problem with it all. You know, the real thing is you shouldn't be able to have organized paid for protests. We are paying people to protest and you're paying people to cause violence. And then you're also using people as political pawns and moving them into the country so that you could change like when you have congressional seats. It's all based on the census, the more people that are in the town, regardless of whether or not they're legal or illegal, you get more congressional seats. So they use them for political. Yes, they do. Absolutely. They know political games. Yeah. It's the same old game and that game should be illegal. That that shouldn't be legal. The idea of the America dream is a beautiful dream. And they've corrupted it and they've taken this and used it for their own game. And you know, and they've weaponized empathy. And it's a real problem. It's a real problem for those poor people that came over here, looking for a better life. Listen, I have an idea run for president or righteous speeches. Buh. Listen, no, that one of the two is really terrific at it. I think you're right to be concerned. You see it. Yeah. You know, I said, I'm 80 when you're sold, but I really see it too. You know, and there's great dangers there that I hope my sons that don't have militarized beliefs on the streets for that reason is a very dangerous person. But then there's the other questions like, how do you get all the criminals out? I don't know. I'm not the guy. You know, I'm not the one, but I am very concerned with this, this dangerous precedent. That's my feeling. Yeah. So I just worry that people accept it because they want this result now. And they don't realize that this could set up this being a common occurrence. I mean, we saw some of it during COVID. There were some militarized police on the streets keeping people in lockdown in certain cities. They utilize the national guard and they did things like that. It's that scares the shit out of me. Yeah. Scares a shit out of me when you you have a justification for militarized police with masks on that are just grabbing people. And some of these people are American citizens turned out a lot of them were Americans, hundreds of them were. You know, we had the same syndrome. I covered the Kent State massacres. Yeah. I covered that. And the one of the things that I saw is the rhetoric that was coming from James Rhodes, the governor at the time and from the semester to El Corso, who was the head of the national guard was absolutely the main thing. And they created that atmosphere. That caused that shooting. Yeah, absolutely. And the end today just sadly, we see many examples of that. And yeah, they're great dangers. Yeah, you would think that we would learn. But we go through cycles where we learn, we get better. And then we repeat the same things again. You see that with racial tensions, you see that with political unrest. You see that with a lot of different things in this country. So like we we learn for a little while. And then we forget. My twins wisdom once again comes through my twin said, politicians are like diapers and they should be changed often and for the same reason. Yeah. He also said history doesn't repeat itself, but it all is but that often rhymes. Yeah. He also said a little bit of terms and subject, but I love it and they said the you said when the mind and the pecker argue, the pecker always wins. Yeah. I mean, he was essentially the original stand up comedian. Oh, you're absolutely right. I'm not you're so right. I've actually been thinking about doing some piece on it. The I mean, and some if you know the history, the but but in the beginning he was a stand up with his so-called lectures that he did all over the West. And then he did this and he wrote some books out of the books that he famous for. But he went bankrupt, nearly at the end of his life because of bad investments. And then he did around the world tour of stand up all over the year. And usually, but he said he was a a a. and then he did around the world tour of stand up all over again. And usually, they said he was a poets of the profane, because usually for male audiences, he published a little book called On masturbation, which is about the Glorazian masturbation. The only thing I've heard that's close is a this in a stand up by one Joe Rogan, which there's a great line that says, if you're married and have kids, the only place to find peace. The way we'd say with the pecker is if you rent a motel room and lock the door. But he had the same kind of nerve and love, in terms of being a stand up, being outrageous, pushing the envelope. And that whole side of the train has been sort of hidden under the notion that he is the great of his head, hooked in and saw him so he heard all of that. Nobody talks to the irritable cult, by the extent the irritant from the voice of the devil. He wrote another one he called the Mysterious Stranger, which is about Jesus coming back in a very dark way. And then he wrote one that was published in the 30s that hasn't been republished, called 20 Rupps. And so yes, it was so right when you say he would stand up. He was a very straight stand up. He was the originator because he was essentially a very witty author who wrote very provocative things, very hilarious things, and then would read them publicly. And when he was doing these speeches, where he would go and what do you call it, whatever it was, and it wasn't no stand up comedy back then. There was no name for it. But he was just riotously funny. People loved them. And they would go to see them because they were funny. And the initial audiences were mostly male audiences. Right. And they gave me a great name. I think he's a great name. It's never been really done. The therapies, a fictional beast, about 20, as a stand up with pushing the envelope with all these things, I think, would be a lot of fun. It would be a lot of fun. The only problem would be like the cultural context. They're so different back then. It's almost like, did you see Lenny, the Dustin Hoffman? Yeah, great film. I think Dustin Hoffman fucking nailed it. It was as close to Lenny Bruce as you're ever going to see someone portray Lenny Bruce. The problem is the world has changed so much since 1960. That a lot of the outrageousness has gone. And it seems very pedestrian. The things that he was saying, because he was such a ground breaker in society, was so locked down and so conservative. And so just the way people communicated was much different back then. The understanding of culture, of race relations, sexual relations was very different back then. And so the outrageousness of what he was saying back then. It just doesn't really translate. Because in many ways, I think, stand up comedy in particular, is a window in time. It's a window into the way people behave. Films are that way as well. Especially if you go and watch a lot of old films. It's a window into how people perceive reality back then. There's a really been published from Twain. There's a really been seen very much. There was left in places like the University of California archives that they go a step past what we know from Twain. And I think there's so much of it. There's something called Twain's notebooks that hasn't been published in their full forms certainly. They may still be shocking. I don't know. I'm still playing with it because I'm reading and reading and all of that. But even if I never do, it's so much fun reading about him and his life. Because he was such an interesting character. I hope you do write something about it. It would be great for people to see and to get an understanding of him. Because I think a lot of young people, particularly today, just think of him as an author. Just think of him as the guy who wrote Tom Sawyer. I'm sorry, I didn't even wish to be young with the kids writer. Speaking of stand up, and I want you to know, and I don't think, did you know that Sam Knisson dedicated a CD to me? Did he really? Sam Knisson, one of his last CD, was called, and leader of the band, BA, and then ED. And at the outside of the CD, he thinks a bunch of people who reggae's often record people and all of that, and also Sly and Sean Penn. And then after all of that, in larger letters than the others, he says, in the very special thanks to Joe Esther Hauser, right egg is letter to Michael Ovis. That's amazing. What letter did you write to Michael Ovis? Michael Ovis was the top dog, agent in town, running CAA. And I was leaving CAA because my best friend and the red band, the business, it was an agent named Guy McElwain. It would have been running Columbia, became an agent again. So I was leaving CAA simply because of my love for God. And I went in to see Ovis instead of leaving the agency. And Ovis said, if you leave the agency, then my foot soldiers who go up and down, will ship Boulevard. and we'll put you under the ground. Oh, Jesus. You know, so I thought about it for a couple weeks and I wrote him a letter, which essentially said, fuck you. You know, I'm leaving. I'm going back to the prison. You started me in the business in the prison. I love. And I turned into a major controversy with headlines all over the place. Put you under the ground, a strong words. Oh, man. There was a producer named Bernie Bilstein. I know Bernie. He did too. He wrote a little bit. I know Bernie. And then more. Later, we said those exact words had been used to him as well. Wow. And you know what? And as time went on, it became obvious that the whole controversy was over. It's really hurting because other people had been threatened that way. And he had a reputation for that. And he actually was out of the business. Not much past that. But then I always said again, I love Guinness and work. I noticed it again. And when I saw that thing, I was overwhelmed. He was one of the greats. He was one of the greats. He was one of the greats. He was one of the greats. And I still maintain that for like a period of two years, two or three years, he was the most profound and revolutionary stand-up comic-hour. I agree. I agree. I'm not out of nowhere. He was so different than anybody else. You know, I was introduced to Kenneson by a girl that I worked with. I was working at a gym called the Boston Athletic Club in South Boston. It was a girl that worked at the front counter who was hilarious. She was a volleyball player. It was really hilarious girl. And she told me about Kenneson and reenacted one of his bits in the parking lot of the club. He told me what she saw on TV about. He had that bit about homosexual necrophiliacs. Oh, yeah. He had money. Yeah. And she's on her stomach laying on the... She was so funny. She was on her stomach in the parking lot going, oh, oh! Life keeps fucking in the ass even after your dad had never had had ever had. And I was laughing so hard that I couldn't wait to go out and get that videotape. And I got that videotape and I was only 19 at the time. I had never even thought about doing stand-up yet. But that was like one of the first times that I was like, oh, this is stand-up. I got to know that this was stand-up. I thought stand-up was like, did you ever notice like that kind of stuff? What do you see on the tonight show with Johnny Carson? I had no thought ever that this wild shit was stand-up. And credit to HBO because before then, you would never be able to see that kind of comedy. The only way you'd be able to see it is in the movie theater. It'd have to be like Richard Pryor live on the Sunset Strip, which predated that by a few years. And no one had any understanding that there was this kind of stand-up comedy out there that this wild motherfucker who used to be a priest, he used to be a preacher. And he comes to LA and is this wild Coke-snorton fucking demon comedian who's just different than anybody else before him. And just changed comedy. There's a few people, there's a few characters along the way that have just completely changed comedy. And I think Kennedy, Kenison, is one of the big ones. He was absolutely amazing. I adored him, I had a ground breaker. And when I saw this CD, he was a demon. Holy shit. I have two of his albums, two different people have gifted me his first album. What is it called? It's not called louder than hell. I think it's called louder than hell. And they're signed. Both albums are signed. Both signatures are totally different. So I don't know which ones real or either one of them are real. It's a problem. Like people buy stuff off eBay. They want to get a nice gift. They buy an autographed album and they might not even be real. He was a preacher. And that last conversation when he died, which Jesus, when he's conversing, I think it's mind-bought. He's literally having a conversation with someone. He is. He's dying. It's obviously Jesus. It's a figure that is at my time. Amazing. It's especially amazing considering where he came from. What he went through, what he did with comedy. And then that ending. It was a movie made, wasn't it? But it wasn't very good. About Kenison? Yeah. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I have a problem with reenactments of a guy who is that profound. Someone's playing on it. Yeah. It's like it's angry. I tried it out to watch. Because it's just the actual work of the guy. Going back and watching his HBO special and watching his stand-up appearances on Letterman. And listening to his first album, the first album I listened to, it was like Jesus Christ. This guy's incredible. It was just so different, so crazy. And he was the first guy that was like open about doing cocaine. Like open about partying. He was a wild boy. It reminds me I'm sorry. Hunter, there's a big wild of my coke. My first story when I was at Rolling Stone was a piece about a Norcottage Corrupt Norcottage Agents. And as a result of the stories, the guy who was the head of the Norcottage Agents in the state of California had to resign. And as a result of that, I started getting plastic baggies full of coke at Rolling Stone from the very dealers who appreciated my work. Now, whenever Hunter was there, I would present him with the bag. And he would go, holy, fucking Christ. And he would get in these from people. I would have said things that sort of bite our offensive. That's hilarious. If I were to hand it over. And that was back when cocaine was actually cocaine. Yeah, yeah, exactly. It wasn't stepped on. You didn't get friends and all. You didn't have to worry about dying of it over those. It was the only drug besides smoking dope that I really, really enjoyed. They said I tried as or once. And then Hunter had to hold onto me because I was so freaked out. I can only imagine. When I watched showgirls, I was like, whoever wrote this was doing coke. That's literally one of the first things I've said. I've always said that's like one of the height of cocaine movies. Not anymore, but certainly the memory of it was influenced. Influenced. Influenced by cocaine. The Tarantino also really loved it. I love it. Love it, showgirls. And I remember, because it was her name, Elizabeth Berkeley. And that's where she was from. She was from the South. She was like this America sweetheart from this really nice sitcom. And then all of a sudden, she's half naked. And she's a showgirl. And she's having a fair with Bulbra Oven. It's moved out when there's life. And it's living with Elizabeth Berkeley right now. That's so crazy. No. Yeah. Jeez, believe. Wild times, right? Absolutely fun. Really fun. Jimmy Andry, just a story because he's the Jimmy Andry experience. And I wondered whether he had any kind of a Godfather impact on the Joe Rogan experience. Oh, 100%. I stole the name from Jimmy Andry. Jimmy Andry's the way. 100%. I mean, when we first started doing the podcast, I was, I would always listen to Voodoo Child on the way to the Sunday store. I was coming over Laurel Canyon. That was one of my favorite, that and whole lot of love. Those are my two favorite songs to listen to on the way to the comedy store. I had like a soundtrack that I listened to to get myself psyched up for shows. You'll love this story. Okay. I'm a reporter at the play dealer. And it be all of our editors barely know about rock and roll. And as I said, I loved it all my life. And then when Banderics came around, I loved his work. And he's in Cleveland. And for an appearance, and the fucking Cleveland cops have gone crazy. And they're saying that this husband riot and it's obscene and all of that stuff. And I asked you go up to my city editor and I said, I don't like to interview with hand-riching covers concert. So I do cover his concert in his jam, and Cleveland arena and people are loving it. And I was set up a date to interview them the next morning at the Cleveland Hotel. Okay. So the show up at the next morning, and I'm the play dealer reporter. I've got a tie-on and a sport code, you know. And I go in, I think it's 9.30. And he's up, but he's barely up and he's wearing shorts and a T-shirt. And his hair is, you remember it's hair, but on this occasion there are a lot of beads and things in his hair as well. And it's totally scruffed up. And we talk about Rock and Roll mostly in his background. And the fact that he had been, I think, as a backup and as a kind of guitarist and a Rick and Nelson band that had been in Cleveland a couple of years before then he'd done this priest before he went out on his own. And we get along. And we'd be a smoking dope, of course, a 9.30 and by a fucking 11.30 we both got the munchies. And he said, man, I'm hungry. You know, you got any, you're going in any place. I've got a car waiting for me downstairs. So I said, sure. And we go down and then Mitch Mitchell and Chad Chandler join us. The other members of the experience who are equally looking like CD characters, you know, but it's that time of morning. It's after concert, all of that. So we pile into this limo. And I direct them to go to Buckeye Road is the center of the Hungarian community in Cleveland. And the center of the Hungarian community on Buckeye Road is a restaurant called the Bolatum. And I direct them to go to the Bolatum. Now, they know me at the Bolatum because I used to live on Buckeye Road. And they can stretch limo pulls up. Blake Last window front and he filled with old ladies with bush cousins and guys very formally addressed. We get out in front of his place. And these Martians three March, they get out of the car. And I leave them in. And then I'm going to look at him like, what the fuck is this? You know, they made me the... They're just following me of Anne. And I say, you see, Jimmy looking around and shit. So they see us. The major D, you know, it's me. So he calls me aside. And he says, well, people, who are these people? I say, Jimmy Andreaks Big Rock and Rolls-Star. You know, he's in town. And he's an old and Andreaks sense. Yeah, Jimmy Andreaks. So we sit down and Jimmy says you order for me. Great. So I order a chicken pumpercoch ram, which is the big Hungarian meal. And chasm and Mitchell order something else, but very Hungarian stuff on my advice. And the interestingly, as we're sitting there, the major D is obviously the same. major D is obviously spoken to people because old ladies are coming around asking you for an autograph. We meet that end age to the U.S. to autograph, please. Wow. Wow. And he's crazy. He's a short. But he loves this pumpercoch and went to order another. At this point, we knocked out two bottles of wine, I think, and we're still rolling from all the dope. So they bring that at the end of this. He had three orders of chicken pumpercoch. He signed, we had like four bottles of wine. We staggered out of there. He signed, I would guess, to attend autographs for people who would come around. Bowing, run on, get it? And as we walk out of the restaurant, he takes this fist high up in there and says, I'm going to eat. I'm going to eat. I'm going to eat. I've made Jimmy Endridge, too. That's awesome. Ron White was telling us a story through the night in the mothership green room, the comedy club green room. And he was saying that when he was, I think he said he was 13 years old. He went to see the monkeys. And Jimmy Hendrix opened for the monkeys. He said it was the worst booking of all time. He's got open. Oh my god. Exactly. So this is when Jimmy Hendrix was emerging. He really hadn't become Jimmy Hendrix yet. So he's the opening act for the monkeys. And so you have a bunch of kids that are there to see this really cute band that was going, you know, pieced together by corporate executives essentially. You know, the monkeys fund banned, but you know, they had a TV show and it was very clean, sweet TV show. Hey, there were the monkeys. You know, and then you've got this guy opening up for them. This just jam it under the guitar. And they were freaked out. They're like, what is this? What is going on? And he said nobody liked it. It was terrifying to people. Like who is this guy with his guitar? Like what the hell is he doing? Great story. The many years later I've talked about writing in Hendrix and movie and working with a producer friend named Ben Meyron and Ben rounded up his brother. And we actually brought him to Malibu. And unfortunately, we discovered that the rights were so screwed up in between relatives that there's never been a Jimmy Andrews movie there because people couldn't agree on the deal of any kind, but it still would be a terrific movie. I can't. Oh, be a phenomenal movie. I believe there was at least one. What did Hendrix buy out there? Docu drama. Wasn't there, Jamie? I believe. Do you remember it? Yeah, it was Andre 3000 from Malibu. That's a good one. But they couldn't really use all the music and stuff, I think. Oh, I'm sorry. I didn't hear Jamie. He said it was Andre 3000 from Outcast. I think. And that they couldn't use all the music. I think. I think. Yeah, it came out. I was an issue back then too. I remember that. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. Jimmy. That's right. Wow. Also, the day after you're talking about in Cleveland, there's a recording of the concert. Oh, wow. Oh, shit. That's my face. Is that right? You can even answer. Wow. There's, I've got a few different links to kept taking me to Facebook, but there's a bunch of pictures. Whoa. March 26, 1968. Wow. And then there's a recording of the concert too. So you can listen to the recording from the concert? Yeah, I was trying to get in here. There's an article from his legendary trip to Cleveland. Wow. But this was like paid wall, but I couldn't get all the stuff behind it. Wow. Man. He was a nice guy. I couldn't imagine. Yeah, very nice guy. He just laid back. Wow. He was just insane. One of a, not even one of a generation. One, one of one talent. I mean, to this day, if you ask most guitarist, who's the greatest guitarist of all time, it's your entrance. Yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. That one guy who died at 27 years old, and would he die in 1969 or 1970? Yeah, somewhere there. That guy to this day is universally regarded as the greatest guitarist of all time. You know, I interviewed him. I was known as the Grim Reaper at the playing dealer because I interviewed Andrew. Janet's Joplin, Jim Morrison, and Otis. And they all died, they all died. Yeah. And I did a feature on Jose Feliziano and people would come up with me as the playing dealer and say, what do you have against Jose? Why do you want to be? That's crazy. It's just unfortunate that they all died. And they all died at 27 years old, which is real. Was that right? I did. Yeah. Hendrix, Joplin, and Morrison all died at 27. And who else? Kurt Cobain, Amy Winehouse at 27. Yeah. It's all 27. 27 is the magic number for insanely talented people of Daya. Yeah. Very weird. You've had an incredible life, man. I've been blessed. I've been really blessed. First of all, the fact that I'm still here at 81, considering some of my excesses in the past is miraculous, truly is. And started smoking when I was 13. Whoa. Stop when I was 60. Whoa. And I had to stage four cancer and the Marshall's Storm Surgery saved me. I drank two hours most of my life until I was 70. And I finally stopped then. Only because I have a hard-headed Italian bullish wife who is said enough you're falling down. You're taking 12 pills and you're falling down. No fucking morgue. And then that it... Now, shortly after we were married, after literally after we exchanged the vows, she turned to me and she says, she whispers. She says, if you cheat on me, I'm going to fucking hunt you down and kill you. But I listened to her. I listened to her. I listened to this one. Something a fun lady. She is. She is and she's... I'm very proud of her because at 67, the mother of four, and truly the true head of our family. She's writing her first... She's written her first novel, which is called Dark Church. And it's set in Dracula's Transylvania. Whoa. And it's a kind of a gothic, um, it's thriller. Um, and, um, I bring it up because I promised her that I would make this plug. And I fear that if I don't, I'm going to be in a lot of trucking troubles. Thank you very much, George. I love that when someone does something like that, when they're in their 60s, just say, fuck it up. Someone always wanted to do. Let's do it. I think it's fantastic. Thank you. I just love when people do, like, fuck your age. Who cares? Just put it out. I write it. I agree. Yeah. But I have lived a, we've been amazing life and I, and I'm very thankful. Um, I've seen a lot. Um, and I've come out on the other side. I've seen a lot of darkness too. Um, but when it's all over, Graham Green, who was in, was in, was in, right or the night Meyer, and died, I think in his late seventies. Um, and he said, um, we get to a point where we see the fence. The fence is there, but we can't see over the fence. But the closer we get to the fence, the more curious we are about what's on the other side of the fence. And there are some people who decide that they're too curious, people like under, and jump over the fence, right? I'm not doing that. But I'm approaching the fence. And well, I've lived a terrific life. And only, once again, only in America. You know, really, I'm like, yeah, only in America. Well, I'm glad you're not jumping over the fence. No. I'm glad we got a chance of talking. No, no, I really did admire his dog. But no more fun though. It should be it. It should be. Yeah. Well, I mean, that's how he lived. And at the end of his life, obviously it was not fun. No, no. Yeah. But Twain went and keep going back to Twain. This is a good one, I think. He said, the orgasm is God's own payback for all the self-range video overlooks in the world. That's funny. You go ahead. It's like writers in particular are they're so important to culture because they can put down thoughts in a way that reshapes the way people view things. And we talked about Hunter in the 60s and the 70s. He was the voice of that generation. Like he was the guy that was this intelligent guy that wasn't a part of the elite establishment, that wasn't a part of the rich fat cats, but was also famous. And well known, but stuck true to his thoughts and beliefs. It was able to articulate things in a way that gave you this understanding of what was going on with the people back then to this day. If you read fear and loathing on the campaign trail or if you lead fear and loathing in Las Vegas or any of his work, the Kentucky Derby is decadent to pray. It's just a phenomenal encapsulation of guys. Is it low? Even even somebody else. Yeah. It's so important. And we don't have a lot of that today, unfortunately. You got a lot of podcasters and a lot of people making YouTube videos and TikToks. It's not a lot of great writing that encapsulates things where there's one figure that we turn to to read their stuff on things. And Hunter was that guy. Yes, he was. And then he was a previous generation. And under and I talked a lot about it anyway. Because of our backgrounds and earning a living and all of that. And I think the fact that Hunter ended it as he did was sort of thought out many, many years before it brought these to him anyway. Inspired by him anyway. Unfortunately, that's how he did it too. And they both shared in common that they drank to access. Absolutely. But you know what? When I was a boy, wanting to be a, and I wanted to be a novelist and on a screenwriter was a boy, the only Twitter they were. Anyway, Fitzgerald and Faulkner. They all died of alcohol. And they way shot himself. Fitzgerald had an air architect at a very young age while working as a a colleague with screenwriter instead of me. Faulkner from off a horse, I think in his early 70s, ripped, totally drunk. And these were the idols of young people coming up. What do you think it is about alcohol and writing that go hand in glove? Be a, I, for a while, I drank all day black coffee and a coeniac. And then later on in life, I didn't have my first drink until noon. And it would make way was 11 o'clock. And I measured until night. And then it was Jen before it was white wine. And part of it is that if you're lost in this imaginary world that's in your head all day, you can get rid of it, you can't make it stop. And the boys make it stop so that you can continue your normal familial, daily obligations and schedules without having this stop in your head all the time trying to crowd it out. The fact that sometimes, excuse me, the fact that sometimes I wake up in the middle of the night and take notes of something. brought it out. The fact that sometimes, excuse me, the fact that sometimes I wake up in the middle of the night and take notes of something that their character says or something, in the case that I can't get rid of it. What the boo is when I was drinking, if I drank it, I'd like to get rid of it and begin out again the next day. It's partly freeing yourself. It's an interesting point. It's partly freeing yourself from something that you've created yourself. So in that sense, you create something that can hurt you even if you created it. My greatest enjoyment was in the Green Place. It gives me a terrific amount of pleasure knowing that when people see this, it's going to make their own lives more pleasant for at least two hours. They will enjoy it. They may laugh at it, but it will take them out of their own existence in a pleasant way. They may not be able to do that with people. It's huge. People think of it as trivial that entertainment is trivial. I don't think it is at all. They can shape our perceptions of the world. Exactly. You do the exact same thing. You make people's lives better by enjoying what they're watching. That is not as important or as dramatic as my daughter-in-law, for example, which has a medical degree. Literally, later, they say people's lives. The indians of them are in the classic Hollywood story. They call this a list of astronauts works in Texas and a hospital. She just got her medical degree, but to show the influence that Ollie would have on our culture. The other day, she walks into a room and there's a gigantic big guy there who was yelling and screaming. This is the sweetest person in the world. That is a wonderful smile. He's really great with people. She's trying to calm him down and she's just what's wrong with strong. He just drives him as a really big man and screaming and what's wrong with strong. He yells, I want Brad Pitt. It's fucking in Texas. Someone else put it on. He says, you want Brad Pitt? I want Brad Pitt. Why do you want Brad Pitt? Because I want to fuck him. That's a sweet woman. That's a little bit. I can't find it with this. Brad Pitt. One more example, DNA of the powerful effect of the culture. So when I wipe something, I don't want some guys to see it and say, is the result I want Brad Pitt? No, I don't want to. A lot of me is a best kid who started fucking war. When I do, people think it's right. That's hilarious. When you say that the alcohol silences the voices, I always thought of it as the other. I thought of it as like alcohol releases people from their inhibitions and allows them to tap into this voice sometimes. I think that happens with some writers, but it never been my problem. There's something about going into a little room wherever you are and you don't have to be an Hollywood. You'd be anywhere. As long as there's a little room in the house, you could escape too and sit there quietly and make it up. You think that people will enjoy it. As long as that's there, that's all I really need. Now, occasionally, I will play music without stop on certain scripts. There's a same way that would let it go and it doesn't do a lot. And Dylan, of course, I did a movie with Dylan. You know, which was also for the experience. But sometimes it's not Coke anymore. It's not Coke anymore with coffee. I drank so much coffee that finally one day, I waited at Colin Ambulance because I thought it was having an art attack. It was just caffeine. Ambulance was caffeine. Ambulance was driving me down in Marin General. And there's a traffic jam. There's construction, right? And they think I'm having an art attack. And I jumped by to the ambulance and I went up to the guy with that heart attack. And I'd never forget it says, break her off. My name is break her off. I'm yelling at him. I'm having an art attack. You motherfucker. Get these guys out of the way. I'm dying. Of course, oh my God. It's worse than the guy who wants to fuck Brad Pitt. I'm getting the kids out of the way. Well, crazy, it's just coffee. If they're all in Coke and all the other craziness. Well, even that kind of stuff. I stopped the coffee as well. The years after I stopped it, I was in New York and I ordered a decaf espresso. There wasn't decaf when I was up for two and a half days without being asleep. So obviously my system got totally. I told you, you got reset. Yeah, you lost your tolerance for it. But the... I never had it. Never I never felt it inspired me. Now the... With basic instinct writing it. The... In the sun. In the wine sun. And of course all through all of this, it was non-stop smoking. You know what I mean? Two back a day smoking. Beginning with buccies and marl bros and moving out to go was. And occasionally cigars and pipe and all this shit. But so I did do that. But I never felt that that picoke was inspirational. It was enjoyable. And it was fucking dynamite sexually. And that also comes in handy. But it wasn't what fueled your writing. And it was just recreation. But nicotine did. Yeah, absolutely. That's also Stephen King said that. That way he stopped smoking was one of the most difficult things that he ever quit. Like quitting the booze and quitting coke and all that stuff was one thing. But quitting cigarettes, he said he really noticed the difference in his writing. Well, the... Yeah, I went through that. I was warned after my cancer surgery. My disarming surgeon that I like so much said if you smoke or drink, you're dead. You know, you're dead. Understand that. And so I took it seriously. And the drinking, my idea of not drinking at that point was switching from 10 to 8 away wine. And the question was, that got out of hand after, until Naomi jumped into the whole parade. And now you're completely clear. And totally, I've been first or completely clear. Does this all line up with your conversion to Christianity? Yeah. Yeah. Well, I needed Jesus of Nazareth to help seriously. To be able to do all that. And I did a lot of praying. But I still believe in prayer. And I believe in worship with a group of people. There's a special kind of inspirational thing that I feel. Yeah. No, I agree with you. I think there's something about all those people collected together. Yeah. It's just like when you go to a concert and you feel the music with all the people that are enjoying the music. There's a similar thing that happens in a church. Very similar. We're meant to be together. We are tribal people. And we're meant to be together. And there's something about groups of people together, especially in a positive way, that unite us and connect us in a way that it's very profound. It's different than anything else. It's different than watching it on a screen. There's something about being in the presence of other people that are doing the same thing. Yeah. It's, you can feel a vibe. Yeah. And the vibe is, it goes deep in its really inspirational. And when it's really working, I feel almost transported. I'm on a different level. And I feel myself being on that level. It's wonderful. Yeah. And you can see all these other people experiencing the same thing. It's very transformational. Yeah. And I was talking about the park in a lot of church is like the best place on earth. Because no, everybody lets you go. Everybody lets everybody go in front of them. Everyone's kind. You know, it's, it works. That's what's crazy. Like the teachings of Jesus do work. Yes, they do. Like if you follow them, you will be a better person. Yes, you will. But people are very cynical. And rightly so. They're very afraid of people manipulating them. They're very afraid of cults. There you go. You got your cross right on you. Yeah. That's a nice one too. Thank you. People are very afraid of people telling them that they know things that they have the answers. Yeah. I'm not afraid of that sometimes. I'm skeptical of it. But it depends on where it's coming from. And sometimes I don't know where you are. But sometimes I could feel something very special with someone who is talking about those kinds of things. You can feel the difference. And the difference between that and someone who's not genuine is very apparent. You feel that as well. It bothers you. I don't want to hear this guy talk about this. But you know what? If you ever should detect her and you do, sort of why. If you have a shit detector, you can really feel that and pick it up. Yeah. And then block it out. Yeah. Well, I think your shit detector works with virtually everything. I think the audience gets it too. People. I agree. I agree. I believe in terms of if my shit detector devices me to do something, I'm always always doing. Yeah. Yeah. It's been an honor having you in here. Your show is so much such. It's been such a pleasure. You are truly what you do is you have redefined in the interview. And you made it into a very special conversation, conversation chat between two guys who think they'll like each other. And they talk for hours and they're inspired. And they come out like each other. And you do that to people. And I think that's a great gift. Thank you. Thank you for the Joe Rogan experience. Thank you for being here. It's an honor. It's an honor to meet you and an honor to have you on here. And I really enjoyed the conversation. It was awesome. Thank you. Thank you. All right.