Connor McGregor, thanks a lot for having us. This is one of the great double ones, one of the great cities in the world for sure. The best city in the world. You can make a claim to that. So, you can walk around double in for a day and then think of five better cities, not possible. It's an amazing place. It's an amazing country. How's the country doing? You know, like a lot of countries in the Western sphere, it is being governed by people with ill intentions of its people. Yes. And, you know, they have not got the interest of their people at its heart. However, our country stays strong. Our people are strong-willed, strong-minded. And we are of an amazing spirit. And it's about highlighting the issues that are going on. And as we have been doing, it's turning. We will get there. I am not going to sit here in front of you where they doom and gloom about the things that are going along. I will highlight for sure, but I will highlight the solutions and the resolutions and where we are headed. And keep the outlook positive. That is what has worked for me my entire life and my entire career, where I was able to rise up and do things that were once considered unattainable. Yes. You know, it kept the positive outlook and that's what I will urge my citizens and my countrymen, my fellow countrymen and women to deal. And that's what we are doing. You know, with a great moment in the Oval Office, with President Trump, where we got to speak and before the press in the White House, where we got to speak our case, it was the first time it had happened in our history, really, where we felt as a people, someone spoke about our issues. We often hear and very hastily hear about overseas issues or foreign affairs. And we hear about it so much that we are left scratching our head. Well, what about our issues? Exactly. About the issues, the people of Ireland face. And that is a rising sentiment that is taking place behind the doors of every household in the country. What about us? And right now, the citizens of Ireland, not only do we not feel like for straight citizens, we don't even feel so great citizens in our own country. So, you know, we continue to highlight the wrong feelings of a minute government elite and it is minute. And what they are doing, they are using intimidation tactics, they are using bullying tactics, they are using diversion tactics, they are using public phones and public wealth in rich private people and private industries to alter the thinking of the public. And we say no more and we are in the midst of highlighting it and continuing our motion towards the betterment of our country and the saving of our great country. Ireland is God's country. And you will not go against the nation of Ireland. We are peaceful, we are not harmless. And we will continue this journey onward. We are peaceful, we are not harmless. Fact and man, you could be describing the United States. And everything you just said that all the conversations about foreign policy in our country it is about the Middle East, who cares, Eastern Europe, double who cares and very little about what is happening to the people of our country. And you feel that here. That is, I feel it is even magnified the more here. I feel in this administration, currently in the United States it seems an America forced stance. It is a very welcome sight for us over here. We wish that for us, Ireland forced. But I feel as many of my country men and women feel there is almost like an incentive to speak your peace on foreign issues. If you think about a raise or your next job or your next position, that is where we feel our government elite have their eyes on. They have their eyes on the next role for themselves. And in order to get that next role, they must speak their peace on foreign issues and nothing to do with Irish issues. And then, you know, long behold, an announcement of a raise or an employment in the European Union delegate and then off they go on their merry way after running right on Ireland and zero accountability of doing so. And it's no more. I'm not sure where people think they will go in this small island. You will not destroy Ireland and be free to walk away. And that is a fact. How do you I want to get to how you know all this and how you've distilled it to such a to its essence? I mean, that was such an amazing description. Not just what's happening here, but throughout the West, the English. You're the Western sphere for sure. It's happening Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Great Britain, which has already gone. I feel like I feel our government again overseas issues. Yes. Okay. In general, I'm an Irishman. I love my country dearly. And there's nothing on no one could ever change that fact. I would give my life for my nation. And I have such a love for this soil. And I how I know about it. I'm just invested in it heavily. You know, I'm an employer of many people here in the country. I have many businesses here operating in the country. And daily I hear about the struggles of people. And you know, the issues they are going through and getting nights of fire and me to stand up. There's something in my belly from my country. And I cannot shake. And even despite maybe the worries of my people in my life, why? Why? Let's go away. Let's say on the yacht. Let's fucking do something. Excuse the language. Let's do something else. I cannot. My country is my country. And I'll fight for it through the air. The world. And that is it. What was it like growing up here? Where did you grow up? What were the circumstances? What was I around like? It's a beautiful place. Beautiful place to grow up. Very, very community driven and family driven. And I grew up in a Dublin suburb of the city center called Crumland. A Dublin 12 is the district. That's why I named my whiskey proper number 12 after my district. It's where my public house is that we will go after in Dublin 12 to have the Black 4G and it's also home to the largest children's hospital in the country. So most people in our relationship with the area. It's a roof into a very old so. And what was it growing up? It was for sure it was. For sure it was. We moved that one. I was about 17 years of age and that kind of got me a little break from it, if you will. But I was 17 years of age. I had already made my friends. I was like an alien in the new place. So I always made my way back down. My boxing club was down there. My football club was down there. All my friends were down there. So I met, although I moved out at 17, I never really moved out. You know, so what am I on the great place for a great people? And I wasn't a rich neighborhood. You grow up? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. It was not for sure. What did you, how far did you get in school? I went all the way to my leaving set. I was the only one of my family to do. So I held that. I hold that. What answer did you leave 18? 18 years of age. I didn't go to college. I went into an apprenticeship. It's either you get a job, you go to college or you get an apprenticeship. And I got an apprenticeship as a plumber on an industrial site in Kilternan, County, Wicklow, which was actually at the time one of the actually it was the largest building site in Europe at the time. And lo and behold, spending over spending over budget, all the rest of it, you know, backhand are central to think fell apart. The ass fell out of it, but say, and that is one of my issues here in our land, the people of Ireland, the over spending that's going on. This is our public wealth being administered into private hands and rich people to bring in this influence of illegal mass migration that is changing the fabric of my country. It is Ireland is very close to losing its Irishness. And we will not let that happen. You know, that's it. We must continue to raise our voice and speak up. It's almost taboo to speak it. And it has been made that way by our government elite. Like I said, they use bullying, they use intimidation tactics. They use our funds to pay our legacy media to push an agenda. They do not push fact, they push agendas. And I mean, I've only been here two days, but I'm a little bit confused by it because Ireland is not like the United States in that you have an indigenous population of Celtic people called the Irish who've been here since the beginning of known history. And so it's not like you were invaders. You were also never a colonial power. You never invaded anybody else. You didn't have overseas colonies. You just kind of stayed on your island and brewed alcoholic beverages and... Are the best brewery in the land? Not to be. You never bothered anybody. You don't have any national crimes to a tone for. So I come here to double on your biggest city and not one advertisement on any public spaces, Irish people in it. And it's clearly part of the same propaganda campaign. Make white people hate themselves, make white people feel ashamed to be white, white people are criminals. It's like, okay. But why would they... Who's doing that to you and why? Like, what is that? I feel since the turn of the crash, our government elite have been accosted into full-time globalist traders of Ireland. And they take their orders from above. And it is not even them. They are being ordered and the orders are coming down onto the people. And the people have no say. We need amendments to the constitution. We need to remove this tight grip that the political elite have over the public. And that is it. And that is our goal here eventually. I operate my businesses and my entire life on fairness. That is it. What is fair? What is correct? Our government elite do the absolute opposite. And it has to change. It has got to change. Our culture is being erased. You know what I mean? And you have a very distinct thousand-year-old or older culture that's based on Irishness, the indigenous population of the island that we're on right now. And they're being replaced and super heist. So you have said immigration is treason. Mass migration is treason. Describe the scale of it to Ireland and its effects. Well, in the old days, my family and the McGregor clan, the emo treason is home to un-quatered if you commit treason against your nation. So emo, what is going on here is an abomination, a travesty. And it cannot continue for much longer. As you said, we are an island unto ourselves, a small island. And we are being governed by a small people who are in turn being governed by another minute group of people. And it must stop. And that's it. There is so much worry in this government elite circle about myself running for president. And if we are actually a democratic nation, which we are not, and I don't believe so, and it's becoming more and more clear and more evident. And the more Irish people are being awakened to this fact. But if we are, let the people decide, you know, it is this cozy click where you have to you have to almost bend the knee, you know, to even have a shot at this. We should be on the ticket. And I sit us in the violent should we allow to be on the ticket above a certain edge of a certain create and let the people decide to get to run for president, ticket to run for president. That is it. I do not wait. Hold on. Why this is a democracy. Supposedly, why can't you run for president? Because you have, there's stipulations. You have to get your four county councils, which are controlled by the government parties. You have to, or you have to get 20 nominations of the Iraq to switch are all mostly party affiliates. You can't just run for president. Can't just run for president. So how is it a democracy? Yeah. There you go. How is it? It isn't. Oh, are you going to do it anyway? I'm going to push forward and carry on my journey highlighting my country's plight, my country's fight, and also my country's delight. Now I do not want to be doom and gloom here. As I say, Dublin is the greatest city on earth. And Ireland is the greatest country on earth. And I was going to America. My brother said in their tour in your chair, but we love Ireland dearly. I'm not actually, I'm just the opposite. I'm thinking you've got a claim on being the greatest country. And it's worth fighting for. And that's it. That's why I know the media here, Hey, too, but I've never understood why. I mean, you're not calling for invading anybody or throwing anyone in prison, maybe other than your corrupt leadership. Sounds like a desert. Why would they hit you? I'm just calling for a national safety. Right now, a national security is at risk. And that is the fact we are being overwhelmed. And it's a danger to the public. And on top of that is our overspending of our public wealth. It is preposterous. The splashing of our money on issues that have not more knock out the dealers and two that actually directly put us in danger. And these are my issues that I wish will say we're on our campaign. You ask about my political aspirations. I am of the belief that the era of the politician must end. It must come to an end. It has proven unfruitful. And that is clear as day by the statistics. And by what we see around us, it is straight chanceary. Our ministers and our appointed ministers have no history in the roles that they're appointed to. Our minister of finance has no history in accounting. Our minister of health has no history in the health industry. Our minister of education was never a school teacher. As an example, as an example, as an example. It is straight chanceary we had dealing with the era of the politician must end, Tucker. And I can see with the selections of the Trump administration that we look upon, which has been 24 or seven work right from my vantage point, Trump, a businessman. He's running it more like a business. And with common sense, that is where I would see it more so than these politicians where they're all in this click and it's a party. They are working on the party and not the people. They are working with the party to rise up the ranks. And then the heads of the party are working with the curry favor on the people above them again to rise up another rank. It just itself to the country. It does not serve the country. And that is it. I'm simply highlighting it, putting it out to the people. If they wish for me to run whatever my nation wants, I'm here for that. That's it. CNN has described you as the leader and I'm quoting of Ireland's far right. Who has CNN, which is a news channel in the United States? Far left, far right. All of these terminologies mean nothing to me. I'm a family man. I'm an employer of the country. You know, I'm a supporter of many people and I care about my land and the safety of its citizens and the prosperity of its citizens. I want preference. I want peace, preference, and prosperity for the citizens of Ireland, for my people. And isn't that fair for our country men and women? It is our country. Ireland is for Ireland, you know? And that is it. I'm right left. I feel I'm centered grounded. That is what I feel. In fact, I ground myself every day. I walk out and I ground myself every day barefoot in the grass, barefoot is king. I fought in the octagons in the cages all around the countries of Ireland and then into the United States of America barefoot. So I am a grounded man. I left right. I am centered and grounded. America has thousands of colleges and universities and a lot of them unfortunately basically just scams. It's one of those things nobody really wants to talk about but everybody on some level knows that it's true. What's an impressive college in 2025? There aren't many at all. Hilldale is one of them. It is the exception. They cut straight through the woke garbage. They give their students a real education. An actual education. Me to Hilldale student and ask yourself, is this the best educated 22 year old I've met in a long time? Yeah. Because they don't have propaganda in their education. Just the truth. Facts, history, English, math. If you think it sounds good because it is good, think of this. Hilldale is offering over 43 online courses you could have rolled in today. There's no catch at all. You don't have to pay anything. I can hit you up for anything. It's free. You can learn about the Constitution, the Bible, the basis of Western civilization, Rome's rise in fall, early Christian church, things that actually matter not one dime. Free. They have a new class called understanding capitalism that teaches Americans basic economic ideas describes our own system, a system that is falling apart. A lot of people want you to hate but for 250 years has been the best and most productive in the world. You understand the basis of our economy from founding till president. Hilldale not afraid to preach the message our country has forgotten, which is freedom is good. Christianity is good. Markets are good and they make this country better by raising well educated students. We endorse this as a college hater. I love Hilldale. Go to tuckerforhillsdale.com to sign up for understanding capitalism today. The course of understanding capitalism zero cost. Just the truth. That's tuckerforhillsdale.com to enroll for free. So in the conversations of how the people in Dublin, every single person I've talked to has said the same thing, which is Irish people can no longer afford houses. Their kids can't afford to get married and their kids can't afford to have kids and they can't afford to have kids. They can't, you know, the Irish family of 12 children doesn't exist anymore in part because no one can afford that. And yet your government is subsidizing immigrants to have kids. Yeah. So I do and that's true in my country too in Australia and New Zealand and Canada in the UK. Look, what is that? Suicide is what it is. It's absolutely suicide. And you know, it has to stop. It has to stop. The rising cost of living is a national emergency. Yes. And you know, it's it has to stop. That's the we say no. We've built the toll bridge here in our rebuild toll bridges. The solar farm companies, the forms of this goes to foreign companies. It's silly. It's a little bit. So the people of Ireland build something and then your government sells it to foreigners and then you have to pay for it. And billions of profit per annum. And people in order in order to think the traffic car on guard is one of the most successful divisions in the guard in the guard in the police force in our police force for convictions. And you know, it is the most successful. And it has caused untold stress onto the people of Ireland. I could I wondered even other suicides in the month of lives lost and families destroyed over the stress of the traffic car institution with you know, driving without tax or you know, no NCT or it's all a money racket for just for not foreigners watching this. You're talking about parking and minor traffic violence. You're put through the ringer. And now on this day and age, which is why it's so infuriating. And then you know, we'll keep calm with it. But it's why people in Ireland are waking up all because everyone has felt in some way shape a form the stress of having to make sure that your buy or you're above board on this on this money racket is what it is. So it's not to keep you safe. It's a shame running from you. Not to keep you safe. But on this day and age now, we've got our new visitors to the to the island who get fully exempt from driving without tax insurance, NCT and even on Irish reg plates free as a board right through after I name an insurance gone through the most stressful periods of our life. Lives have been lost due to the stress cause of this of this of this branch in regards to and yet now people now have our neighbors from other countries are moving here and with full exemption to drive around our roads with supercharged vehicles that have been imported on the taxpayers dime. And then also even another crazy statement is if something happens to your vehicle, if you're a nice friendly visitor or potential new new member of our country, you get your vehicle repaired at a cost of the state. So it is just ludicrous and the people who are on the rising up to it. Then even we're just being awakened to it. And that's it as it, as we awaken, you know, we're noticed. It's just what you said real. That's very, very real. Very, very real. And it's how can they justify that you have not there is no justification. You know what there is? Silence. And that is that doesn't work. You cannot be silent on this. Like I said, you're not going to get off. Rounding or ripping off. I never in a million years. But if they're paying foreigners to have kids, well, you can't afford to have kids. If they're shaking you down with the armed police, but allowing foreigners a pass. If they're paying to fix foreigners cars, but not yours, they hate you and they're trying to kill you. Right? It's an attempt at a ratio of our people. That is it. I could have went. I could have went all that way in the White House. I had to climb. We have to go incrementally up. Right? You go in. Hey, it's you talk about a genocide. This is the genocide of our people. Obviously. But you know, you got a climate right. So we're getting there. And awareness is being made. And we make the moves. And there's many great people. In fact, the majority of the Irish people are great people. Majority majority majority are great people. They're doing great things for our nation. And the pressure and the awareness we're putting on our government elite is causing slight changes. You know, they're doing certain things to a piece. However, how genuine that is, how much of a facade that is. What's skeptical our trust is at an all time low. And you know, you see we walk the length of breath, the length of breath of the Dublin city capital. And it's love and you know, cheer and support not one politician on their any party can do the same. And that is the shame. And I actually, I don't understand why didn't Ireland. We had a great support. You do good by Ireland. Ireland will do good by you. And none more is that evident in telling myself, we had a greater supporters of the in the world. They say, how are politicians do not wish to receive this love? I do not understand it. Fundraising efforts will begin and there will be a large phone built into this where we're going to really take back our country. And that's it. Phones are needed. Money is needed. Is anybody is sure you've made a, I think if I think about these tariffs, what's going on right now? Well, their money dries up and they're panicking about their money. Our government elite, our money rises up. And that is an exciting thing for the people of Ireland to hear. And that's what this is. My phones are infinite. And I'm all in for the country of Ireland. And I've got incredible backing from your country and other countries that wish to support our cause. And it's it. It's a real movement for change. So let me ask you this. So a lot of political move or one political movement in particular in Ireland had support from rich Irish Americans for years. The Republicans, the nationalists here had support from donors in the United States. Do you think Irish Americans in the US, a lot of them are rich, understand what's happening in the country? No, for sure. And when I seen in Miho Martin, Art T-Shook, a rotating T-Shook, graced the Oval Office on March 12th, five days before, saying Patrick's Day, five days before myself, I saw softball. I started a game of softball by Vance, by Vice President of Vance and President Trump, and almost a little bit of pandering to being safe with him because you cannot speak to me and that's 40 million Irish Americans. And that vote is very strong for the administration. You know, you're not on strong. You need that on side. So they couldn't be seen, although their feelings are well known, you know, they're well against what's going on here in this country, they could not be seen. They'd be tearing through an Irish delegate on the same Patrick's week. So they played it, they played it correct. And then when I seen this, I said, okay, and I got my call to go and show up. I said, I'm going to highlight to the Irish American people. This is just what's really going on. You know, some people are saying, now I'm from Wexford. I'm from Wexford. My grandmother's from Wexford. I said, Wexford was the sunny southeast is what we used to call Wexford. I hope what we do call it a holiday destination. It is now no more. There is no hotels available in Wexford. They're all transferred into Ipass centers, which are international protection, applicant services. It's this Fook, it's this where they're all getting housed. It is a house. It is an office block. It is a hotel. It is a, it is even a school. It is even schools now are being transferred into these, into these. I filled with immigrants filled with immigrants. Yes. So they talked about Wexford, Wexford, Rossler, and wexford is another port where they arrive in. And they're in Woke County, Wexford, which used to be the sunny southeast. The beautiful holiday destination is now without a hotel in the county. They've all been transferred into international protection. Why doesn't someone overthrow the government? Here? Yeah. I mean, that's like an active war against your country. I mean, I shouldn't say that to you because I don't want to get you comfortable. Look, I'm statesman like, but in a guy will carry me to statesman like I'll say this. We are peaceful. We're in a harmless. In a normal country, people wouldn't put up with that. We move on to our God and we let God guide us. We're capable of many things. We're capable of many things as a great nation, as a great people. And we move on to our God. Boy, you've heard a lot of complaining in the last couple of weeks, and Donald Trump announced his new import tariffs on foreign-made things. A lot of people don't like it, but the companies who make American products in America with American materials, they're pretty happy. They're not affected by this. They've been doing the right thing since the beginning. They're not paying tariffs because again, they're making American products for Americans. Liberty Safe is a perfect example. Liberty Safe is not making it stuff in some foreign country. It's not made in China or Vietnam or India. It's made right here with American steel. They employ skilled American craftsmen who do an amazing job. That's why they make the best safe. There are a highest standard of quality and security. So you don't have to worry that when you lock up things that you really care about, they're getting a stone. They're not. These are safe. You can trust. I keep my father's shotguns in a Liberty Safe at my house. When you buy Liberty, you support American jobs. You protect what matters most. Choose American Steel, American Craftsmanship, Choose Liberty. Visit LibertySafe.com for more. So you believe that Irish Americans, again, who funded a lot of stuff in Ireland over the years, a lot of investment. You realize where you originated from is on the coast of being done and so many already gone. So many already gone. However, it's not, I don't see it as, I see it as correct. Even if you think about like a deportation efforts, I asked Speaker Johnson, where are you going to go? You're talking about this with a large deportation effort in the United States history. Where do you plan to go? And you said the prisons, to the prisons force, they said, I just thought, okay, then I thought, then I thought about our prisons. Our prisons are over a room right now. We've got mounting maybe just houses of people without a bed, even in the prisons. The long we can't house our people, we can't even have a bed for prisoners. So straight away, you're going in there. You came in, you committed crime on a soil, you're gone. That's it. No, if I answer books, why is the taxpayer paying to keep prisoners from foreign countries in our prisons? And it's being over a ramp. So that would be up for that. And then I would be going to these I%as. I would be going to the direct provision centers. How did you enter our country? Allegedly, you're gone. I do criminal history, gone. I was a genuine attempt to assimilate into the culture and achieve a job and give to the community and support the community. If so, yes, Kate, middle of all to if not gone. And we can do that. And then also we're turning off of the tap. You know, right now, as I said, throughout the car situation, they arrive, they get you get favor if you're from an ordination. But if you're from. So we're turning off of the tap. You know, right now, as I said, throughout the car situation, you know, they arrive, they get you get favor if you're from another nation. But if you're from from who or not, why who thought of this? It's in order from above. It's a globalist agenda. That's the truth of it. It's a global agenda. I know it is. So for me, if I get the end, I'm going to be exerting my influence to turn off the tap. If you think about what Trump has done, they're actually stopping to they're stopping coming in. Yeah, because it's not there no more. The gravy train isn't there no more. What is there is actually resistance? You know, and that's that's where I said, now there is a human compassion for me. There's compassion. I employ people from all walks of life. So there is a compassion element. Many people have immigrated here have done great things for our country and that has to be highlighted also. But it's like at a stage now, where the great people who have came here and immigrated and contributed greatly to our society are now being feeling the strain of, of, of, of, of, of, and I feel the wrath almost because of this social unrest. It has to stop. It has got to stop, you know, and what I, what I had a limit with it, we are really at our limits with it. How the next few years go, it's a, it's worrisome. It is worrisome. This EU practice, EU migration pact that as a president I could get in and I could really rattle it and put it to a stop, post the stop, which is, which would be the main thing. They're trying to now hurry it through, which if goes, if it goes through, it's like 20,000, 40,000, 50,000. It's an unlimited number that we'll have to take. It's on the orders of, and move all around your country, right? Into small towns. That's what they've done in the United States. They move them into small towns around the country. So then your country's gone. They don't even know it. Yeah. Yeah. They do in that here. Yeah. There's counties over all night now, because the county in Ireland, the county, it's a Gail Talk county, it's a Gail Talk town. And there's more I percent. It was a home for the Ukrainians announced being altered into an outbound center. And it's the one of the last places of our language. And that is feeling an influx out on this. You know, the people are out in the streets against it. So it is happening in counties all over Ireland for sure. And with this EU migration practice, if the floodgates are open on that, it's a difficult time. It's changing the religious composition of your country, which since St. Patrick has been a Catholic country you had. Anglican overlords from across the water, but it's been a Catholic country for over a thousand years. So now they're trying to put a refugee center in a, we had a Christian holy site town in Ireland. Yeah. It's hard to think that's not on purpose. Yeah. Yeah, it is purpose or for sure. Is anyone saying anything about this? Like in your media? Yeah. You know, I wonder, I do often wonder. And I'm almost certain they must behind doors. You know, it's like if your boss says something and you don't agree, but you're going to, you might have to agree because your livelihood is on the line, which is essentially what it is. A lot of people's livelihoods are on the line. In fact, the only people that agree with it in public, because I actually, I could not believe that they could believe it behind closed doors. Boss are not livelihood are not. I'm almost certain they cannot believe in this way for a country for that's it. I'm just, you know, it's. So you, your biggest media company, state media, it's like North Korean state media, it's called RTE. Yeah. And it literally is an organ in the state, which is amazing. But then you have social media and you tweeted on social media, Ireland, we're at war. Yeah. What was the reaction from the government to that tweet? Oprah. No, I was the scapegoat. And then it happened where an Algerian visitor or citizen in an Irish passport, an Alger or so, we believe that the information is very, is not fully revealed. You can never get a straight answer from these people. Never get a straight answer. Our children will stab this out of an Irish school on Pinell Street and a teacher will stab, turn to fight them off. And then an Irish man jumped in and then an immigrant from Brazil jumped in and together they wrestled them down. And then it was, you know, hide it and my, my, blame my tweets as the reason it kicked off. And that's kind of what we're dealing with. Wait a thousand. The Algerian stab, Irish children, but it was your fault. Pretty much was kind of what the rhetoric was. Yes. And then, you know, that was pretty much, I like that. I said, I often wonder about if I think about, you know, if you're doing believe in this, we've 6,000 members of the Defense Force, 6,000 army. And we've about 12,000, I really wonder how many are happy with this direction our country was going. I cannot see, I cannot see many behind closed doors. Guardian or the police? Guardian or the police? I cannot see many closed doors that I happy with this. Even if I look at what has happened in some of the protests where the Guardian said, essentially the Guardian are following orders that they don't have their job, but it's Ricky one. And it's a sad one to see. It was very sad and upsetting to see our Guardian torn on their compatriots. And that's what we saw and use excessive force, put it's an order coming down. And I feel, I feel sad seeing it. I feel sad seeing it. And, you know, most recently, one of them came out with all named and said, it has stayed with him. They are very, very troubled by it. And it's just a sad sight to see, you know, Ireland, we should be together. And that's what I said. I wonder how many behind closed doors are really with this cause that we are fighting. So if not... I would assume it's most the majority. I think that's true in the US too. I think our FBI is totally corrupt as I'm sure you've read. I think most FBI agents are probably appalled, but too afraid to do anything. How long if nothing changes will Ireland remain Ireland? Do you think how much time do you have before it's just not thick? I think it is. Well, we are a small island. We are a small, small island. And we are now... I don't even want to highlight. I actually do... I'm actually at a stage now where I'm cautious of highlighting the benefits of arriving here because it's only gonna attract more. You know, if I look at Trump's situation, he's... He has decreased the amount of people who are attempting to immigrate to the United States, America because of what's going on. This is what I wish were happening. If it's turn off the tap, they go. Or they stop coming. If you show a basket full of gold nags, they just arrive for it. You know, that's kind of what it is. So it's awful here. I just want to say that. It's a free-for-all with our public wealth, with our money, a free-for-all. And it's been stolen. And it has to stop. It's not how long I couldn't give you the exact figures. You know, statistics, it doesn't look right. It could happen. Not long. Anyway, not long. Feels that way. So how did you just back to my original question? You're a plumber's apprentice on an industrial site in Ireland, cutting cast iron pipes and replacing them or whatever you're doing, probably someone like that. And then you wind up here thinking about running for president with these very evolved political views. How did that happen? Having a love for one's country? That's it. Love for my country. I fought to represent my nation's flag on the grandest stage of fighting. That was my aspiration to represent my nation, to open the doors of the fighting world and the martial arts world to the Irish public. And to support my teammates, we were all, we had a kindred spirit rising up chasing our dreams and a very tight knit tie knit crew. And we rose up. And I got in there. I was successful. I opened it up. Now the martial arts lifestyle is a real way of living for many people in Ireland. And I take great happiness in seeing that. And I suppose it's just continued off of that. You know, it's a different fight now. It's a different fight. But it's still a fight to represent my country to the best of my ability. Well, Easter is finally here. And there's no better way to remember the story of Christ. Jesus dying for your sins is the most powerful thing that's ever happened in history. It is really the beginning of history. And it's worth celebrating. This Easter embraced the freedom of the resurrection on howl, which is the number one prayer app in the world. Join Liz Tabas who plays Mary Magdalene in the chosen, actor Kevin James and others in immersive and jubilant prayer experience worthy of Easter itself. Every single day you learn how to walk in freedom amidst the circumstances often crushing of your daily life and let go of the things that you're attached to and that are causing suffering. And instead embrace the peace and freedom that come when you place your trust in God, which is the only place to place your trust. So enter the joy of Easter with a brief prayer reflection meditation every single day that will help you continue the habits that will change everything, the ones who established during Lent. We love howl here. We love the app. We know you will too. It's got thousands of prayers, meditations, music help you build a daily habit of prayer and to grow closer to God. Download howl today at howl.com slash Tucker. You get three months for free. You'll be grateful. You did honestly, you will be. So when you started fighting, as you said, you're a plumber apprentice on an industrial site and then you announce in public a few years after that, you haven't heard of me, but I'm gonna be the world champion. And then you were. Yeah. I'm five times. Five times. Five times. Did you know that you were gonna be or were you trying to put your mark around and then live up to it? Well, that's what I will say here about, you know, I do not wish to be doom and gloom. I, I, I, I, all my outlook on life has always been to have a positive outlook, you know, borderline delusional. I could walk into a burning house and see her birth-shirping as an example. And that assisted me in being able to block out certain things that may have impacted me and, yes, hampered me and slowed me down from getting to where I was going. So I wish to continue with that and have a positive outlook and say, it's not all doom and gloom. Like I said, there are positive changes happening incrementally, slowly but surely, slowly but surely. And as I said, there's a great group of people and it's the majority of our people that are at the helm of it. I'm, I'm a voice and a support. And as I said, I'm here to serve my country, to the best of my ability and protect my country. That is, that is all I wish. I wish for the people to have the power and myself to have a vote amongst the people. That is my, that is my aim. What did you think of President Trump? What do I think of him? Yeah. I think he's doing very, very well. I think, you know, I was present for his 2016 inauguration, although not officially, I was there on fighting business. I was fighting the Madison Square Garden for my second UFC world title. And MMA and UFC had just became legalized in New York at the time. And I remember Trump had been just voted in and he won the election and it was uproar on the streets and anger and fear as opposed was going on. And at that time I was just an observer. You know, politics wasn't really on my mind at that time. Ireland was not really going through what it was going through at that stage in 2016. Although it was rising, it was going to be known to me in many in the country. Were you not political really? Not really political now at that stage. You know, it's focused on my craft and it wasn't at the forefront. It all kind of took a tour in post COVID. It all took a real tour in post COVID. And you could kind of see what was going on and what had gone on post the crash. You know, and who are going to serving? You could kind of see that come to fruition then throughout the COVID era. And then I just became more invested in and then that was it. But I was there for Trump's inauguration when he was sworn in for the first time, fear, worry, panic. And then I was there the second time in 2024, most recent. And it was a nation and excitement. And I thought it was good to see. I asked me what do I think he'll be as a president. I said, well, when it was 2016 in the media rooms I was doing. And I said, let's see. You know, we give them any chance. He's not, but he's not from a political background. He's from a different background. It's interesting that I see. And I thought he'd done well towards the end of the term. There may have been times to, you know, as a leader of a country, you almost need to, you know, cool the flames. You know, maybe there were some things that might have found the flames towards the end of his term that I taught. But this time around, I feel it's off to a good start. And I wish them well. I wish the country of the United States of America well. We, I consider them my dear siblings. We consider America our sibling. And I think it's going well. And we're getting a good fair bit of energy from our, even amidst the entire situation that is going on. You know, Ireland's people have not seen the money got to deal with this at water. However, in fact, we have been, you know, robbed of our own money. And yet, yet, yet we are supposed to be this wealthy country, yet the people of Ireland are struggling to heat their homes. So there are many people who are seeing this type of situation as a, you know, we've got your moment for our government. They I'm not so much of that. I wish, I wish for our, our country to be prosperous and our people to be prosperous. And that's what my aim is. That's what my wish is and my hope is. So you're not necessarily against the tariffs. It doesn't sound like well, our government say what good is tariffs? Tires are no good for nobody yet. They've been tariffing the United States. You know, if that's the case, then why have we been tariffing them? Why haven't we been hitting, why have we been hitting them with tariffs? I'm not so much against it. I'm watching it. You know, I'm watching it. I wish for economic success for my nation. And, you know, Ireland deserves it. That's how it's straight. We play it our cards correct in certain ways. And, you know, that's it. But like I said, fair, it has to be fair. Fairness is is key here. And that's what I, that's what I push for. Since no Irish politician, well, you're one of the most, maybe the most famous living Irishman. Okay. So there's that world famous. And you're saying things that the overwhelming majority of your politicians will not say that are probably pretty popular with the people. So you're therefore a massive threat to the structure running your country now. What do you think they're going to do to you if you keep talking this way? Mm hmm. Attempt to tarnish as they are. You know, attempt to disrupt as they are. Or possibly worse. But I do not fear. I do not fear it. Like I said, I move forward under God. And my nation can see. My nation can see my heart. And what I'm for. And that's that's it. That's like I move on like Ariane. You're really not afraid at all. Madam, my elder. Mm hmm. When do you have to make the decision about whether you want to formally enter politics? Well, they will, we believe the election will take place in November 11th. So it's a 60 day rule prior to that. So I'm just going to keep, you know, requesting a democratic process to play out and allow the people to decide and see where it falls. To become more evident today, tonight this, that we are not a democratic country. Right. And they have to answer to their constituents at some stage. You know, there will be accountability. You know, it's how much are they going to be accountable for. They'll have to decide. And that's it. You've described yourself as an employer. You said that a couple of times. What tell us what the business is you employ people in? Look how many businesses here in the country. There are not many other about 300 staff falling. I've got public houses. I've got construction efforts going on building some public houses meaning we would call them bars. Yeah, public housing. No, yeah. No, no, yeah, public public is short for public houses. Right. So I've got public houses. I've got breweries. I've got companies also. We're brand building. And I have also construction efforts where I'm building many social houses, houses towards the housing crisis that's going on. I'm currently about 300 houses built already. And you know, closing in on, you know, my next changes about the thousand houses built. So I'm doing my part to help this housing crisis. I've always been doing that. And it is at a heavy cost, I'm going to lie to heavy cost. What would you mean? Like there is no profit in it. You know, it's a it's a build and it's it's for the people. And that's it. There's no profit in building houses. I'm not a profit in it. You know, for social housing, I'm get my money. I get my money back if I'm lucky. And I'll maybe a little, a little sweet and a little drink and say here in Ireland. Yeah. So I bought it for a stress at this cause and the time it's a difficult task, but it's it's awarded. You know, there was a time there was one I don't I completed a build of eight houses. It's actually my very first one. It may be two years ago. Moly, I've only I've only I've only maybe four, three, four years ago, but it was in a part of Dublin called Sandring. And it was eight homes and I had got them completed just before Christmas. Oh, there were homeless, homeless families that were brought into their new forever home, right before Christmas. And that filled me with so, so it's energy to continue on going to it. And I went full steam ahead. And like I said, now I'm in the process. I've got three on the strong now in construction close to finish. And you know, more than a thousand being built already. And that's what me, my own self able to do this with every block in my way. You know, as as one individual citizen of Ireland, if I was to get in and to have influence, I really fancy my chances. I mean, the bar is so low. Every statistic, every metric is on the on the floor. Every metric is on the floor. I'd get in and I'd be able to I don't we have to decrease our homelessness, you know, build our housing, you know, slow down the role of influence of illegal migration, control the spending. I fancy it. Our country has nothing one correct. And it is clearly evident to everybody outside of the political paywall. Everyone is aware of it. And even those inside of the political paywall are also aware of it. However, they are being bullied, intimidated and threatened with their livelihood. Let's take it all along with it. So the tone will happen. The shifts will happen. I'm doing my part. And I'm proud to do so and honor to do so and I will continue to fight for my country and the future of the children of this nation. And that's that's it. Do you really sincerely, be honest, think that your beer is better than Guinness? So it's another level. There's the world's creamiest out. Not only is it better tasting, it is better pricing. It is brewed right here in Dublin. And as an employer of about 100 people in that brewery, it's a fantastic brewery. And the Forge brewery can go and visit it if you have time. But we will go and test it if you wish. I would fancy a blind taste test any day of the week and I guarantee victory. We have we have done with other amazing things with the stout to date and it's still only on the rise. But there have been many taste tests doing. So there's a couple of stout skin. This is the talk about the minute. We are number two on the rise. And then there's some other brands. You know, there's some other great Irish brands, more freezing, beamish. It's a shared part of rising tide raises all ships. You know, the others are bullies. Yeah, the others are bullies. I am I wish to build up our all our stocks and all our, you know, because Ireland we watch happens at making stealth. Like we are in a world champion and making whiskey. It's it's put them all to the test on a blind taste test. Forge Irish style. It's just a weird weird. I guess I didn't realize that Guinness was an English company. So after you know, on this and then you were a, yeah, centuries of colonial oppression and they're still selling their stout here. You know, if you're not held accountable or you've got, you know, you're free to do as you will. That is what it is with Guinness. Even as they go in, I'm a public and also so I own pubs. So I deal with getting and I serve Guinness. I serve my competitor. No problem. We outsell at 10 to one, 10 points to whom we outsell at on site. But you know, other publicans are dealing with Guinness distributors. And they're not they're not friendly. They're not supportive. You know, because they've never had to be in. And then when I came onto the scene with Forge Irish stout, all of a sudden they start coming and shaking the, the public in time, they're a little bit differently. They start acting. I heard that they thought they were held accountable. They had to be, they had to be by the book. It was creating fairness. And then there was a hitch up, doing on me and it kind of took me out of the market here in honor for a minute. And that's kind of what happened. And it was it was it is what it is. You know, but I have the best out in our Forge Irish out for sure. Interesting. And you're going to have them. You don't drink. You don't drink any. No, I had a, I had a Guinness no alcohol last night. We can get you one of them. We've got that we got the zero zeros in on on site for sure. We get you one of them. Yeah, it was okay. Yeah. That's nice. So in sad news, I know you said you're a, you know, looking at the bright side kind of guy, but Rosio Donald has moved here. If you're president and you tackle the immigration crisis and I do think Pakistan and India take a lot of the blame for it, Africa, but also Rosio Donald, like would you deport her? I think you probably want to. Criminal history has got a criminal background. How does she enter the country? She enters the country illegally. Has she assimilated with our community? Do she hold our beliefs? She A, she A, outstanding member of our community. No, if she has not, well, then she's got to go. Yeah, you got to go home. You got to get the head out of here. But I don't know Rosio Donald from Adam, but you know, would you be believe she's a comedian? She see, I seen her on our national TV. She spoke of it. You know, I don't know Rosie. She seems on a happy. She seems going through something at the moment. And I'm not the player of Paris. The kick up person when they're down. I wish for her. I believe she's a comedian is what a craft is. I wish for her to find her happiness again. And that is it. I am, you know, that was what I would say. That she was going through something even though I could feel it for sure. I think that I wish, you know, happiness and spread love in the world. That's it. Well, you're a very, very decent man. I have to say last question. Do you do you think that Ireland is like famously a spiritual country? You know, your, your patron saint, same Patrick after whom the day is named, you know, was a Christian leader. And you think of Ireland as like a very religious country. It's not really anymore. Do you think it's becoming more spiritually aware or less? For sure. Do you feel that for sure? It's spiritual warfare going on right here. One of the percent. Yes. And we fancy our chances. We fancy our chances in a big way. Me too. Connor McGregor, thank you very much. Oh, that's a good view of you. Oh, so. Danny, right. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.