Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night. All day. All right, jam is here. Last time I saw you, I think it was before the madger off. I wasn't it? Wasn't it before that fight? I believe so. It was before that fight. And that was just around the time you were talking about fighting Cannello. And everybody was like, that's crazy. He's going to go up all the way to 168, two more weight classes above that. That's nuts. Everybody's got to shut the fuck up now. Yeah. Yeah. You know what I say, skill is pay to be us. They do. They do. Skills are everything, man. But the thing is, it's like, it's interesting. I watched both the canal of fight and the madger off fight again recently. And madger mauve looked bigger. He looked bigger than Cannello. It was really interesting. He was a big dude. He's a big dude. I wonder what that guy walks around that. Because it's not 154. Not at all. I thought that was guy. He just thought that was guy. Did he? Yeah. Really an outstanding performance against Cannello. It was like I was telling you before. It was a great, I told you so fight for me. Because there were so many of my friends are big boxing fans that just thought Cannello was too big. They thought it was too much of a jump. He's too experienced. Yeah. Well, you got it? You got to mean you made it look. I want to say easy. It wasn't that it was easy, but it was definitive. It was such a clear victory. It was at one point when you were a pity patent them. And then firing off hard shots. I was like, oh my goodness. He's feeling it. Yeah. I was in my element. I was in the zone. Mainly because a lot of people was down me as well. Tell me I was going to get knocked out. I was too small. I was just fighting for the money when I knew what I was capable of. So I was just like, I'm going to show y'all what I'm really about because this is not the first time that I didn't heard that. Oh, he can't do this. He can't do that. I think your situation is very similar to when Roy Jones was in his prime because when Roy Jones was in his prime, everybody was saying Roy Jones, other than James Tony, Roy Jones really hadn't thought anybody. Am I? And I was like, no, he's just that much better than everybody else. He makes it look like they're not good. Yeah. If you saw them fight against everybody else, you would say these guys are awesome. For sure. Sure enough. I've been dealing with that my whole career. You know, people getting so much praise after fighting a guy that already knocked out, you know, if they beat him. Oh, such a such beat this guy. But me is oh, you fighting tomato cans or you fighting bones and things like this. So it's like it was just because you're doing it so well. That's what it is. It's just people they try to find flaws in every great performance and the flaws, the only flaws they could find is yeah, but who are these guys that he beat? Mm hmm. But you beat great guys. Champions. Yeah. Listen, one of the more interesting fights to me was a bit of it as fight. I ever watched that again recently too. No, exactly that. Oh, because there's so much tension. Yeah. There's so much shit talking and tension and so many emotions. And you can fight. You can fight. So a lot of people they looking at his injury and he fought no different from before or after the injury. He fought the same, you know, so that's another thing that they're going to say, oh, well, he had got shot in a leg. And if he didn't, then this would have happened or that would have happened. And I'm like, he fought the same. Like if you would know boxing and you see him box, nothing changed from his boxing standpoint. He wasn't a mover. He wasn't this guy that uses his legs as a defense or offense. So I just take it as a ground and so I'm sure that injury sucked, but he fought the same. And he fought well. I mean, his tough guy, he fought really well. Took me 12 rounds. Yeah. Listen. And that right up or cutting that 12 round to put him down, I was like, oh my goodness. I remember watching that fight live. I was like, oh, there it is. There it is. You found him. Yeah. He had good hair movement. You know, tough guy. He was ducking him hooks and straight punches. So I was just like, I got to switch it up. Well, also he believed in himself. For sure. Definitely. He came into that fight to win. Oh, definitely. Most definitely. It's a beautiful watch. You get what you deserve. Because I felt like, man, if you retired after the Spence fight, I don't think people that are casuals would really appreciate your skill set. Yeah. You know, the people inside boxing, the people that really know boxing did, but I felt like too many of the casuals just talked so much shit. And so the the canal fight was the cherry on top of the Sunday. Yeah. It was in. Even now, a lot of people saying, oh, well, Canelo's watched. He's old. And I'm like, well, I'm older than him. What are we talking about? So I just love it because it just shows what love I'm on. For everybody that already know what happened. And then they try to take what happened and make it a reason why it happened. Right. So I just be like, man, that's cool. That's boxing, though. Right. That sports in general, you're always going to have that. There's always going to be a bunch of sideline people that talk a lot of shit. But you know, for a lot of fighters, it's later in their career, especially when they're avoided or they have difficult, difficult, these signing big fights. It's later in their career that people really appreciate them. Like think about Bernard. It wasn't until Bernard Hopkins be Felix Trinidad. The people are like, oh, shit. I think he was like 37 or 36 when he fought Trinidad. And a lot of people are saying he's watched. Stop. It's over. And when he knocked out Trinidad, everybody was like, oh, OK. Yeah, I've been calling out everybody since the beginning. They created a whole side of the street, because of me. I'm with a different promoter. It was always something. And everybody always blame me. But now look at everybody now. All the promoters working together now. Why couldn't they work together when it was my turn to shine? But it is what it is in life happening. And I'm happy the way it happened, because I did it my way. And I don't think too many other fighters can say that. That's true. Yeah. It's a dirty business. The business of promoters and keeping guys away from guys and making sure that they're fighter, avoid certain fighters. It's always been that way. It's unfortunate for the fans, because there's so many, like the big one for a long time was David Benavides and Canelo, like everybody wants to see that fight. And they just can't figure out a way to make it happen. And you got to think someone's avoiding somebody and it's not Benavides. No, not at all. I just think Canelo, in a sense, he know how big Benavides is going to come in the ring. Benavides is a great fighter, but he's a big fighter. He's a tall fighter. And I just think Canelo knows why would I want to get in the ring with this guy that's going to be massive, come fight time. And I'm not that big of a guy at all. I've been doing all this with my skills, because Canelo's not a big guy. He's been fighting big guys. It's whole career. Yeah. And beaten them with skills. So you got to tip your head off to Canelo and what he's accomplished. Absolutely. Being five, seven going up to 175 and fighting these big guys and actually winning and winning. Not to have a level of, I mean, it was a couple of later in his career, but it's still Kovale. For sure. And then having the courage to fight Bivall and his prime. For sure. I think that's the fight that probably kept us from getting the Benavides fight, the Bivall fight. Because I think after that fight is like, OK, it is the big. This is a little big. Because Bivall, not just big, but he's got that Russian style light on the feet in and out in and out in and out. Good box. It's a difficult style to handle. And like the only guy to be better be of, it was another beast. Yep. So I think him knowing that. And then I think the disrespect that he got from Benavides had persuade him to go elsewhere. But there's been many boxers from the past that didn't fight people that they wanted to fight. And I look at Sugar Ray Leonard and Aaron Pryor. They never got that fight. So and that's just one of MIDI. So it's going to be like that. Well, it always seems at the end that it all worked out the way it was supposed to. And that's how it felt like for me after your canelo victory. This is like all the bullshit. It's like now everybody has to shut the fuck up. It's like all the bullshit's gone. It's like now everybody's got to give you just do. Because that was a stellar championship performance. I mean, that was one of the all time great performances. Because it was a canelo that's, you know, you could say whatever you want. I think he's still in his prime. And you just outboxed him and you outbox them. I mean, think about it. 40 to 47, 54 all the way up to 68. And you know, that's right. 35 first right. That's right. That's crazy. That's crazy going up for 35 to 68. And outbox in the champ. And the way you did it too was so skillful. It was so beautiful to watch, man. When you're a fan of skillful, intelligent boxing, there was such a good fight to watch. Because you know, canals a dangerous guy, a heavy puncher. And he puts a lot of power into his punches. He's kind of changed over the years and really relied more on his power. But man, he knows how to land it. And when he lands it, he puts people in a lot of trouble. And who he just, there was, there was this one move that you were doing where you were throwing a left hand and then a quick hook behind it before he even brought the hand back. So he was going to counter and you were throwing a quick hook. I was like, oh, that is so pretty. That is so pretty. That is so pretty. You know, Canelo is a great counter puncher. You know, so you got to beat him to it. You got to counter the counter. That's ours. Did that fight play out the way you thought it was going to play out? Yeah, most definitely. Exactly the way thought it was. Most definitely. We knew what was up against. You know, when I went to his fight against Berlinga and against the guy that's on his team, I forgot his name. Mongea, Mongea. When I was with Turkey, I said Turkey. He came beating me. Just watching him from 135 to now, like live. I'm looking at him. I'm just like, I can beat this dude. Like my confidence is getting more and more and more. And his last fight in Saudi Arabia, I was like, yeah, he came fight like that against me. What she did, which he definitely rose his game, but I just believed in myself that much that nothing was going to stop me from getting that victory. That not the fight in Saudi Arabia. He looked like under motivated. Yeah. It wasn't a big enough challenge for him. He didn't look like he was in the same kind of shape physically like when you look at him. He wasn't, you know, and it happens. That's why I always train like, this is the toughest fight of my career, because it is. Every fight is. And you never know what to expect with those type of fighters that nobody know about. Right. Right. Right. Them beat the ones that sneak up on you and you got to be ready for him. But he didn't come to fight. He moved the whole fight and Konello was frustrated. He was just like, oh man, it's do it in. Come and do anything. Right. He came to survive. Yeah. So I could see where he was frustrated there. Yeah. Well, he probably thought he didn't belong in there with Konello either. Right. You know, so he probably said, listen, if I just keep moving, I can get out of here with my dignity intact. And just never get hit real good. Yeah. Yeah. It's fascinating now, because before that fight, you were looked at as one of the best boxers today. Now you're looked at as one of the best fighters ever. And it's interesting how that changes, how people now look at your body. And then they look at Arial Spence before you fought him and go, Arial Spence can fight, man. He's a really good fighter. And a lot of people discredited, you're Victor over him because of that car accident that he had. And maybe he wasn't as good as we thought. And but now with the Konello victory, you're in this rare air of, you know, mentioned as one of the greatest of all time. You know, there's a handful of guys. There is no, it's very difficult to say the greatest of all time. Because people want to go all the way back to Sugar Ray Robinson. They, you know, they throw Floyd in the mix, prime time, Roy Jones. There's all these different fighters. They put us at greatest of all time. But you are now in that conversation. How's it got to be nice? It is beautiful. You know, especially all the hard work that I am put in to be here at that pinnacle of the sport. You know, since I was seven years old, I've been boxing. I've been fighting. I've been a fighter since day one. So when people compared me to like Sugar Ray Robinson and Floyd Mayweather and Sugar Ray Leonard compared me to who will win who will win, that just let me know that I did my job well in the sport. Oh, yeah, absolutely did. Now you definitely done done. Right. So it's definitely over. I don't got that. So I told a couple of my close friends. I said, okay, since 2014, I've been fighting for something, a title. I won my first title in 2014, March of 2014. I've been since then I've been fighting for titles, undisputed titles, undisputed, undisputed titles, undisputed, like just everything that I've been fighting for. Now I just come back and it's just like, all right, what's the motivation? Just money, you know, like all right. So what is on top of that? You know, because my thing was the money going to come. You know, I was taking pay cuts at the pay cuts, because I knew what I wanted my legacy to be when I finished boxing. I want to be remembered as one of the greatest champions of all time. You know, and I think I did that. You know, so now it's like this last fight that I had, the height of it. There's no better finish than that to me. Yeah. Well, what was on the line coming from where I came from, all the eyes that was stacked against me, all the things that I had to go through and can't, and can't to get to that fight. You know, it was just like, man, you did everything right. So what can top that? I love that. I love when fighters go out on top like that. And for you, for a fighter to go out like you have with all your championship experience, all the way classes you competed in undefeated and beat Canelo, another all time great. I mean, that is that is a perfect finale for a spectacular career. It's pretty dope. And go out with your faculties intact, your health intact, plenty of money. It's nice. It's beautiful because nobody knows what us fighters adore to get to the point to entertain the fans. You know, we go through a lot. You know, we put our body through a lot. And then when it's all said and done, when our body broke down to the point where we can't take care of ourselves, they don't care about us. They're going to say, oh, well, he was once a good champion. And we go to the fights. You see a lot of old fighters showing up to the fights and people just walk past them. Yeah. You know, they own to the next. Oh, let's see the young fighter, you know, and it's like, they use you up till you have nothing left. Then they forget about you. Yeah. And also it's very critical for these fighters to think about their health first. Because once it's over with, it's over with. And you can't, you can't get your health back. You can always get money elsewhere. But once you can't, your mind is messed up. Yeah. So we'll, that's such a good lesson for young fighters to see too, to see a guy like yourself. be fully dedicated, so disciplined, get through the whole thing, get out on top and done. Yeah. And so many fighters have said that. And then a couple of years go by, their identities wrapped up in fighting. I think I've got one more in me and then, you know, maybe they're buying a lot of shit. That's the real problem. Yeah. There was always going to be that, you know, I got another one in me. I got another one in me because they missed that, that high of all the fans, chanting a name and everybody, you know, cameras, lights and, you know, they, they miss it, you know, but I was always the top person. I didn't care about it. I really, I can had a light. Just, just pay me and I go under the rock somewhere, you know, take care of my family. You know, I never was a guy that wanted to be all up in the media and wanted to be the center attention. How come? Because that's just me. I already knew what I was doing it for. I never was doing it to be famous. You know, I don't walk around with a whole entourage to get noticed, you know, be under the radar. I do like that. He showed by yourself. But one time you showed up at one of the UFC's and someone said you were Kendrick Lamar and they put it on the fucking screen. And I didn't catch it because I was doing the broadcast. But I was like, are you guys out of your fucking, you don't know who Terrence Crawford is and you're in combat sports? This is crazy. I think they did out in purpose. No. No way. No way. No, no, no, no, no. It was just some moron in the truck. Yeah. Yeah, no, 100% they did not do that on purpose. No one in the UFC would have a disrespect you like that. No one would disrespect you like that. No chance. Yeah, I was sitting next to Terre Biden. I was like, did I really just do that? No, they did not do that on purpose. That was just some dumb ass that thought that you were Kendrick Lamar for some reason. Yeah. It was so stupid. And then I think they corrected it later in the broadcast. I don't know who it was. Right. I didn't want to know. I don't know. I don't know. I'm pissed out. This episode was brought to you by Uber Eats. Big news. Aldi is now on Uber Eats and you get 20% off your first grocery order with the code new Aldi 26. So whether your fridge is empty and you're too tired of shop or you just ran out of essential ingredients in the middle of meal prep, don't worry. Fill your fridge in just a few taps and get 20% off your first Aldi order on Uber Eats. For orders over $60, you can save up to $20 ends February 28, terms apply, see app for details. But that's you roll very low key. Like you don't show up with an entourage. You know, a lot of times you just buy yourself. Yeah. That's unusual for a guy who's achieved as much as you've achieved. Yeah. It would be so like surprised that, you know, they have seen me in the airport. They'd be like, you buy yourself? Yeah. Man, this is crazy. I would always imagine you would secure your cars big entourage. Right. That's just a bill. Yeah. You know, you got to pay you all them people to be around you. That's true too. Yeah. Yeah. When you've showed up with the studio, you showed up by yourself. Yeah. I mean, it's another good example for young fighters to realize like at the end of the day, what are you really doing it for? All that other bullshit, all the attention and stuff. It's very temporary. It's very fleeting. It goes away. Legacy. Legacy and the glory of your accomplishments, that stays forever. And the respect of people in boxing, it really know. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. And you've got that. Now everybody has to shut the fuck up. Yeah, they do. Everybody has to shut the fuck up. Even the people that said that all can help stop, you were the same people saying can help it was going to stop them. You're the same people that saying aerospace was going to stop me, same people that saying magic moth was going to stop me. Yep. And so forth. So it's just got to the point where they just, they can't, they got to accept it, though. It's like, man, I've been hating on this dude for so long. You know, and he's been provin' me wrong time at the time. It's like, let me just give him his flowers for this. Yeah. That's beautiful. And for young fighters, it's such a good thing to watch. It's so good for young fighters to have an inspirational figure, to have someone who really does it, does it perfectly and does it in a way that is very unusual because like you want the best switch hitters since Marvin Hagler, if not the best. you know, and like that, that is such an underrated skill. It was so funny. One of the times you were in here, you were telling me that his coach, your coach told you to stop doing that. Yeah. He was like, you need to focus more on fighting orthodox the right way. Instead of switching the South Pole, I was just like, I switched South Pole again and then it was just like, he was like, all right, well, you're going to do that. We're going to train like that. I was like, all right, let's train like it because I'm going to keep switching because it just came so natural. Yeah. I've been there boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, then I just switched like, unthinking it. Ba, ba, ba, ba. Yes. Yeah. You know, it was just, I went and I went and he was like, we're going to fight like, we're going to train like that. Well, it's such an underrated aspect of boxing if you can do it because you have to recalibrate where everything is coming from every time you switch. Different angles. All that. In MMA, it's become commonplace. Yeah. Beginning of MMA, it was a lot of people would stand one way or the other. And now a large percentage of these young guys coming up are constantly switching because it hides combinations, it hides different techniques. There's so many different things you could do in MMA off of a switch because you're switching and kicking and switching and punching, you're kicking and then now you're in South Pole and you're throwing left hands that are right hands. It's like things are coming, there's so much overload of the mind. We have to calculate all these different things. And if you don't spar on a regular basis with a very crafty guy who switches a lot, it could fuck you up inside the cage. Yeah. Because some people, they have better chances on one side than the other. You know, and then when you switch on them, it's like off. I hate fighting in South Pole. Right. You know, and just do something today, brain, you know, because they might be slower moving one way than the other way. everything looks so weird when all of a sudden the jab's on the right side and the left and then your brain has to like, you got to worry about the hook instead of the straight. Everything's different. Yeah. I mean, I wonder how many young fighters are going to see your example and start training that very early in their career now because I think it's the conventional wisdom was that you have one stance whether it's South Pole or Orthodox stick with that. There's a few outliers like Hagler, but for the most part, stick with that. But I don't think that's the way to go. I think, I mean, I think great fighters have stayed in one stance. But I think the way to go is having the ability to switch up. Yes, always, you know, beneficial if you can have it and not need it, then the need it ain't got it. Yes. Okay. It's cool that I don't need it for this fight, but I got in my bag just in case I have it. Yes. You know, and that's just like me. I got it all. Yeah. Do you think you got to train people when you're done? I've been training a little bit. I'll be helping out at the gym, but my patients ain't there yet. But I get frustrated and I have to remember like my coach, both my say, everybody's not you, but yeah, everybody don't adapt like you, everybody not as athletic like you, you know, so you can't be frustrated if they're not getting something right. Like as fast as you get, and you've been doing this since you were seven, some of these kids that started when they was teenagers, you know, so you got to give them grace, you know, and take your time with them. And some of them, you know, they flat foot in. You just got to train them into their style. Everybody not going to have your style. So when he explained that to me, I was just like, hey, right. You know, let me back up a little bit and just tell them what I see. Yeah. You know, more or so than trying to coach them into being this fighter that I want them to be being a version of you. Yeah. Yeah. That's got to be difficult, right? Because everybody does have a different style. And you know, you're never going to convince some fighters to fight your way. Yeah. But the wisdom that you can bestow on young fighters is like, there's a lot of great fighters like, you know, Freddie Roach that had some boxing matches, but was never like an elite boxer. But still was a great coach. And but to have an elite fighter to be a coach, it's like there's an element of that. First of all, you is that there's an element from the young guy coming up like you want to impress. You got Terrence Crawford in your corner. You want to impress him. Buddy McGurk did a fantastic job and he became a great trainer. There's a bunch of fighters that have done it, but it's like, I always wonder because I feel like there's so much you have to offer to these younger. There's so much small minutiae, intimate details of what you're thinking and what's going on that would completely change the way a young fighter sees certain exchanges. Yeah, for sure. And I try to help them on that aspect when they in the ring or when they on the back or when they hit in the mids, shadow boxing, just low details. You know, I come in to gym and you see the little kids, they see me and they look to the corner and they hit the back. Yeah, they can fire it up. You can see they try to get my attention. I come over there and give them some little wisdom, you know, and they appreciate it too. But it's good that they see me in the gym while the time. You know, my son wrestling next door and they over here boxing and I'm both one side and other side. You're just on just want to wrestling title. Yeah, he just want to state as a freshman. That's incredible. Yeah. That's incredible. That's so amazing. Does what does he want to do? He want to go do you want? He want to. And he told me Saturday after the tournament, we on our way to the Ryan Garcia fight. He said that. I want to go to Olympics. Wow. I said you want to say what kind of mind state is that? I said you're going to go. I said you got to have it in your mind. You're going. You can't say you want to go. You got to say I'm going to the Olympics. That way you know you're already programming, you know, for the future. How did you learn that mentality? Man, being doubted my whole life, you know, being doubted my whole life and my coach, man, it's mine. You're still already saying, Lottie, Dottie, we fight anybody. They ain't fought you yet. You know, and I just carry that on my shoulders. Like anybody you put in front of me, they ain't fought me yet. So you can't tell me they can beat me until they beat me. So just like my son, like, hey, you got to have that confidence that whatever you say you want to do, you can go on the stage. You want to do it, but you got to put the work in there first. So in that sense, doubters give you fuel. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Whatever you say you want to do you gonna go out and do it but you gotta put the work there first So in that sense doubters give you fuel. Yeah A lot of people like that a lot of people like that they live off the haters They feel me up and then especially when it's crazy because like magic moth and canella they was over speckful You know and I respect them, you know, I'm I've been a fan of Imagine moth, you know coming from Uzbekistan and learning the bar and bottom and hearing the bottom and I always been a fan of canella like since I could remember you know, so I didn't have that like killer like mine like heart in my heart like I want to beat him but like my other fights I was like now I want to knock this dude out like Benavides. Yeah, I want to knock him out like so like even in training Like I didn't have that rage like this dude talking shit like he never they never got into my skin It was like all we respect for so it was like I want to what they ask but I didn't want to like inflate Like pain like I want to like knock him out There was one fighter you fought at 140 his name is escape of me, but you document the fifth. Yes. Yeah. I want to knock him. Oh boy Yeah, and I was so mad like when you we watched that fight You know, I miss like when they stopped that I miss like two crazy hooks and I just like man Why could not land like he wouldn't want to sleep? I was I was just I thought I was I want to I went to put him to sleep, but you know It's it's a sport and it is what it is and I'm happy that we all could go home to our family and Talk about it. You know years around a lot. Yeah Well, that is the danger of the sport. That's why it's so different than every other sport Which like you legitimately putting your life on the line. Yeah, and a lot of people don't understand that until something happened But you know as boxers a lot of boxes have died in our ring a lot of boxers have winning a ring one way and Left it a different way. Yes, you know so when a lot of fans They criticize boxers for doing What the sport is for and that's boxing? You know us boxers like you not even here getting your brains beat out So what you consider boring We consider us doing what the sport is meant to do right? box right, you know and I think a lot of fans Don't give a lot of fighters. They just do four boxing, you know like Floyd like score You know when they pure boxers. Yes, you know they want to see people Bleeding battered knocked out You know, but they not thinking about that after my and the other effects of them fighters going to the hospital blood on the brains Pissing blood and things like that like your body is not meant to be being on like that. Right. You know so They just looking at oh, well, I paid this money y'all going going there and kill each other You know and I think that's wrong. Yeah, well, you're always gonna have morons in this world You're always gonna have casuals You're always gonna have people that don't appreciate what they're seeing But like when I see a performance like Shakur versus Tf email that last fight like that was art That was art that sneaky jab where it was like half speed and then popping them with the jab and you can see a little Low-purchase couldn't get out of the way of it. He didn't know what to do. It was beautiful. It was really got hit Yeah, it was beautiful and and things like that, you know, you see two high caliber fighters But you just see one just on a different level because his Box and IQ You know not because Tof email didn't belong in the ring with him is just that Shakur IQ and his boxing ability is up here Yes, you know he didn't have to sit in front of him and trade shots and give Tof email the opportunity to land a good shot and change the the outcome of the fight One shot. I don't care who you is and a good in a rice spot at the right moment Anybody can get knocked out without doubt. Yeah without a doubt. I mean The human brain is not designed to get punched right. It's just not designed that way Especially big punches and when you see a guy like Tof email Tof email can crack He's a big dude and he's a world champion and it was one of the most lopsided performances ever Or you see one world champion challenging another world champion for sure. I mean it was Was art to me. I was like every moment of that fight like up until the 12th round. I was just like there was Multiple times. I was like oh Oh my god. It was just beautiful. It was just I love watching a guy at the pinnacle You know watching a guy where everybody else has got to go wow I didn't think it was gonna go like this because you know Tof emails a super aggressive guy beat Loma Chanko's got a nasty jab and throws big power in his punches. He's tough as hell You know a lot of people like this is gonna be a tough fight In chakur just and he didn't run he stood right in front of him. That's the other thing He wasn't getting hit and he was right in front of him. I mean that was art. That was art that's boxing at the highest level and I'm Fascinated because now they're talking about him and Ryan Garcia. I am fascinated to watch that fight because That's a Shakur's a different animal Brian looked amazing in that fight. I mean he looked amazing. I mean he looks so fast and it was beautiful fight to watch but That's an interesting fight. I like that fight. Chakur and him. I like that fight a lot Because you of course there's different animal. That's he dealing with a whole different kind of skill set Yes, of course Listen I went down to camp Before he fought TF in mode and I seen his focus in the level of You know Intense training. He was doing And I said I don't know at all, but I know Shakur going whoop TF in Mozazz I tweeted that way before the fight, you know, and he went out there and did it Ryan looks spectacular in his fight for what it was. I don't think barreals came to fight, you know Brian was boxing great You know the jab was working over here right was working and He looks out I mean at the end I said you see my jab. I said man. It was working that That jab was beautiful because we don't we not used to seeing Ryan jacks, right? You know or or or or boxing for that matter You know, he was he was boxing beautiful beautiful, you know, and I commend them on that like you He aced it, you know, but when it comes to Shakur Shakur is not a barreals You know Shakur got a jab. Shakur got Hand-moving and Shakur got defense Shakur knows range and Shakur have good legs. So I Look at that fight like it's not gonna be as a Competitive fight like everybody think because if Ryan get careless, he's gonna get counted all day It gets careless. I don't I think you'll fight very different than you fought with barreals I think you got to barreals just couldn't keep up with the speed I mean Ryan speed is extraordinary he relies on it a lot But I mean that's not a knock. That's just like if you had it you would everybody should rely on that Man, of course nice nuts. Of course different A lot of people thought Devin Haney was different though, right a lot of people thought Devin Haney was gonna give him real problems when he dropped Devin early with a left hook everybody's like oh, this is different I wish he didn't have a positive drug test in that fight because that fucking tainted everything They know they know each other far too well. I think Him and Devin fought each other the most how'd I all of them? You know Shakur and Ryan fought as well which Shakur won all the times that they fought but I just think You know him and Devin the the history of it Devin came in there overconfident Ryan You know Ben won't do stuff, you know at a little whatever they are but You know you can't take it away from him landing the punches that he was landing you can't take away from the performance that you know He was he was doing but When you when you want to steroids that add to Definitely add something. What was he? What did he get pop for? Do you remember? I don't even know I just know I just know I know what he got pop for it was a very low level of whatever he got pop for and A lot of people say all the levels it doesn't it wouldn't even matter. It's such a small level The problem is there's a lot of ways you can mask the amount of steroids you have in your system and that's one of the reasons why the UFC banned IVs Because you can flush your body out if you super hydrate with IVs I don't know what you're supposed to put in the IV, but there's some new trends So you can put in IVs that will mask any traces of performance enhancing drugs, which is why you FC You have to hydrate this is drug-free sports policy and you saw this policy You have to hydrate only with drinking liquids can't hydrate with an IV and when you use an IV Which I don't was where they allowed to use IVs I don't know when you use IVs to rehydrate you can mask a lot of shit So if he did use an IV to rehydrate and he only showed a trace amount still That What did he what did he test positive for? Lost which I miss which fighter you're talking about Ryan Garcia. Oh, that's right Ryan Garcia when he fought Devin Haney The fight got overturned right it was in the contest which is very unfortunate because it was a clear victory One of his best victories ever drop Devin had him a trouble a bunch of times dropped him how many times a few Yeah, a few times. He looked fucking great in that fight. Yeah, dude, and I think Unfortunately, you know that positive drug test just Austrian yeah Okay, I think I think you know Both of those fights is great fights for Ryan Ryan's in a great position right now. Oh, yeah, you know He he he got the roly Unification fight, you know, he lost he lost to roly right he got that fight that can you know try to avenge and a unification fight Really look great in that fight. He got Devin. Yeah, and a unification fight He got Shakur in a spectacular fight fight so Ryan's in a great position right if Giovanni take comes back. He's got that rematch I think Giovanni's gonna fight him without having those type of claws the rehydration claws. Yeah, bring him down You got to do this and you gotta do that. So that's crazy. Those those clauses are crazy Can't wait more than Fuck off that that's like with me and Canella. I'm like man listen. I'm challenging you. Yeah, you can wait whatever you want I don't want no excuses, you know Hey, it is what it is when I all you got to do is wait 168 yeah, you know, you know, and even before that Yeah, yeah, it is what it is well. That's the same shit the Floyd made canella do. Yeah. Yeah, that's where they got it from That's pretty got it from The thing is these guys see that big number they see those purses and they go oh I can fight good. Yeah, I'll just get I'll just get a little smaller beforehand It's just not smart. Yeah. Your body's not gonna react when it's not fully hydrated. No not chance It's the worst way to fight, you know, I think guys who cut a tremendous amount of weight They do themselves a terrible disservice. Mm-hmm. It really do. I think it's terrible for your body. What's the most you ever had to cut? The most I ever had to cope probably 25 whoo, that's a lot. We'll wait was that 35 or 47 47 47 really? Wow My last fight was spent and When did you start your cut? Who months months out? Yeah, myself. So the week of the fight what we got? parlay one 52 54 oh, okay, that's very good. That's very reasonable see MMA fighters doing a fuck. They were the last couple of pounds is tough Yeah, the last couple of pounds of tough, and I just knew that it was over I knew it was over, you know, but the hardest cut ever was when I was at 135 That was like Killing me what were you walking around that back then probably like in the fifties. Mm-hmm like 55 and So would you just lower your calories and camp and camp and then and then Change my whole diet and then the week of the fight. What did you wait when you were fighting 35? I don't even I was cutting like probably like seven pounds The week of the fight see that in the MMA world. That's nothing these guys are cut because they wait to the last minute Yeah, I know I know a lot of MMA They just wait hydrate the way to the last minute, but mine I got to start Gradually because I never went to go in there and just like tank right so I got to change my eating habits Up months like two months in advance that way I can get my body used to being lighter and you know performing at that weight class because If not, you know, you doing more hurting yourself than then good because you're taking all the the fluid out of your brain exactly, you know and Yeah, I couldn't be I know disadvantage like that And it makes you more vulnerable to getting knocked out. Yeah, definitely I mean Alex Pereira was the craziest example in the UFC He was fighting at 185 and he would wait 225 when he fought Which is bananas. Yeah, that's 40 fucking pounds. I think that's why I got When when couldn't uh not gonna win I fought gamble When I got hit hurt, you know and a ninth ground But I stopped him in the ninth round, but that was part of that poem called me with a clean shot I like oh shit You know it till this day That's the only fight That I got hurt like that ever You know a lot of people thought me machine driving me machine hurt me I didn't got me machine him. He was some hard shots or clean hard shots, but Nothing was like that gamble like my whole leg locked up and I was just like man I got a grab this dude, you know and and you think the weight cut had a lot Yeah, definitely well weight was that at 135. Yeah, 135. You're a big guy man. That's a lot of weight cut It's uh that's the the most problematic part of MMA for sure I was actually just having a conversation with Hunter Campbell about that they're trying to devise Strategies to discourage these big weight cuts and trying to figure out what to do. It was crazy though because I Always been skinny. Mm-hmm. You know a lot of people. They say oh, he's a weight bully. He's this he's that and it's like bro I came from 132 I Wasn't that you know you see a lot of these fighters They in the amateurs that like Sean Porter. He was at 165. Then he went to 147 You know a lot of people they was heavier and then they dropped weight I was at 132 and I moved up to go at 135 You know as a professional and I was cool with the weight then I just start filling out once I start You know working out more and doing a little strength of condition and I just start my body start filling out So I kept moving up, but the weight that I was that were with Kinello. That's the most comfortable is time of my career To be able to Eat whatever I want not focus on weight Just you feel much better in the ring because that I did I did because that was the only time that I Never like I had to eat to keep my weight on wow and it's like I'm not used to doing like I'm used to you know Marvin we got portions like they feed me big meals. I'm like I can't eat all this You know, but so that was the that was the one Camp that it was like The weight wasn't issue. Do you have a nutritionist and camps and so how do they how do they do your meals? This is it all based on X amount of protein X amount of carbs so way down Oh, yeah, yeah, and then the way you check you make your body facts and you what I weigh in the morning Every morning. What did you weigh like when you got into the ring? I think I was like 72 okay. Just a few pounds. Yeah nothing Yeah, I don't wait. I'll probably just couple of pounds. Yeah The only difference in MMA is obviously the grappling You know, and that's it plays a big advantage if you can get a lot of weight on a guy That's why a lot of guys do it and it's also MMA is very flawed and one of the most flawed aspects of it is the weight classes. There's just not enough weight classes Yeah, there's giant leaps like between 205 the next weight class is heavyweight, so it's 205 to 265 185 the next weight class is 205. That's 20 pounds That's nuts. Yeah 170 to 185 15 fucking pounds is a lot. A lot. That's a lot seven pounds is a lot A lot of people don't know but I was way stronger at 47 than I was at 40 and that's 27 pounds Right that's seven pounds a muscle that I don't have to cut right Yeah, and a lot of people would think oh, it's just seven pounds or 135 to 140 Is this why it pounds? Oh, that matters. Yes, it matters a lot and for fighters There's a lot of guys that are tweeners They're too big for 155 the can make the weight and then they're too small for 170 Yes, because at 170 you got guys that are never gonna make 155 they're coming down from 210 and they're getting to 170 and they're jacked I know somebody that was coming out from 230 Find out 165. Oh my god. Who was that? Go say his day well Anthony Rubble Johnson was the craziest one that I ever saw 230 Anthony Rubble Johnson was one of the 230 and he was fighting 170. I ran into rumble once rest in peace He died a few years back I ran into rumble once when he was Fighting at 170 and he was in between fights and I ran into him at the hotel and he was a fucking heavy weight He was so big. I couldn't I go what do you wait? Yeah, and he said 230. I'm like dude That's crazy. You have to cut 60 pounds But he was killing him it was killing him like literally to the brink of death The day before a fight That's nuts. It doesn't make any sense and they were all doing it because they all felt like they had to be the biggest guy in there Yeah Not smart. No, I think for MMA they really need to recognize this that one of the things that's gonna stop weight clots Give people more weight classes. Mm-hmm. Give people more options. You get these this idea of only having eight champions I think in MMA is very very limiting It's also limiting the potential of a guy like you to go up and up and up and win championship after championship In MMA if you win two belts. That's crazy. That's the only thing anybody's a great class is right far apart Exactly So you only doing people that have ever done it have done it in two weight classes no one's done it three You know Pereira might try to do it at heavyweight you might try to go up to heavyweight now because he's walking around like 240 Which is crazy because he used to fight it 185 It's nuts, but If they had more options and they had more weight classes I think we'd have more competitive fights. We'd have less extreme weight cutting. We'd have healthier fighters Just more champions is better. I mean, there's a lot of guys that could be champions. There's not a weight class for them If there's a 20 pound gap 20 pounds is so much If I put 20 pounds of bone and muscle on this table and show you what it looks like you'd be like whoa That's a crazy amount of mass and the difference between losing that gain that being in the middle of that It's pretty significant So for a lot of fighters. They're just they're framed doesn't line up perfectly with whatever the division is it just they don't have a chance Yeah sucks It drives me nuts. It drives me nuts. Well, I think extreme weight cutting is the worst thing that's ever happened to the sport of MMA and In sport any sport, but it boxing. It's not as extreme. No one really does it. Jeremy Clallon used to do it He got real big in between fights real big He was but that cost him in the Nigel Ben fight I think that probably is what led to his bleeding of the brain That's probably one of one of the contributing factors to why he's you know, he's he's so hurt right now You know and that fucked Roy up too because back at the time that was his biggest rival was Gerald And you know Roy was always like I did do not want that ever happening to me, you know Yeah, like man like I say when you lose that that weight and you don't understand you losing that fluid and Back your brain You know, and it takes days for that to it to fully return to your brain especially when you just drinking the water and not IV rehydrating it's tough. Yeah, it's uh But I mean boxing's been around longer. They've got it figured out and unfortunately or fortunately the UFC Dominate MMA and they only have eight weight classes so everybody else only has eight weight classes California has instituted a bunch of different weight classes, but nobody you have seen has a heavy weight limit Crazy that is Stupid it's stupid right? These people I'm just now learning about that. You didn't know 265 you have to wait 265 so think about Tyson Fury when Tyson Fury fought Deontay was like 280 Yeah, he's got to dehydrate himself. He's got to lose 20 fucking pounds just to make the weight class That's retarded. It doesn't make any sense at all at all. It's the heavy weight It's the heaviest weight we can go remember value of when he was fighting a vendor Holyfield. Oh my god He had to be over 300 pounds. He was giant. He was a literal giant actual giant Yeah So I think that's something you need to talk today now about nobody listens to me bro They don't they don't listen to me. They think I'm crazy. Well, we got a petition Oh, I have a bunch of wacky rules that I want the Institute so I understand whether they don't want to listen to me I would throw the whole sport up in there. I think it These combat exports It got to come from the fighters You know just like box. I think if the If the fighters come together They can make anything happen The fighters don't understand The level of power that they carry because they think oh since they cutting the check They got the power right, you know, but they can't cut the check without us You know, but it's the fighters that need the money that makes It hard right because the fighters that already got the money They can make a stand for something But the fighters that doesn't they like well you can do that. I got to provide for my family you can take chance of Going at the organization For a year or higher or longer is gonna last but who gonna pay my bills? Right who gonna put food on my family table Why we doing this? Why we making it stands so it's a little tougher for them to make that stand then a person That's already established. Yes, you know, and I think that's where You know the the sea saw effect happens With with boxing and UFC because UFC is more extreme because it's really just the USA. Yeah, it's really I mean even Francis and gano Right Francis and gano one of the most devastating fighters to ever compete in MMA you have see heavyweight champion They couldn't get a deal signed and he winds up leaving and it goes to the PFL But nobody's watching. Mm-hmm. Nobody watches nobody cares He knocked out some dude in the PFL. Nobody cared. Is he making more money? Yes He care. He cares. That's why he did it. Yeah That's a great deal with the PFL and then he got to box box Tyson Fury Fox Anthony Josh and well doing well. Well much much more money for sure which is good but The fortunate and unfortunate fortunate that the UFC is the best promotional organization that's ever existed They really know how to do it. They do it right. They make stars out of these fighters. They give them all these opportunities They they get the most asses in the seats every paper view sells well When there's a UFC paper view people line up to see it. There's the bunch of stars in the UFC But unfortunately when they're in other organizations even if they're getting paid more nobody knows who they are And so they if they want to come to the UFC they have to be they have to take a pay cut which is crazy so you're leaving an organ like if you're going from a Small promotions and boxing and then all of a sudden you're in a world title fight and you're in or you're in you know Golden Boy promotions you would imagine now I'm getting paid more money more people are watching me But it's not the case like these other organizations like the PFL have to pay these guys more money because otherwise They can't get them at all because everybody wants to fight in the UFC It's not a monopoly because there is other options. There's one FC this PFL there's some organizations in Russia and other parts of the world But the reality is it's like the NFL or like you know Q tips It's like it's got a name it's the NBA nobody wants to watch some new basketball organization Nobody wants to watch the I mean the XFL does people watch it. I don't know But it's not the Super Bowl, you know, it's like there's one big organization That's the NFL there's one big MMA organization. That's the UFC and for these guys that want the glory They want to be known as the best in the world. There's one place to be so it's very difficult for those guys to Hold out for more money. It goes back to identity and what you're doing it for right You know, that's what you got to ask yourself is you're doing it for Fame is you're doing it for to provide Stability for your family Is it I need money Like what do you like in the NFL? Yeah, yeah, definitely legacy For the grades of the greats legacy is the primary focus almost always greatness is always the primary focus Because otherwise you never achieve greatness if you just think about money I don't think those guys ever get to the level that you're at or the level that like the elite of the elite get I think those guys have to have their eye on being the number one dog period That's why I asked what did you do it for because In Ghana, you know, he he's already famous right he probably like okay Well, yes, if y'all gonna pay me X amount over here and they only go and pay me this Then it makes business since they go over here. Yes, you know and that's just like Connor being he just saw Si was Zufa and a lot of people was saying he's disloyal and Eddie hers now was loyal to him and this and I You're getting 15 million for us. I'm like man. What is people talking about? I said It's just business. It ain't personal with with them. I bet I said Connor being dead Was best for him and his family. I said just like the promotional company's gonna do was best for them and they business If a fighter that they sign Lose probably too straight. They get to cut them. No questions asked Why because now they waste them money? They fit that they sign, lose probably two straight, they get to cut them, no questions asked. Why? Because now they waste them money, they feel, they don't care about that person family, they don't care about that person, you know, relationship with them. They not going in there with a heart, like, oh man, like you a good buddy, they like, oh, sorry, it's just business, cut you. So when a fighter does the same thing that a promotional company do, or a manager or anybody else, it's all you disloyal, you did, you did. I'm like, that makes sense. That's, it doesn't make any sense in boxing. Because in boxing, there's so many promoters. There's so many different peoples as Eddie Hearns, Bob Aaron, this is so many different promoters. Don King, this is so many different promoters. That's the beauty of boxing, is that there's a lot of competition and there's a lot of people that are there to try to get you over onto their side. And there's cross promotion. There's no cross promotion in MMA, doesn't exist. They tried it a little bit. In the early days, they sent some UFC fighters over Japan to fight for pride. And they brought some pride fighters over into the UFC, but they don't do that anymore. That was early days. Because the sport wasn't big back then. They were just trying to get big names. And they were trying to work a promotional deal, but Japanese, man, they're clever. Like when they sold them pride, they thought they were getting all the fighters, turning all of contracts for bullshit, that none of them were valid. They basically bought pride for, I think they spent $65 million and they got a library. They just got a video library. You see that? You got the kid get shit. They didn't get fade or, fade or was the big dog? At one point in time, he was kicking air by a leg. I remember that. Fuckin' everybody up. Slamming him, arm barring him. Fuckin' people upstanding. He was complete. And he was at the same time where came Velasquez was in his prime. And that was the fight that they tried to put together. But the Russians, because the UFC didn't have a contract with fade or anymore because the contracts have pride brought bullshit. They had a deal with these Russian gangsters. And these Russian gangsters were like, they wanted a piece of the promotion, they wanted a lot. And the UFC wasn't willing. They got it very contentious. So the UFC had an up their security. It got sketchy. It got sketchy. Now they're bad dudes. Those are bad dudes, right? You know? But just as a fan, we were robbed. We were robbed of like one of the greatest match-ups in the history of the sport. And there's a few of those moments in combat sports where you've got these just top dogs where you're like, God, we gotta see that happen for a while was Floyd and Manny, right? For a while. And after one Manuel Marquez knocked out Manny, it took a little of the shine off of that. And then eventually they fought, but Manny had a hurt shoulder. And now they're gonna do it again. They're both 50. It's crazy. You're gonna watch it. I wanna watch it. Fuck you, I wanna watch it. I wanna watch him fight in Mike. I think that's crazy. He's gonna have an exhibition with Tyson, which is crazy. Yeah, that's crazy. Mike is so much bigger than him. Yeah, he's so much bigger than him. He's not gonna land a fist on Mayweather. Right. It's not after his last performance. Yeah. Tyson just needed to do it. What do you think was going on with that? The last one. It looked a little bit like sparring. Yeah, I don't know. I think it was scripted. Yeah, I ain't never seen Tyson biting his gloves. And like, it was taking all of that. He could not hit him. He could hit him. It was like, it's heartbreaking to see a icon go out like that. Yeah. You know? But it's crazy also to see him fight at 57 years old. Yeah, he's a steal. Like, he shouldn't have been in there at all. I think this is the money. He's the money. He's the money. Yeah. It's the other ways for... But what did he get? He got at least 20, right? Yeah, but still. I think... I think he's got that money. Yeah, but with all these connections and things like that, I think people could have put them in the right position to make some money. If he's got people with him that are looking out for his best interest, but you know how it is. When there's a guy like that, that's a big name. Usually everybody around him pretends they're looking out for their best interest, but there's always lawsuits later on. And you find out someone was stealing money or not paying and what he deserved. There's always a bunch of bullshit involved. Yeah. You know, unfortunately, especially if you're not business-minded, which I don't know if my kids, but most fighters aren't. Most fighters concentrate on fighting. Mm-hmm. To be business-minded, that's a giant distraction. You've got to pay attention to all this other shit. On top of that, it's generally not how they think. Right. You know? I mean, look at Floyd. Floyd spends money like it's a tap. Like he's got a tap. Just looks like unlimited amount of money. What's money's just flowing. And even as much money as he's made in his career, which he's probably made as much if not more money than any box or ever. Like there's all these lawsuits. Like he hasn't been paying things and he owes money on this and there's money on that. And it's like, and then he's got to come out of retirement. Yeah. That's tough. Yeah. That's tough. I think it's just a lifestyle that Floyd lived. Yes. I think he can't fathom to just live a modest lifestyle. It's like he got to be lavish. Right. He's got to have those videos which shows you all the watches. Yeah. We're open to the case up. You know? All the money you got to show that you got a million dollars in his backpack. Yeah. You know? He got the latest watch and the latest car and look what I just bought. And when you get into latest watches and latest cars, you get into that shit. Like, boy, that money goes quick. Yeah. But God is like three million. There's watches that are three five million. That's crazy. So you buy a watch in a car. You're down ten. That's nuts. That's nuts. Crazy. I remember him barking. He was talking about that. I remember him barking when he was in his prime. He was hanging out with all these professional athletes. And everybody was getting diamond-crusted chains and this and that. And he was keeping up with these people. Like, you got to keep up with the Joneses. And he just found himself draining all of his money. He was talking about it. Like, that was the biggest detriment to him being able to save any money. Mm-hmm. Are they trying to keep up? Yeah. Which I thought was funny. What I was listening to this conversation with Chad O'Chosenko. He was talking about it. He was like, he's like, he's like, he's wearing fake jewelry. But he was known. What's that? Who were known? He's saying, oh, no. Oh, it's real. Oh, it's real. It's like when you look at her, like, fly an economy. He was sleeping at the stadium. Like, he's like, you didn't have to pay for it. It's so smart. Yeah. So clever. You know? But that's a guy like preparing. Like, my own question. You know what I know? You know what I know? Oh, man. It's NFL story. He got money. Yeah. Yeah. And I was like, we're not going to question if his dime is real or not. Well, you really can't tell. Right. I mean, you can't tell until you get a magnifying glass on. Or that's why they say we got these dime testers. Yeah. And when you test your dime is now, like, come on up. Yeah. Is this all all illusion anyway? Do you fuck around with any of that stuff? I got jury, but I'm not paying all that money for no jury. Yeah. No, well, you can get some sponsorships. Yes. But me keep spending hundreds and millions of dollars on jury. Nah, I mean, it's just not smart. Yeah. And you don't get out of it what it costs. Like, if you think about how much blood sweat, what? Sometimes you do. What do you get? Now, if you buy it from the factory, now if you get you a Rolex, from the Rolex store, you know, you might can get some money back. But you don't get that much money back. Yeah. That's true. Now, now, Buzz Nails know. But if you get it from the actual store, the protect store, the Rolex store, that's true. Them type of stores. Keep the box on the papers. Yeah. It's worth more money. Yeah. It's worth more money. Yeah. It's a investment. But all the mother owns the chains and stuff like that. No. You'll never see a billionaire with no chain. No. You see what a good watch though. Yeah. You would have good one. Yeah. That's true. It's just the trappings of fame. And also showing everybody that you have that money, the trappings of wealth. You know, competing with us or getting your own private jet, all that stuff. It's like, oh, I learned from them. I learned from them because the people with the real wealth, you know, know they got the wealth. Right. You know, right. They walk around, playing, Jane clothes, know nothing. Yep. You know, but the people that have a little bit of money, they want you to know that they got a little bit of money, but they don't have the wealth. Right. So I'd rather be wealthy than rich any day. Are we? Yes. And sneak around. Yeah. Yeah. And keep it. Yeah. Because a lot of what wealth is, it's never happened to worry about money. That's the big thing. Just have the money invested, have the money making money for you. Don't spend it all on stupid shit. Live a modest life. Live a normal life. You're much better off. Much especially professional athlete because you have such a small way of time. I mean, a lot of men don't even make their real money until they're deep in their 40s and 50s. Or the end of the 30s? Yeah. Yeah. But Jeff Floyd, when he fought Delahoya, then he fought a guy, then he started making some real money. Yes. Yeah. But I mean, that's for a pro athlete. But for most of these like really wealthy business people, that most of them, unless they're tech investors, they're making their money later in life. And so you have all this opportunity to keep growing your wealth. But when you're in athlete, you got a small window of your prime. Your prime is essentially like maybe 20 years. Maybe 20 years you can make money from 20 to 40. But for a pro athlete, unless you're Tom Brady, 40s at the end, or unless you're Bernard, Bernard was fighting at a world-class level. At 49, 50 years old, which is crazy. Crazy. Crazy. That's because he take care of his body. 100% I don't put in that. Super decent. Never gets out of shape. Never puts any bullshit in his body. And also that mindset of what he learned when he was incarcerated. Like discipline is everything. Discipline. Discipline. Never knowing. Never going back to that. Don't buy anything stupid. Don't be dumb with your money. Don't be dumb with your body. Take care of yourself. Never get out of shape. Always keep your conditioning up. So when you go into camp, you're not struggling to get back in shape again. You're already in shape. Now you're just working on your skills and honing everything to raise your sharp edge. I think that goes to, like I said before, the people that you have around you. You know, that want to see you be successful and the people that you can learn from and the people that you can get advice from. You know, when they see you about to do something that you shouldn't do, they're like, hey man, we ain't doing that. Come on, let's go. Or they'll call you, be like, let's go around. I'm not doing that. Let's go jog. Or let's go to the gym. Or let's go eat some healthy food. People that want to see you be successful. Not the ones that say, hey, let's go party. Let's go trying. Let's go do this. Let's do cocaine. You know, I think those, the people that you need to get from around you. 100% the ones that see you doing things that you shouldn't be doing. But that's cool with them, seeing you doing that. Yeah. That's all that's for me. That's all that's for me. That's all that's for me. That's the one that's on the top. Yeah. For sure. This guy's a role with an entourage. He always got one dude who's fucking up with an entourage. And it's conflicts in the entourage between dudes and like your managing old team and knuckleheads. It's like, oh, God. Yeah. Just so they can roll deep and you show up at a place. You have 30 dudes hop out of SUVs. Yeah. Holys here. He's here. I don't need none of that. That's beautiful. I don't need none of that. That's a valuable lesson for young fighters to see your example. I'm glad you lived the way you live. I really am. I really am. Because I think it's so important for guys to see. So let me ask you this. When you were trained for Canelo, what did you do different? So no one that you're going to be fighting in 168 instead of 54 or 47. What did you do different in terms of did you do anything different about strength and conditioning? How long did you prepare? Like, I know you were thinking about that fight for a long time. But like, when you were physically preparing for it knowing that you were going to be fighting him in 68, what did you do different? To be honest, I ain't do nothing different. Really. It's crazy. Like all my fights. There's nothing different. You know, we're trained for me, me getting sharper. What I need to work on, what I'm lacking in. But the only thing that I changed for the fight with Canelo is, Chit, my strength of condition coach, he got me in February. He called me up. He like, hey, we don't get this fight. He just kept saying, we gonna get it. So you need to be working out now. So this way before I ever got the Canelo fight. So I'm like, all right. So you come over my house. We work out. We work out. We work out. What kind of stuff we're doing? The strength work. The strength work. The strength of your life. Like we're doing. Yeah, strength condition. Like that lives working on good legs and things like that. And just get my body just, you know, back to where I need to be. And he just like, man, you got to strengthen up your shoulders and things like that. And because quite as kept, I had just had shoulder surgery. You did? Yeah. So I just, you know, there's a lot of things that I go through and train them. I don't speak about because I don't never want it to be as cues. You know, that's just one of the injuries that I was coming off of. But yeah, he was just like, man, we got to work. We got to work. So it was the shoulder injury. Labor. Labor. Yeah. So did you get it sewed back up? Yeah. Did you get stem cells shot in there at all? No, no, no. I just had surgery on. Oh man, I wish I had the front in the back. What was I talking about that? I could have got you in. Yeah. I didn't get it on my left shoulder. So I tore both of them. Well, I tore my left in the Gambo-ish fight. Really? Yeah. And you never got to fix? Never. Is it okay now or is it fine still, still tore? Really? But the doctors say if it's not preventing you from working out, then they wouldn't advise me to get some surgery. So you feel it? Does it bother you? Sometimes, but not really. It bothered me sometimes, but not crazy. How long you come from? How long you come from? I leave after this. I wish I were. But the right one? That was crazy. It was hurting when I was sleeping. After the magic of my fight. Oh really? Yeah. After the magic of my fight, it was like, driving, then it was just like, man, we better get it done. But he was just on me. We got to do physical therapy. We got to do this. We got to do this. And it was just like, all right, let's go. So he was just on me. He was just speaking it into existence. He was like, man, you're going to get this fight. I can feel it. I can feel it. So I started training for Canelo in February. I wasn't more so doing boxing workout, but I was just getting my body prepared to go to camp. And when I start back, go. So strength work is like the basics. Strength training. But what kind of conditioning are you doing? Oh, nothing different. Like running swimming, things like that. And you didn't try to put on any weight. Just try to be a good one. No, I just tighten it up. No, I just tighten it up. Just tighten it up. You know, with the strength work, just tighten it up. That was it. Damn, I wish I knew that you had a problem with your shoulder. I could get you back in town. There's a place called Waste to Well that I work with here. It does stem cells that help so many fighters out. A lot of UFC guys come here. A lot of pro athletes come here. NFL guys come here just to get stem cells. It's like state of the art facility. It's really good. And it could help you. Just I bet it could heal that labor. Probably. Yeah. Especially now because you're not going to beat it up as much anymore. Yeah. Obviously I'm sure you're still working out. You look great. No, I'm actually not. No working out at all. Nothing. Nothing. I've been chilling. You learned it. Hey, I've been putting on my time with my kids and just, you know, relaxing and not having to. Where about running and waking up in the morning. Did they offer you a rematch? No. They didn't. Because there was talk that they offered you a rematch, but you wanted a hundred million. No, that's a lot. All the internet bullshit. That was a lot. There wasn't even no, no rematch in the contract. There was no conversation about a rematch. There still haven't been a conversation about a rematch. I've seen Konello said that he want to rematch, but nobody has reached out to me and said, Hey, Terrence, what you think about a rematch or anything like that. So let's put that out there. Is there a number that would bring you back? I don't know. Like me personally, I can't say it is, you know, but you're not compelled. Yeah. You did it. Did it perfect. It's like I'm not the motivation. I'm always motivated by competing. And you know, things like that. But like when it comes to boxing, it's like I did it all. Like it's like I checked everything off the checkbox. So it's like it wasn't close. I beat them decisively. So what am I doing it for? I think I might have given one or maybe two rounds. More like one. Yeah. It was mostly there was I think it was like maybe the fifth. He had a really good. Yeah, the fifth round. Yeah, but other than that, man, especially the ninth round. Woo. Woo. And you hand button. He had button, you know, purpose. Did he? Yes. Really. I was like me. He was like, sorry champion. I like, it just got a little angry. A little frustrated. Yeah, a little frustrated. But it's a fight. Like anytime I'm in the fight, I don't, I don't complain about nothing. Somebody hit me in the back of the head or they hit me below the waist or anything like that. I never complain because I'm so aggressive. I'm like, it's a fight. You know what I mean? Like they trying to do whatever they can to win. It's up to this referee to step in because if you don't, then I'm going to take matters in my own hands. And I'm going to do the same thing. So I don't complain. I'm just like, damn, I was a little frustrated. And I was like, man, all right, I breathe. Let's get back to work. Yeah, don't lose your composure. Yeah, that's the problem with getting angry, right? Yeah. But yeah, that ninth round. That's when you really start separating. Yeah. You really started pouring it on. I was wondering if you're going to stop them. When the ninth round was going on, when you were cracking them with some big shots, I'm like, whoa. So I told my coach, when we was in there, he was like, you know what I do that? They know me. And I'm like, man, I can go for it. And they just know me. They know my demeanor. And it was like, you don't got to give them a chance. Just keep doing what you're doing. You boxing this shit out of them. You winning hands down. Don't give them a chance. You don't got to boxing them. You don't got to do that. You winning. So it's just like me wanting to listen to my coaches all the time because I have that much faith in them. If they tell me to go out there and use my jab, the whole fight, that's what I'm going to do because that's the belief I have in them. You know? And I just like, all right, the last round, I was like, all right, let me win this round and separate myself. You know? And I felt like I heard them bad in that round. Yes. You know what? This boxing. Yeah. Well, he's got a crazy chin. Yeah. I mean, it's something unusual. No. You don't think so? No, they say redheads is hard to knock out. It's proven. Yeah. Yeah. I googled it. What is they called? Ginger's. Ginger's. Yeah. I promise you, will you look at a higher pain? Yes. Yes. Yes. When you look it up, I looked it up because my cousin, she's a nurse. And she said, yeah. And I'm ginger's, they hard to put the sleep even when you giving them the aesthetics to go to sleep. Well, yeah. Interesting. And the stage. Redheads often possess unique pain profile, generally exhibiting a higher threshold for specific types of pain like heat or pressure, but we're acquiring 19 to 20% more general anesthesia. Wow. Or higher, 19 to 20% is a lot. Or higher doses of certain anesthetics to reach the same level of comfort. Crazy. Largely due to the mutated MC1R gene, which affects nerve sensitivity, can lead to increased sensitivity to pain and paradoxical increased sensitivity to some opioids. Interesting. Interesting. increased sensitivity to opioids is interesting. When she told me that, I googled it and I was like, damn. This white cadello, you know, it can take so many good shots. That does make sense. Well, you know, Neanderthal supposedly had red hair. So maybe like redheads have more Neanderthal genes. Probably, you know, the Neanderthals were brutally strong. I thought she was playing that first. That's crazy. She was like, man, well, we'd be trying to put them to sleep. It'd be harder to put them to sleep than normal people with a star googled it. And I like, fucking right. 19 to 20% is nuts. That's a lot. That's like the difference between killing someone and them just going to sleep. Like you give them an extra 20%. They might not wake up. That's crazy. 19 to 20% is wild. Well, I was talking to Jim Lampley and I didn't know this, but canelo has always been riding horses since he was young. That's go for his balance. Yeah. And legs. Yeah. It's his base. That's a big part of it. Also, he's got that thick fucking neck. Mm-hmm. Like he'd been doing the iron neck. It's just, as Nein and close, have a different mutation that actually gives them more sensitivity to Peyton. Interesting. Interesting. More sensitivity. Yeah. Lower threshold. Interesting. That's like an agtoposite. Wow. Even though the redheaded. Yeah. So he went in. He went in. Yeah. He got another one. Well, those back skin redheads. That's right. Yeah, it's wild. That's crazy. Yeah, I never thought the horse thing. Like, Lately was explaining. It was like, yeah, the balance and the legs. Because you're constantly squeezing down on that horse. And you're constantly adjusting and you're core and everything. Oh, I never even thought of that. I would just think, why are you riding horses when you're world champion? Don't do that. People fall off horses. They break their fucking neck. Don't do that. Yeah, I see a guy break his horn. They wanted me to take a picture on the horse. And my bro, Manny was like, I don't know about these fucking horses. These horses be crazy. I said, man, I rode horses before. He was like, yeah, but it's a lot of people around. And he actually the guy about the horses and the other guy was like, yeah, he couldn't get on this horse. So I get on the horse. I take the horse. I take the picture. I get off. No longer than like 10 minutes. This guy on his own horse, his horse just buck. Go crazy. Come on. Pull me broke his arm. This in the parade. And the horse is just running wild. I'm like, he says, see, see, just while I was telling you, he was going crazy. He was like, see, I told you to do this. But it wasn't the same horse. It was a different horse. Yeah. But he was just like, see, that's why I was telling you, these horses be fucking crazy. Yeah, you just never know with animals. My oldest daughter got into horses for a while. One of her friends, you do those things where, you know, he just jumps over a thing and done like, you know, they have like a whole obstacle course. And she was getting into that. And she fell once and she was okay. And then she fell a second time. She heard her wrist pretty bad. I'm just like, honey, you've got to stop. You can't be doing this. This is too dangerous. Cause like those kind of injuries you get falling off a horse, especially if you get stomped, those are life changing. Especially if you get tied up, tied up. Oh, I didn't see videos of people getting bucking. They just ragdaw. Oh, you get stomped in the head. Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, yeah, horses. Fuck that. Fuck that. I know quite a few people that have fallen off horses and been okay, but like, why, why do it? Yeah, no. Yeah, Texas Ranger. Everybody wants me cowboy. They watch Yellowstone two times. Everybody want to be a cowboy. That's funny. We were talking to Andre Ward on the phone today when you had Andre on FaceTime and you were talking about burbles. Yeah. But I've been going down this burbo rabbit hole. Those, those mastiffs. I'm fascinated by them. And South African mastiffs, they used to keep lions on hyenas away from the farms. You know, and we were talking about coyotes like you got land now. You know, you're just, you're relaxing now. So I like it. Separated from everything. Got some space. Yeah, but it's crazy. Because when I was building a house, you know, a lot of people was like, oh, he's, he's building a house on the aerospace money and this and I. And it's like, dude, do you know how long the process is of building a house? Like this is not no week or two, two months deal. You know, I mean, like, I bought yours. Yeah. Like just from design to the beginning of construction. Yeah. So show you got to go pick out every fucking thing in the house. You know, I bought that land in 2016. Oh, really? Wow. And I just was sitting on it. It was a house that they're already, you know, I had it ran out to one of my buddies, my best friend at that, you know, and when the time came, I had more kids. So, you know, it was better that I waited than the bill then. So I just was like, man, it's time, you know, it's more peaceful out there to kids. They ride the four wheelers out there where we can shoot out there. Nice. We can do whatever we want out there. And it's just, you know, peaceful to wake up to the sunrise, you know, the nature called it. Yeah. And not like it. That's the dream. It's definitely the dream. Yeah. For a lot of people. That's nice. That's nice to see someone just setting their life up right. Yeah. You know, I'm just amazed that you don't get the itch at all. I'm more competitive in other sports, you know. Like what? Like, askable football. I'm anything. I ain't gonna lie anything I do is like, I gotta compete. I gotta compete. Darts pool. Like, whatever. You remember I came in there like, you want to play pool? You like, let's do it. I like, you know, I'll just play. You can't kick my ass out of camera. I'm just like, okay, we're on. I heard that she was good. I fucked Lex Lewis up. Yeah. I'm just talking a lot of shit. I already lose never got a shot. Yeah. I read tracks on him. Yeah, I think it was like, we're done. I came in here. Paul Faking you. I knew it already. No one. Yeah. I just like that. I just like that. Well, everyone who is an elite athlete isn't saying like competitive. Yeah. You know, that's the problem though. Unfortunately, some of them get involved in gambling. You know, like that's the Michael Ford. That's what we were just talking about. Yeah. Yeah. He was like, you can't buy a set. I ain't never damn good for you. A lot of people with all these acts. I don't get more in your face. No. I don't gamble at all. Good for you. You know, it was like, oh, well, we see you. When you gabbled on the streamer, you know, Aiden Ross, I said that was only because he called me out with my brother. What did you do? What was that? He banged me 10,000 at TFU. What was going on? Whoops, you're core. Oh, that's crazy. You know what I mean? So it was just like, that's a silly bet. He called me out on live, you know, streams. So I'm never going to back down from that. Of course. I'm riding with a Chicago. Yeah. I'm riding with a Chicago. Yeah. It was far along. That's also like if I was making odds, I'm putting like a six to one. Yeah. Like that's a crazy flat out bet. Yeah. You're not even getting any odds on the money. And you're putting it on TFU. No disrespect to TFU. No, but I think that Shakur is, he has the potential to be in all time. Great. Yeah. He will be. I believe so. He will be. All he got to do is keep doing what he doing. Stay focused. Yeah. That's it. Is this what fighters like Shakur, Devin? Keep doing what he doing stay focused. Yeah, that's it. It's just with with fighters like Shakur Devin it's all about Stand focus. Mm-hmm. You know when these young fighters get to the Pit pinnacle of boxing and they got everything that they disposal Sometimes they get caught up in the the lime light and the things that really don't matter Yeah, and longest they stay focused and Keep that eye on the prize of where they want to go and where they want their legacy to land They're gonna be just fine because it's easy for them to get caught up and want to be a fan pleasing fighter You know listening to the masses all they need to fight like this or I don't want to see them fight because All they do is run or all they do is fight like this and they pity pat they ain't got no power This and I know this boxing they win all they got to do is keep winning. That's it. We'll look at Floyd later in his life Like Floyd later in his life fought so safe But yet made so much money because he talks so much shit for sure people were spending money hoping he was gonna lose And he's not the first one to do that Tyson Yeah, Roy Jones Jr. Yeah, Muhammad Ali. Yep, and I always I said this When I was with talk ring I said Why is it only the black fighters that got a talk shit to to sell? Like MMA it's white fighters to be a conemore graduate. No, no, no conemore Gregory You know, I say he wanted us You know because they was treated like black people over there where he from You know a lot of people don't know that oh, yeah a lot of Irish, you know, they was they was treated just like us So you know, I consider him one of us, you know, but at the same time You know in boxing it's always the black fighters got a be the ones that step out and played a circus role and you know be the one that Talk shit and have everybody hate them, but The ones that don't like Andre wore terence Crawford Tambra Ali, you know, they born or they can't sell that things like that Is you judging me for what I say or what I do in the ring? Well, this is the difference with casuals versus people that really appreciate excellent box. I knock people out That's what people will to see they want to see action. I'm gonna give them action But I think for casuals they want to see a lot of shit talking to for some reason They want to get emotionally wrapped up in your conflict with this other person, but they pick and choose they do sometimes Yeah, they do sometimes But I mean like look Tyson Fury talks a lot shit are you and obviously one of the greatest of all time? You know talk a lot of shit sold a lot of tickets, you know Singing and shit. Yeah That guy's great in his draws and his draws that it's cut legendary But he from a different country Sure, yeah, so yeah, you got to understand like He bringing those people over here and they're gonna support him win lose a draw. Yep. You know when we Went over to the UK and we watched a American Fight kill broot It was a electric fire and those guys had losses been both stopped and on all that You know, but those people came out to support like a motherfucker. Oh, yeah And I left and I left that arena like I damn and I wish I was You know from the UK, you know like because the way they support boxing. Oh, yeah, they don't look at us issue loss You know, we're not gonna support you. They look at no. These is warriors and We're not gonna stop supporting them because they lost. That's true. That is true about the UK America they like man. You got your eyes will onto the next you're bum you washed You ain't as good as you said you was or we thought you was and it's just like they they chew you up in spit you out It's like I damn you know how hard it is to stay at the top of A sport that everybody's gunning from you. Mm-hmm. You know that's that shit hard like Yeah, that's the culture of America though, right? It's a bit of a problem. Yeah, I it disgusts me with fighting It's not like that you have see though. It is There's so much there's plenty of plenty of people. It's what the UFC It's not as important to me about the say it's funny like a couple of people in the UFC that was undefeated very few You know you got kabib you got a John John he had that one little loss that's a bullshit. Yeah, but everybody knows my boy so who though he just finally lost with not to long he lost a bunch of times He lost to mighty mouse early on and he came back and beat mighty mouse to win It's real title Yeah, but like Everybody else be having like five losses and stuff like that and they be at the top of the top You know and everybody still support them, but don't nobody go He got five losses. He tries. He does that. No, I just that's true. Maybe it was off night You know there's something to that because I think it's more difficult to not lose in MMA There's just too many different styles. There's too many different approaches too many variables And it's also so difficult to not be hurt in training before you fight when you're grappling kicking legs Elbows all that shit you do some training You know your manipulating joints. There's so many different things that can get fucked up We think about all the things that get fucked up just with your hands just boxing shoulders back knees ribs ribs Yeah, and they yep neck shorter. Yeah, yeah, and then Add getting dumped on your head add you know get in need in the face and get your legs kicked Knees buckled toes broke toes broke. Yeah, I mean per error fought a world title fight with a broken toe Just came in fought with it and afterwards toes off fucked up Decide and you like adjust it pops it anyways. Yeah, it's tough for them for combat sports You know and people don't know like I said, I don't know what we go through we are never walking a world Class fight, you know the same or 100% healthy like everybody just be like oh, man I'm 100% no to fuck you know It's not possible There's always gonna be something that's bothering. Yeah, if you're going through a 10-week camp How is how how is it even possible? Yeah? To not something if they bullshit but it's gonna show in the fight It shows it a fight, but don't they everybody always say nobody says I'm pretty fucked up going in this fight But I'm hoping it works out. Yeah, nobody says that nobody said no. I mean, it's just It's the game when they talked about my shoulder You know before the canal of fight. I was just like I don't know what she tell me hit me in both of my shoulders Like You know matter like my shoulder is healed like yeah, how long did it take before it felt 100% again? after the fight Really? Because I got it on Halloween Oh, you got an October and then how many months did you have to recover? I fought September? Whoa, okay, so that was not even a year and when did you really start training hard again after the surgery? Probably April, okay, that's a good amount of time Yeah, if people don't realize like shoulders is such a Joint as long as different movement and it still wasn't like like a hundred percent after I fought because you didn't have your strength all the way back Even after you fought. Yeah, like it wasn't a hundred percent. So it wasn't a hundred percent in the fight That's crazy. I always tell people like if you watch my jab and my hook in the canal of fight then watch my jab and my hook My prior fights, you know and magic marks and spins you see the difference really, you know But the blind eye wouldn't even notice it right, you know, they were just like, huh? effective yeah, but then but then when they know they're like it wasn't that snappy It wasn't as hard, you know, you kind of was just like landing out there So let's just low key low things, but now it's a hundred percent. It's good now. Wow And the left one doesn't bother you really The left one it bothered me when I when it's overused Mm-hmm, you know, but like Not in the fight. No, I don't think none of that shit bother you. Do you have any plans to come back and tell? No, no, we get you back and never I gave it some time You know the the only time I ever came here was this podcast Never ever been here in my life really. It's a great city. Yeah Julia always talked about it. She so many good restaurants. Yeah, so many good places She took me to the college and all that and You know reminiscing because she went to college here and she just loved here So she'd like this is the pores that we went to this is this this this this I like oh Julia you're happy spot a place up. It seems like I just love you. Well, why not move here? It's a great town. I love it death, but if you want to come back I would love to get you set up get your shoulder taken care of Yeah, it'll change your life Stem cells wild man. It's crazy. What it could do. Yeah, just regenerate's tissue everything heals But like within like weeks you start feeling better. You're like god. Yeah. Everything just feels looser I've had so many friends that were like on the verge of getting surgery like I don't know Dr. Says I need surgery gets demself Everything's good. I had a full length rotator cuff tear I went to the doctor six months after those stem cells He's like this is the craziest thing I've ever seen. He's like that tear doesn't even exist anymore. It's gone Completely healed. It's crazy. Yeah, like stem cells are nuts man, and they're getting better at it all the time like it's just Pharmaceutical drug companies fucking hate it surgeons hate it like doctors hate it because it's gonna it's gonna cost the money A bunch of people yeah, so a bunch of people that are gonna get treated with stem cells that don't need surgery right and afterwards They're like oh, I'm good Because the doctor is like when all you have is a hammer everything looks like a nail and these doctors the way they make their money is cutting you and they all want to cut you and It's amazing how many different especially soft tissue injuries how many different injuries you can heal with stem cells It's pretty remarkable. My doctor is trying to avoid cutting me That's good. He's not a weighty. Yeah, all the way to that's a good doctor. You know That's a good doctor. So it was like we got to That's after the magic of my fight, right? Yeah, yeah, well, I love to get you back in here because I really think they could they could help that Yeah, especially you got your whole life ahead of you now you don't want You know you don't want that bother in you fucking with you be able to do whatever you want And especially now because you're not training hard. Oh, it'll heal good It'll heal because that's the problem a lot of guys they get the stem cells and they go back to training in a few weeks And they kind of it's not a hundred percent healed and they tweak it a little bit and You know, but now if you're not training at all This is the perfect time to do something like that So what is your plans now now? Now the on top of the world You did it. What does it feel like? Like it's like it's supposed to it feels like it's supposed to like Like a lot of people they asked me they say man. How do you feel like how's the retire like I'm like the same like nothing Am I life has changed but the people Everywhere else Congratulate in me and things like that, but Like far as like my living You know aspect of my life is it's the same like When I'm fighting training, you know, I'm focused on the fight, but after that it's like my kids You know the gym Things like that Do you have any interest in doing commentary at all because I think you would be great at that I'm Be chill. I don't be liking to be in the media talking Avoiding them Avoid avoid you know how like some people They want to be all up in the line like things like that and yeah, I just be I'd be avoiding it But like change can we get it out of that now right now? I don't want to talk. Yeah, you know Well, I appreciate you coming in here though. Oh, yeah for sure, you know, but A lot of people ask me that do you want to be like all the other fighters and be a commentary, you know Ah Good for you. I'll be cool good for you. That's gonna help you so much It's gonna help you so much because it's the people that crave that limelight when it all goes away Then they're like whoa, who am I? I thought I was special. I thought I was special You know, I want I want to be the guy when oh, he's here. He's here. Yeah, they want to be constantly in the limelight showing up at red carpets All that I avoid all that shit, too. I don't want to have nothing to do with that. I know who I am You know internally, you know, so I came up by you know, tell me who Terrence Crawford is So I'm happy in my own skin always been happy in my own skin and I believe that's how I got to the point where I'm at now Know when nobody believed in me. I didn't listen to them because I knew who I was all along when people told me I Was a bad businessman Okay, look at me now You know what people told me what I should have did what I shouldn't have done and I Did what I wanted to do look at me now, so now it's like Everybody like man his dude was new all along. It's like Yeah, because I'm not a follower. I'm not gonna listen to people that it's Never done anything in their life and never took no chances or no risk to tell me what I can and what I can't do So I'm happy in my own skin. I'm happy You know whether they chat my name or whether they're not long as my family Love me and my family there and they they good they well took care of then That's the only thing that makes me happy. That's beautiful. I hope young fighters That are inspired by you take that example. I hope I hope they take that mindset and try to adopt it as their own I really do I really do because there's so many young fighters. I just can't wait to be that person in the line Like can't wait to be that person living flashy in front of everybody and It's a foolish adventure temporary temporary and they don't understand that like that when you check your name for a moment You know, it's it's very temporary You know and they're turning on you in the heartbeat You know just just do something crazy or lose a match that you're on post-alose or Be up against one of your rivals and you lose and then everybody gonna turn it back when you hundred percent You know and you're gonna be sitting there lost look at Broner When he was at the top of the top of the top everybody was there. Yep. He had Everybody in this corner Now he had this lowest now they make a fun of them now they taking pictures and You know, I hit he makes fun of himself to that he do, but he suffer Yes, you know and I hit some up and I try and encourage them and I sent him messages and now You know and you got to be there for people in that day. Lois. That's great He was a very talented guy, but again, that's what you said like he's a guy who really got caught up in it That's a perfect example. What's Jervante doing now? I don't see on the run. I don't know. I don't know. No, no, no about that guy Then I saw the run At least he was like recently That's unfortunate. He's so fucking talented He's a He's such an unusual style too, you know very economical throws very few punches, but when he does it's boom explosive super super explosive I mean, this is a great time for boxing though. It really is it's an exciting time for boxing There's a lot of stars right now, you know, and they fight each other. Mm-hmm. That's the that's the most important Thing that I could say is The fight is being made whether you on this side or that side the fight is being made the promoters is working Together within with each other So no, we should be that do you think that's re-aut season is the sellers? Yeah, of course. Yeah, Turkey came in changed up the game You know, he he he he went to the fighters You know, hey, I got this I got this you get it. We want this fight to happen and the fighters like whoa We know we not gonna get this and Nothing nobody would have never seen no Bev all better be of right If I would have never happened. I'm promoters not gonna pay that money You know There's so many fights out there That the promoters would have never paid for and talk rank would have never paid the money that Turkey paid to see Shakorn TL fight right? You know, so we got so many fights because of him And we need to be a priesthood to love him because without him none of those fights would have happened 100% The canelo fight wouldn't happen for me. The magic mall fight wouldn't happen for me um and So so many more Absolutely, I think that's very exciting that but that's with the sport needed. Yeah needed someone to come in with Bockets that just said let's make these fights happen. I think that's why you know boxing is on a rise right now People was talking about boxing more people is more supportive about boxing now and People is tuning into not only Re-aut season shows but all shows look like Clarissa. Yep. She just put on a hell of a performance And it was rocking in that Sold out over 16,000 people as a woman. I know right man. She's doing her thing and people don't give women Enough credit like she bringing out stars You know and man it was it was a good atmosphere in there Yeah, and it was a very skillful fight. They came to bang. I Say y'all came out of there fighting like cats and dogs in that first round Yeah, she's sitting in her face. She wanted to knock out so bad. Oh She's a doll. She's ferocious. Yeah, and so skillful too. You know, but it's she's a unique individual star, you know, you know A round one is not a lot of women stars. Yeah, it's like but I think a person like her can encourage others Yeah, and it could be more and when you have one star a lot of times it does sort of open up the landscape for more For sure for sure because she she transcends yeah, she transcends boxing like a lot of people know who Clarissa shields is a lot of people know who she is Outside of boxing and there's not a lot of other female boxes you could say that about you know There's only been a few ever like Christy Martin Very lolly Lolly, yeah Yeah, and wolf wolf She could and she was a ferocious trainer too. Remember she was training Kirkland. Yes. Well with the bag on the back of the truck Oh man, she'd make him go through hell But when she when he was with her, yeah, he was phenomenal when he undefeated with her I think he was undefeated with her and she wasn't with him when he fucking yellow Unfortunately a couple of fights on being sure. Yeah, but I think it was too much like it was too hard like she didn't want he didn't want to do it She's a tough lady man. She would put you through so fucking hell her training like there's some videos of her putting Kirkland through training Can't look like my god But for a woman show to be able to do that, you know, it shows you how impressive she was how special she was But his performances showed as well. Yes, you know because she was getting in his mind as well as physical yes, you know and Taking everything from him and putting him in the room and not as training. It was kind of like Rocky You know, you ain't got a TV all you know is work. Yes, we Yeah, boxing. Yeah, and this is like I got into old Boxing footage real recently over the last like six months up and watching a lot of old camps and there's some great YouTube channels that are shows haggars camps and haggars camps were Phenomenal so good like Hagar was rich and he would go to province town this shitty little fucking town on the Cape No disrespect promised I'm just saying and compared to where he could be Yeah, New York City could be anywhere. I wanted but he would go to this small town in the middle of fucking nowhere And run on the beach and live in a room with no TV no nothing just eat sleep train He was barring a hundred rounds a week and it was wild watching him train was incredible It was incredible and when he would get into that ring there was no stone Unturned no stone unturned and it was just all Discipline and drive and focus and And he was another guy didn't get his due didn't get his due until he stopped it really until he stopped her That's when people really woke up, you know all the inside boxing people were very aware But it took a while it took a while before the rest of the world because one flashing yeah Wasn't flashing just dominate Just break people's wills the Mugabe fight to this days when my favorite fights of all time Because Mugabe was putting people in the hospital. Oh my god Mugabe hit so fucking hard But that was the other thing about Hagar band had a chin from a hell You know if Hagler had extraordinary mandible muscles that like they they did a cat scan on him like a scan of his head They said the mat the muscles on the side of his head is like he was born with headgear Or he developed it just from biting down on a mouthpiece for so long Yeah, just but I love watching those old-school training footage videos So I did some great ones of sugary Robinson running in the mountains and hitting the bag and training and all the calisthenics that he had to do I think the more people should see stuff like that just to appreciate the amount of discipline and work that it takes to get into peak condition for a fight Because I just don't think they understand what your mind has to go through to get up for that every day Over and over and over and over until you're finally in the ring like the ring is almost the easy part easiest it's tough It's like You know when when we ain't caught a rattle when we got a run to mountain Like sometimes I'd be like man, I ain't running I don't care like And then it'd be like you gonna get your ass. Well if you better get your ass up Or a boy coming in and be like let's go. I'm like man, boy. Let's go. I don't Bo got the same any time I'm giving them some push He'd be like I'm not about to argue with you for you to be great. Let's go Like that's great. You have someone with you like hey, right. I like here we go He's from the beginning from the start. That's so big too and it's crazy because The days that I don't want to do nothing is the craziest days that I do the best You know and because you conquered that inner bitches The thing inside you that wants to not do it. Yeah, it's even say fucking man. Yeah, it's even be like he would like When you don't want to do something it's like You trying to hurry up and get it over with so you trying to do it fast So like my best times is when I don't want to do it Like my best sparring is when I want to spar because it's like I'm like all right I'm other fuck you old cuz I ain't about to play with you. I ain't about to go in here doing all this extra shit You know, I don't want to get hit. Yeah, so it's like your best Days is when you don't want to do it. Yeah, you know, that's when I perform the best and the in the gym and stuff like that So yeah, man a lot of a lot of young fighters when they come and see my training. They see what I go through Three times a day. So it's eat sleep shit work You know, they like man you train to her I'm like ain't no such thing You know Tam Bradley told me and man you got a rash you guys Andre War man you got a you got a rest you know and These last two training camps I Took on their life and took it just a day off like in a week like every week instead of training Seven days a week. I take one day off just not doing nothing and it helped me tremendously on my recover Really? I used to just do active rest on Sunday We'll do the incline. We just do the incline. That's it in the morning early in the morning Then we have the whole day to recover But he like no You gotta just take the whole day off Not doing nothing and just recover and as you get as I got older You know my last two training camps. I took that advice and it's just like man I'm like man. I could have did this years ago I was just so like locked in like right if I take a day off They don't have a day up on me, you know, and I was just like I can't do the opposite working Well, it's a fine line where there's a point of diminishing returns Where you put in too much work like seeing of a guy fight when he's over trained is one of the saddest things ever It's like his drive actually fucked him. Yeah. I've seen it before and MMA it happens all the time Especially guys don't use heart rate monitors don't monitor their resting heart rate when they get up More that my last two yeah two camps. Oh, that was the only two camps. She did that my last two camps Interesting interest like everything was Visual with with my coaches because they been with me so long right so they know when to pull back Some days there'd be like all right, you know You peeking you did four rounds. No, we done like man. I got eight rounds today. Oh, you good But like what you good don't worry about it. We'll come back tomorrow You know, I'd be like art, you know, I will never question them Right, you know, are we coming in there and they'd be like all right today We just gonna we're gonna shallow box and we're gonna hit the mitzbeth But I never questioned them, but they already knew by watching me You know along the weeks to pull me back when the yeah, then it started getting You know to me and I was like oh, okay, so now I know with it like they not gonna let me over train Because they know I'm gonna give it to my all every time I train anything I do So they just pull me back like all right Well, we gonna just do yoga today and we gonna do boxing work we're gonna do no You know strength conditioner. We're not gonna do no road work Or we're not gonna or we just gonna swim. We're not instead of running we gonna swim You know, so some days there flip flop That's the beauty of having a really good trainer. Yeah for sure And someone has really paid attention to you and real and knows you like knows the signs Nose when you're a little sluggish knows when you're peeking a little early Yeah, before you back. Yeah, and anybody said that you train too hard. It's like Compared to who compared to who you know like it's whether or not you built your body up to the point where you're doing that for so many years Your body's conditioned to go that hard You know because there's people that used to say that if you were on a marathon Like you need like six months off I had a friend was my friend Cameron Haines. He runs ultra marathons when he was training for a 250 mile run He was running a marathon every day Every day most people the conventional wisdom was you can't do that. Yeah, you can't yeah, you just got a 150 mile run, he was running a marathon every day, every day. Most people, the conventional wisdom was, you can't do that. Yeah, you can. Yeah. You just got to get up to that. So if a fighter is slacking off in between camps and getting fat and drinking and fucking off and then they get back in the camp, yeah, you can't do three hard a day like that. Yeah. But if you're already in shape and you're already conditioned and you have built up this base of years and years of doing this, your conditioning will be so much better. One of the things that I noticed in young fighters in particular, especially in MMA, is how tired they get in a three round fight, just a three round MMA fight, how tired they get. And I'm sure they train hard, but they don't train as hard as these guys who don't get tired in a five round fight. So what is the difference? Well, it's the years and years of building up that cardio base, not fucking up your body, not partying. You know what, how to breathe? Uh huh. That's the most important. Yeah. Because when I my first time at the UFC, when I did strength condition, you know, I was like, man, I'm not getting that knowledge. It's easy. It has like, well, it's not meant to break you or kill you. You're going to, you're going to see the difference. And I'm just like, man, when I'm doing UFC back back at home, like, I'm sore, like, I'm not sore, you know, the next day when I'm doing strength condition here, but like, gradually you start seeing the results, you know, and it's like damn, you know, and it's a science behind it. Yes. You know, and I was just like, in my mind, I'm like, man, I'm not working hard enough because I'm, I'm used to working hard and I'm going home and I'm like, oh, that was a good workout. I feel it. Like psychologically. I'm like, I don't feel like I did nothing, you know, because my body isn't so in shape. You know, I'm like, man, I need to do more and they're like, you did a lot today. You know, I'm like, all right. So like, gradually I'm starting to see the effects. Mm hmm. You know, I'm like, oh, okay. So maybe he was working me out too, too hard. You know, I'm getting stronger and everything. I'm just like, okay. You know, it's all, it's all the science. It really is a science. And you know, the problem with fighters is, especially elite fighters is they're so driven. You know, and sometimes you can't let the dragon off the chain. Yeah. Like, oh, yeah. Yeah, slow down. You got to do this. We got to progress. Yes. Over time and get to that perfect point the week before the fight, we just settle in and then fight time. That's my guy got him. Got him. Just like, oh, don't worry. Steps. That's the beautiful thing about having someone that you can trust that really knows what they're doing. And, you know, there's a lot of young fighters that are just all gas, no breaks. And they might be costing themselves a little bit. But then there's a lot of lazy fighters like, yeah, I don't want to over train. Yeah. Like, no, no, you're under training. That's why you get tired all the time. You're not in good enough shape to be doing a proper workout that you need to do to really prepare for a fight. It's this fucking dance, man. It takes forever to learn. It takes forever. You know, that's why like a lot of fighters, they reach their prime when they get into their 30s because they get it all dialed in. They know what they need, they know what they need to do. They know what it can't really feels like. They prepare for it, been their experience. Yeah. And also, yeah, they definitely know they body. They know when they in shape, when they out of shape, what they need, when they need a little more experiences, the best teacher. I'll say. Yeah. Well, experience and then listening to people like you, that's a big factor. Listening to people that have done it all and, you know, and that wisdom. The just the things that you've said on this podcast today, I guarantee you right now, there are hundreds of thousands of fucking future fighters that are listening to this podcast right now and that are probably like taking it all in. Okay, because you know, in the early days, you don't know what the fuck to do. You don't know what, what's the right approach, his approach, his approach, his approach, what's the right mentality, what's the right mindset, what's who the right coaches, which is a big factor, you get a bad coach and get stuck with a bad coach and it'll limit your development. Yeah, for sure. For sure. That goes back to styles. When I said, I was trying to coach everybody to the same style and everybody meant to be training the same. Everybody don't have the same, you know, mental capacity to process things the same way. Some people process things different. That's kind of like yelling at a fighter, you know, that that motivated me. Sometimes that break fighter. They like, I'm getting that. I'm right. I'm wrong. You know, so we look at them like, man, toughen up, you know, but nowadays is different. Like everything don't flock the same with one fighter like a dude. No, you gotta figure out what gets your fighter going. Yeah. Yeah. And that's, that's another interesting dance. I don't envy those people because your livelihood depends upon another person performing, which is kind of crazy. It's a crazy way to live your life. That's any sports. Yep. Like I always say, sometimes I blame the coaches, but for the most part, the players and the fighters and the athletes, they got to go out there and perform. I could tell you go out there and do this, but if you don't go do it, then that's what you. Right. Now, coaches, they can make the, I mean, they can get out coached. They can call the wrong plays at the wrong times, different like that. But all in all, if he go out there and miss a tackle, if he go out there and not catch the ball, why am I getting fired? Right. They go blame me. Yeah. It's true. Hey, I can't make him hit the three. I can't make him, you know, the up so that I'm getting fired because they're not performing. You're also getting fired by people that don't totally understand all the subtle nuances of what you do if you're a coach. Yeah. Like if they're not a coach, how could you really understand if you're not day in, day out with these athletes in their head, working with them, seeing what they're doing, improving upon their strengths, strengthening their weaknesses? If you're, if you're not doing that, you just are seeing results. Mm hmm. That's all you say. You're judging based on results. Do you don't really know who's a good coach and who's not? Because if you're a good coach, you got shit athletes. Yeah. You only go so far. That's it. And it's tough. Yeah. It's tough to, you know, go across the middle and try to catch a bullet without when you know the safety by the coming later, the crazy slap when you, you know, and it's crazy to go up, you know, on a seven footer, trying to shoot a, shoot a, shoot a three. Right. Hard at a professional level to do what these athletes is doing, but they make it, same like as easy on the outside for us. And we like, man, you need to catch the ball. It's like, you try to catch that ball with three people, you know, me or you, you know, coming full of speed and you got to worry about getting your feet in bounds and things like that. It's so much. Well, it's like Tf most corner during this curve fight. You got to hit him. You got to hit him. What do you think? I'm trying to do. Tell me how to hit him. Tell me how to set up to him. Just tell me you got to hit him. You know, and that, that, that goes in to saying that everybody shouldn't be a coach. Right. You know, because now you're not giving me an no instructions. You, you going off of emotions and you just telling me, hey, you got to hit him. You, you not hit him. What are you doing? Yeah. I'm, what if Tio would have said, what is you doing? Because you're not telling me nothing. You see me trying to hit him, but you move in. You know, like what I, what I'm supposed to do, I'm swinging and I'm, I'm missing. Right. So tell me how to set it up to him. But there's really nothing anybody could have told him. Yeah. The gap was just too wide at that point. Right. Yeah. They should have studied more in training, but even then it's like the problem is years. years of advancement. It's years of intelligent boxing. It's years of setups. It's years of skills. I think when a fighter have a good coach, that's knowledgeable and they believe in a coach, and they coach axam to do something and they believe that that's going to work. They'll try it. You know, if your coach tell you, all right, listen, he's stepping back every time you step in. So that means for every time he step back, you got to step in twice and double, double the jab and close the distance and let your hands go when you get in range. And that fighter go out there and do what the coach asked them to do and he's successful. They're not a different ball game. That's a different ball game. Because now you listen into your coach, but your coach is seeing what the other fighters doing. That's making him be more successful. Technical instruction. There you go. Yeah. You can't just go go out there and hit him. Tell me how to do that. I hear that shit in the corner. I'm like, good Lord, what are you saying? Yeah. He hear it in MMA all the time. You got to put it on him. Oh, oh, I didn't know. I'm going to put it on him all this time. I was hoping it would just happen. Yeah. Well, listen, man, congratulations on everything. You had a fantastic spectacular, like one of a generation career. So it's beautiful to watch. And as a fan, I'm honored that you came in here and I think what you've done is just fucking incredible. So congratulations on everything. And enjoy it. Enjoy all the rest of your life. Oh, you earned it all. Thank you very much. Bye, everybody.