What's up world? We're back again with America's favorite con man Matthew B. Cox. On this episode, we talk about Matt's latest documentary about to be released in Europe, where they create the con man Olympics in which Matt actually represents the USA. We're very proud of Matt for that. Matt also gives his take on the current trial getting started with Elizabeth Holmes and her company Theranos, in which she defrauded investors committed wire fraud and conspiracy to commit fraud. Matt makes his predictions on what the outcome of that trial is going to be. And also towards the end of the conversation, we get into the latest developments of the Gabby Petito murder investigation and the Florida man who's currently on the run. It's crazy out there in Florida right now. We got hurricanes everywhere, murderers on the run. Luckily, we have Matt Cox here to keep us entertained through all of it. So without further ado, please welcome the man who needs no introduction, especially to the FBI and Secret Service. Matthew B. Cox. All right, what's going on? What do you mean? I don't know. We're back. We're back. Why go on? We're on Matt Cox. What's up Matt? Welcome back to the show Matt Cox, the FBI's most wanted con man. Still not. Still not. I was on the Secret Service. I was number one of the Secret Services. That's what I meant. How you been, man? How's life going, bud? I mean, it's going okay. What are you been doing lately? What do you even up to? Been working? I just got back from Amsterdam. Mm. I love. That sounds like a place I want to go. How'd that go? You would like a Amsterdam. I like Amsterdam. Yeah. I just don't. I just wasn't able to do any part. Take heartache in the extra curricular activity. Yes. Exactly. What did you do? Why were you in Amsterdam? Why did you go to Amsterdam? There's a series called the psychology of a con artist. They did a six part series. You don't have your headphones so you can't tell how good your voice is. Oh, you're going to put them on? Yeah. You don't mind. You could probably turn his mic up. I hear. I go to Amsterdam, right? And like, with the... Are you nervous? With the girlfriend? I'm dating this chick. And then as soon as I get back, boom. We break up. Why? Honestly, I never get an exact answer. The answer that I typically get is so ridiculous. It's not you. Yeah, it's the whole it's not you. It's me. It's not going to work. It's like, you said, you've heard this before. It's ridiculous. Is this the same girl you broke up with before? We talked about it in the last pocket. First of all, I've never broken out with her. She breaks that with me. She breaks it over to me every three or four months. And it goes three days, maybe four days. And then she starts texting, this is killing me. And I can't stop thinking about you. And of course I reciprocate. I'm angry, but whatever. And it goes back and forth. And then she comes over. and then she comes back and forth. Or comes over for three or four weeks. And then it's like, can we start seeing it just see each other again? I'm a mistake. But you know, so we get back together. We're back together. It's fun. Three months later, boom. Same thing. It's never going to work. We're too different. We're totally different people. Obviously, like we have nothing in common. Well, it doesn't seem to be an issue. We talk all the time. We joke around. We have fun. We don't argue. It's just not going to work. OK, well, I'm always like, look, if you're banging somebody else, like, tell me that. Tell me you're nailing somebody else. And I'll be like, OK, yeah, we are done. But it's never that. Tell me. Why would you? Why would that be the thing that you need to hear? Well, I mean, because I think that would be a nice, clean cut. Like it's OK. This is a clear. This is clearly not working. You're nailing some other guy. We're done. So you're done. But simply saying, we get along. I'm in love with you. I love the sex. I love being around you. I love talking to you. I have fun when I'm with you. But it's never going to work. But the words don't match the actions. Why? Like, tell me. Tell me I'm too, she's 34. Right now I'm 52. She's 34. Like, it's 18. It's always been an 18 year difference, obviously. It's what? 18 year difference. Like, tell me I'm too old for you. And she's like, you're not too old for you. She's like, I don't look 34. And you don't look 52. She's like, we basically look like we're the same. We both look like we're in our 40s. And she's like, so it's not that. I'm like, okay, well, tell me it's speak. Like, give me a reason that makes sense. And she's like, I just can't. I'm like, tell me you're not in love with say, look, you know, I'm not in love with you. Like, I'm just not in love with you. Like, you know, you know, you know, I'm saying it's like, look, I've tried. I like you. You're cool. I like, can't I with you. But it's just never going to become love for me. Like, tell me that. Like, I get that. You know, I could be like, you're right. I can't make you be in love with me. It's just like, it's not that I am in love with you. I think about you all the time. I'm like this. It's like, it's just not going to work. Okay. You know what I mean? So, and that's what it was this time. So it's just done. And only this time I knew it was serious because. And this, I told you this, this is so stupid. I know it's stupid. And I've heard people say when I was locked up, like I had heard people say stuff like this on TV. And I always thought, that's got to be the dumbest thing I've ever heard. This is how I know it's serious. This is how I knew that was it. She's serious this time. Yeah. She within a day or two, she changed her relationship status on Facebook. That's it, bro. It's over. It's real. It's real. Like, because you got to think before when we were not see each other for whatever four or five days or a week, and then we just, we were just kind of sleeping together. She never changed, never once. This time within a day, bone done. It's like, wow. Okay. It's so funny how people in the 50s, the people in the 50s act the way we used to act like in high school about social media. When we were in high school, we probably would worry about a girl changing their social status of being single or your relationship or whatever. You don't even know what I'm going through. You're married. It's over. Like, you don't even remember what it was like to be pathetic and feel insecure. Of course I do. Yes, I do. You're like, you don't need her. Yes, I do. I'm always saying, you don't need her when you've got some chick. Yes. You're always like, guys, like fuck her. Yeah, because you're living with someone, you've got her locked down. It's over. You're all good. It becomes fuck her. But when it's you, it's like, fuck. This is the worst. But it's so weird. Like, why can't you just be happy? Just playing the field, getting your doing your work and just banging random broad. Because I'm 52 and it's almost over. Like, my best years are way past me. They're gone. You're not good in solitary. You need to sell me. Absolutely. I need a sellman. I need someone who's down. It's going to be down with me for the whole thing. That's what I need. You know? Yep. And the worst thing is too, like it is I know like part of it. I get it because like she didn't want to move in. And so I knew when she didn't want when she we first met and she did want to move in. And then she didn't want to move in. And I always knew that was an issue. But as we started talking, I started realizing that the major issue is it's hard to fight with me. Like, I'm very easy to get along with. I almost never draw a line in the sand. I never have 100% opinions. This is the way it is. Like, I'm totally okay if we don't agree on the same subjects. I'm pretty easy going. You want to do this. Okay, well I wanted to do this. But if this is important to you, then it's important to me. Like, I'm available almost all the time because I work for myself. So all of these things make me a guy that's difficult to not get along with. And not probably drive some women crazy. Right. It makes her nuts because I'm always available. I'm always this. I don't argue. So I guess in her mind maybe she's just like, maybe she's just not interested or disinterested. Or I don't fight or argue with her or she needs a challenge. Maybe she needs, I keep telling her, I say, look, I get it. You want a guy that drives a forklift that will come home drunk. You'll have the shawl shang. Right. You're going to have to check it off a few of those blocks. So let's keep going. Couple of these. You're going three for three. Six three. Every three months you got to get them out of jail. He's six three. Right. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. And I even said that one time. Tell me that I'm too short. Tell me that. This is how comical it is when we're arguing. Every time we break up, this is how much I go. I go, tell me that like I'll make, and she's like, it's not that. I'm like, tell me that it's, you know, and she's, make anything other than this ridiculously stupid answer. When you think it really is, what do you think the real answer is? Well, I mean, I think she's just not ready. I think she's just not in love with me. But she's, but I'm, I'm easy to go along with. I'm funny. I'm funny. I'm nice. Like the last time she broke up and got back together with me, here's what she said. Okay, listen, if you aren't already gambling and betting on sports, you need to be because I've been cashing in big for the last two months after I signed up with my bookie.AG. I fucking love my bookie. I was using my bookie way before they reached out to sponsor the show. And this month only our listeners and subscribers are going to get matched on their first deposit up to $500 when they sign up with my bookie by using the promo code, concrete, K-O-N-C-R-E-T-E. Football season is officially here and betting, my throat is so, my fucking voice is so fucked up. Football season is officially here and the betting has begun. It's time for you to win big with my bookie.AG. They have all the crazy pregame prop bets you could ask for. And you can even bet the game's live to shift the odds into your favor and always come out on top. They are the leading betting site globally. That's why we use it. And I've been making so much goddamn money. I'm going to start investing in some more real estate. If you want to bet and win big this NFL season, it's got to be with my bookie.AG. Sign up today with a promo code concrete, K-O-N-C-R-E-T-E. And you're going to get matched up to $500 on your first deposit. So do it now. Back to the show. After we broke up for a few days, then we start sleeping together again. She's coming over three, four days a week now. And then so after a month or so, this was how we got back together. She said, I would be stupid not to be with you. You're a great guy. So I would be stupid for us not to be there. I don't know what I was thinking. It's just stupid for me not to be with you. Well, that's not because you're kind of a catch. And you're easy to go along with in your nice guy and you're funny. That would be stupid for me not to be with you. Well, you should really just want to be with me because you're love. And so what happens is three months later, I just think she's just not in love. That's probably the case. It probably is the case. And she just doesn't want to say because she doesn't want to hurt my feelings. And I even said that. Look, you're not going to hurt my feelings. It's impossible for you to hurt my feelings. Well, I can't tell you. Why can't you just take this input and just do the math. One plus one is two. Why can't you just walk away from it? Why can't you put it to bed? Because I love her. I like it as pathetic guy. Those pathetic women that he's beating you every night. But I love him. If that's how I feel when I say that. Because I did it. Because I love being around her and seeing her and being around her. But whatever. It's fun. It's over. I'll figure it out. I'll work it out. I'll be back in three weeks. It's one of the worst things that human beings have to deal with is the same thing that you're going through. It was just relationship problems. I think it was self-recussive that. And I always wonder if down the road through whether it's some sort of technological enhancement. Like the Elon Musk's Neuralink where we'll have the ability to flip a switch and just turn off an emotion. What was that movie? Was it Reliquy for a dream or something? I forget what we were doing for a dream. That requiem for a dream? It was where they removed the memory of the girl. I don't know if this is a thing for you. I was here before. It was Jim Carey. And he was in love with this chick and he goes to some guy who can remove the memory of a person. Really. Right. So yeah, that's exactly what we need. And so Jim Carey is kind of going a little crazy because he feels like something's missing. But he doesn't know what it is. And the guy actually, they actually mail out these cards to all your friends and family and and explain this is what's happened. This is a procedure. Do not mention this person to him. And then somebody at some point, I think shows him the card. And then like he goes back to the doctor and he tries to say, I want to know what's happening. Who is she? Where is she? What's going on? What did you do? It's a whole thing. I need to watch this again. I need that doctor. Yeah, you do do that. That's what I need. Yeah, but what if you could do? Sometimes in the future there's got to be a way to where you can do it without really. You don't not really like, delete it. Oh, it is. It's Jared Leto. Jared Leto. Jared Leto. Jared Leto. No, no, no, no, no, no. Okay. That's the wrong movie. This was Jim Carey. This guy was you sure? I'm sure it was Jim Carey and they removed it. Well, it was obviously I got the name of the movie wrong. Well, it's hard to get the name of that movie wrong. That's a very, very... It sounds like the story you're talking about maybe. Really? What is it? Requiem for a dream. Anyways, can you pull it up on there? But there's got to be a way. Maybe it's a different way. There's got to be a way for like not to delete the memory just to delete the emotion because, you know, just make it, then you're basically a robot. I mean, that's what a robot is. It's kind of emotions. Right. But if it's an emotion that's going to benefit you to turn off and you're suffering and you're depressed because... What emotion is that love? Instead of taking... Instead of drinking alcohol and taking pop and pills, smoking, trying to bury the emotions. They're just flipping switch and you can just get rid of it, the negative feelings. And maybe reverse it into a positive feeling or something. Ooh. I got it. I got it. It's called Eternal Sunshine. Eternal Sunshine. Eternal Sunshine. Oh, wait. Of the spotless mind. Eternal Sunshine of the spotless mind. That's it right there. Can you text me that? Sure. It's a maze. It's an interesting... I don't want to say this. It's an interesting movie. Kate Winslet. Kate Winslet. Is Winslet? Yeah. And so like he's programmed to forget her. A couple good ones in there. David Cross. Oh. Hmm. Good stuff. Let's check out that one. Good stuff. So yes. So I go to Amsterdam. Yeah. Why'd you go to Amsterdam? Okay. I went to Amsterdam because there's a documentary company. They contacted me like whatever. They contacted me like a year ago. And then there was the COVID thing. It was like in the middle of the COVID thing and they were trying to work out how do we get you over here. I literally... So they're doing a six-part series on the psychology of a con artist. They are doing like one on a guy from like Germany, one from a guy on France, one guy from the UK, one guy's from whatever. And then I'm the guy they chose from like the United States. So you're representing the United States. Representing Danny. You're a United States best con man. And the con man Olympics you represent in the United States. I mean you think they get bellford or something. But yeah, I ended up with what they said was that I was extremely forthcoming and willing to talk. He's immediately disqualified because he's a New Yorker. Why? I don't know. You're like New Yorkers? No, because he's a fucking New Yorker. He's a Italian New York guy. He's first of all, he's an Italian. So he's automatically a pervert. Wow. And this is the con- Like Cuomo. So perverted, he's just Italian. He's not horny. He's just battalion. So he just got that he just got that I don't know. He's just a salesman really. He is a salesman. But I think speaking salesman is kind of a part little con man. You go out to be a little conny to be a salesman. Yeah. But there's a difference between a guy like him and a guy like you. There's a very, very obvious difference talking to a guy like him and talking to a guy like you. He's just one of those like he just reminds me of every high energy sales hustler guy. He's a hustler. Right. He's not a pyramid scheme. You're more of like a pump and dump scheme. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You're more of like a hit and like false. You're a thought out. You're everything you did was well planned out, well thought out. You know, you were in two. You were company's public. I mean, he was thought out. He was thought out. He was, no, but not to the level that you were doing it. You were literally it's a little more one on one maybe. He was 102 million dollars. Like I mean, I wasn't at that scale. But I hear what you're saying. But you were creating and manufacturing identifications. You were buying. So security numbers. Little more. He was really kind of working in a gray area that was it was it was all seemingly legit and he was really just cooking the books. So I get it. He wasn't like he wasn't like a running like scams. And it was still a scam. It just was more of a cook at the book's type of deal. And he was doing it all in his name. And he was so yeah, I totally get it. I definitely see it was definitely mine was 100% in the gray or in the in the red and the black or whatever. Right. Years was from start to finish right abroad. Like it was out to just it was a total scam. Right. Okay. So anyway, yeah. And to talk to me that I so they flew me out there. First of all, I had to get my judge to sign a I had to apply in front of the judge to have permission to apply for my passport and leave the country. Not an easy task. I owe $6 million. Two of my charges are passport fraud. One one is how the fuck did you pass this to you go it you go in and say like I I know how this sounds, but I need a passport and look I my argument to my attorney that put in the the motion to the judge. I was like listen, I think honestly I said I feel like like you know, I don't need permission to get a passport like I can get a passport. She was like Matt. Don't go there. That's not an argument. I'm not even don't. Please don't joke about that. I'm like, all right. I'm just saying. So I think that's part of the argument. It's like look you're on or I'm trying to do the right thing here. Showing up in good phase. Right. Like don't make me go the other way. No, so anyway, so anyway, she she went in front of him. She said look, this is how he makes this, you know, his living. This is a thing. Bob, blah, blah, blah. And they said, okay, and he said, okay, fine. So my two charges. One was applying or applying for a passport like fraudulently applying for a passport. And the other one was use of a fraudulent passport. So one first you applied for for several of them. And then when you got them, you used them. Like you didn't just get the thing. You went out of the country back and forth several times. So he said, okay, I'll let him get the passport. And yes, he can leave. So I got the passport. Do you know the one I used to apply for passports? You could get one in about 15 or 20 days if you paid the extra like the extra. I know I got one a couple of years ago in like less than a week. Yeah. Well, guess what? Now it's like eight weeks behind. It took like between six and eight weeks for me to get. So I get it. I go to Amsterdam. I get there. They put me up in a great hotel. Was there eight days? Put me up in a great hotel. Walk around the city. You know, I had a couple of days here and there to myself a few hours here a few hours there. Like that would have been awesome to be there with the chick. You run in any fashion. Did I tell you that? What? Did I tell you that? About the guy? No. You're going to love this. What? Okay. So I go into with my mask on by the way. When I get to the airport, Tampa International Airport. I'm there standing in line and somebody came, one of the Delta people come up to me. They say something to me and blah, blah, blah. I'm like, yeah, yeah. I said, well, which line do I need to be in? Is this international right? Like, and they were like, yeah, yeah. I was like, okay, cool. And these two guys turn around. They're from Slovakia, by the way. This is in what airport? Tape International. Okay. So they turn around and the guys they look at me. And the one guy goes, you're on a podcast or something, right? And I went, yeah, how'd you know that? And he goes, well, I recognized you. I went, I got a mask on. And he goes, no, no, I recognize your voice. Oh, okay. And he said, yeah, yeah, you were on that shoot. He goes, what's that fucking jerk off's name? And I go, Danny, I go concrete. I knew immediately. And I go, Danny, and then the other guy goes, he goes, yeah, concrete, concrete, he goes with the K. They spell if I say, yeah. And so the his buddy and I go, what do you get? Look, that's what he said. I believe in it. I'm not going to say jerk off. I believe. Yeah, they had a few toys that he has always interrupting. He's this, he's that. I go, and yeah, I go, but you keep. I go, guys, in the comments. I look there. I said, you, I go, you still watch it though, don't you? He's got good guests. And it's he's not, he's not bad. I mean, you know, so, so anyway, he said that and, and then he was like, hey, what do you, what do you think about this? So COVID thing, do you know about this? And I went, here we go. What do you mean? And he goes, this whole COVID thing. And I went, he goes, this is the biggest scam of him all. And I was like, what? And so he starts telling me about how he thinks this whole thing. It's all, you know, and there are those, the conspiracy guys. And I get it, you know, and there is some of that. I first of all, thank you Matt for getting this podcast demonetized by YouTube. Just realize that too. When I said it, sorry, you have to clip that. Oh, we'll leave it in bucket. So anyway, he goes on and on about this whole thing, right? I mean, he's right. Like he's right. I don't doubt for a second. Oh, yeah, they'll flag it. Yeah. So he goes on and on about it. And he's like, and I was like, look, take down my email, send me the stuff, the information, whatever, you know, blah, blah, blah, blah. And we talked and you know, seem like a nice guy. He's from Slovakia. I think both of them were, he was going back there. He was like, giving up his US citizenship. Like he had a whole, he's out of here. Super upset with the United States. Really? Oh, yeah, he was all. I'm like, enough. Was that where I'm making America great again? No, but he was upset. Like to me, I'm not going to Slovakia. I'm not giving up my US citizen citizenship, no matter how upset I am. So yeah, he's upset. He's upset. I hear a whole thing. And he wanted to talk. So what was he saying? Why did he say it was a scam? I mean, it was all, I didn't really get into it because we're in line and we're moving forward and I'm trying to get on the plane. I'm trying to get deep into conversation with this guy. Right. Right. And look, you know, people believe what they're going to believe. You know what I'm saying? I mean, who am I to say like 10 years from now for who you know is what's going to happen? So, but the point is that he was super upset about it. So anyway, that's one guy or those are two guys, but he was the first one. And I get to Amsterdam and I forget the plug. I can't, you know, the plug that goes in the wall. Yeah. So I had a whole issue with my plug thing. So I go to one place and I go another place. I end up in a supermarket because I also forgot deodorant. So I'm walking around, get buying this stuff that I forgot. I go in and get deodorant and this guy walks by me in the supermarket. He walks by me, looks at me, you know, look at him, keep walking. I get my deodorant and I come back. And as I walk by he goes, hey man. And I said, yeah, what's up? And he goes, I love your podcast bro. And I go get the fuck out of here. Are you serious? And he goes, yeah man, I've watched a bunch of them. I watched you on concrete with that jerk Danny. No, he didn't say that. No, he said, yeah, I watched you on the other one, the concrete with the two guys. And I said, yeah, yeah. And I said, Danny and Hat Rack. And he goes, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And he said, Patrick, he was bet David. I watched that one. Like he started naming off. And he was like, wow, he's like, I've watched a bunch of your stuff. Nice. And I said, I've got a channel. Did you subscribe? And he goes, I didn't subscribe. I'm sorry. I didn't write then. I was like, all right, I said, you did the right thing. So that was, I mean, in Amsterdam, that's pretty cool. That was cool bro. That's bad. That was awesome. How did it make you feel? I felt great. I was like, this may be something. This may be something. You're on a song. Yeah. You're on a tear, Matthew Cox. You know why? All because my buddy, Trion, said, you're getting touched with this guy, Danny. It's really because my only option was trying to get some articles made. Put up a website. Like I don't really know what to do. I want to do a true crime podcast. I don't know how to do it. Like I don't know. I was already kind of watching videos. And I didn't quite know. And it just happened to be he was wrong. Like the reasoning one made a contact was like, you know, for real estate. That was like, yeah. Because of life for sale. Doesn't want to talk to me about real estate. Yeah. He was like, well, with the other thing, the other thing, like you got a story, you could he interviews people. I was like, nobody interested in my style. I wish you talk about it. I said many. Anyway, so yeah, that was pretty cool. So anyway, I go to the store. I go to the shop. It turns out that I thought they kept pitching this thing as a documentary, right? I'm conman. So it's a documentary. Documentaries are typically low budget. Right. So relatively. Right. Right. I mean, there are other ones, right? There are the ones with reenactments. But when I think of documentaries with reenactments, I typically think about, I typically think about, like, I almost got away with it. Or what is one of the best ones is locked up abroad. That's a pretty good one. Yeah. Yeah. I saw a really good one recently where they had really fucking good reenactments. What was it? Netflix or something? It was Netflix. It was Netflix. I was doing great ones. Like they're really doing good reenactments. This one was like crazy with cartoons and animations and thought I can't remember what it was right now. Well, so anyway, so I get there. And they had said, oh, there's going to be some reenactments. Like I felt like, okay, this is kind of low budget. Listen, so I get there. Man, this place, I was way wrong, bro. Like this is like top notch. Like did I send you the pictures? You did. Oh, they've got. They've got. You know those red cameras? Like how much are those things? They vary. Like the cheapest ones are $15,000. They go up to them. They're in the hundreds of thousands. Like they've got like every other camera I'm looking at is red, red, red. I mean, they've got it's just, it's huge. They've rebuilt all of these sets for the main set that they have. Like they have this huge set that they're using, which is like a museum and it's super ultra modern. They've rebuilt all of these rooms in the museum inside of their, not studio, but what do you call it? Like the sound state? It's, I don't know, whatever. It's like a huge building and they've got these rooms inside. They've got all these sets and they're like, sound stage right away, I start realizing. So real deal. This is way, then I'm like, hey, who's, so there, are you doing reenactments? They're like, yeah, like who did you get to play me? They, they pull up the pictures of the guy. And I'm like, really? That's really not bad. Do you know the picture of him? No, I don't. Oh, yeah, I should have. I should have. I got you to play it. Yeah, can you imagine them scouting the guy, scouting the actors, getting them, getting them to do auditions to be my call. They were like, they were like, he's your height. He's your size. They said he's, you know, they said he's about your body. You know, your good hairline. Yeah, I was like, hold right hairline. I was like, nice. Nice. Wow. It was good stuff. So anyway, I go there. I do that so that we spent like four or five days shooting. I was interviewed by all these different psychiatrists, took all these tests. Then I fly back, went to Atlanta. There was a bomb scare in Atlanta. So it was like four hours in Atlanta. I finally get on my plane. Oh, no, no, that's what I was going to tell. That's what we were laughing about. When I got when I get to, when I get to the United States. So when I went into Amsterdam, by the way, I walk up to passport control. I show him my passport. Guy looks at the passport and he goes, okay, he said, where are you staying? And I went, oh man, I don't know. Hold on. I start looking through my paperwork. And he goes, where are you here? Business or pleasure? I go, oh, business. He goes, what's the name of the company? And I went, um, tops. I don't know. It's in, it's like, I was German or something. I don't know. I'm looking. I'm looking. You sit there. Yeah, man, you're okay. Just go. It's fine. That was easy. Done. We get to the United States after standing in line for whatever 30, 40, when you're coming home, coming in to the United States, coming home. I get in there, walk through passport or, you know, in the line, the six or seven people in front of me, like they walk up, they flash their passport. Boom, the guy goes, he scans it, he goes, okay. Thank you. Nevermind. Thank you. Next one. Thank you. Thank you. I get there. Peace. Next one. Thank you. Thank you. I get there. B, B, B, B, B, B, B. Put the passport way over here. Like I was gonna snack it. It's like I'm gonna snap it out of his hand and run. I'm wearing my goin'. And I was like, huh. And then he starts kind of, you know, looking through the, he's got the computers, but he's going down on the screen, right? He's like, not scanning, but whatever. He's click, click, click, click, click. Oh, fuck. Click, click, click, click. He's going on and go, I mean, it's a lot. He's sitting there and he looks at me and I go, fine. Now I'm thinking, that's this, that's good. Fuck. It was, you know, and I went, I said, uh, how bad is it? And he goes, well, it is what it is. And I was like, I mean, I'm like, I kind of make my flightiest. Well, you're definitely going to have to talk to somebody. I can tell you that. And as I go, I was like, I mean, I'm cutting it close on my flight, you know, I end up missing an anyway because of the bomb scare. But I'm sitting there all sudden a guy comes walking down. I see him walking. The guy takes my passport, guy, I'm talking to puts it in this thick, clear plastic bag with a zipper, zips it up and hands it to this guy who walks right up, grabs it and he goes, you're going to have to follow me, Mr. Cox. And I was like, like, how does he know my name? I'm like, oh, okay. So I follow him. I have to sit down for about five minutes. So all these guys are talking and talking and then finally they call me up and I walk up. I walk up and the guy's like, so what's this about? And I went, I don't know. I said, I'm not sure. I said he said, you know what it's about. And I went, well, I mean, I, I, assuming I was, I'm a felon. I'm here. He's looking at this more than that. And I looked at it. I went, I thought, okay, you know, it was funny before, like, could I know I'm good? And he goes, do you have anything? And I went, like, now I'm thinking, do you think I have drugs? Like, and I went, have anything. He's like, he goes, yeah, I mean, you're on federal probation. He said, how did you leave the United States? And I go, well, I have permission. I wouldn't leave without permission. And he goes, he goes, oh, you'd be surprised how many people do. And I went, he goes, do you have anything? I said, yeah. So I have a travel permit from my probation officer. And I said, I have a motion from my judges. It says, I'm allowed to leave the United States. And he looks at a manufacturer on Photoshop. Oh, he was, he sat there and he goes, he said, what did you do? It's like a Ponzi scheme or something. I went, no, now it's realistic. It was just realistic. He's like, well, what is it? Because he said, you were, there was, he said, there's a, I forget, it wasn't a red note. If he didn't say a red notice, he said something else with Interpol. He said, there's an interpol, such and such on, he said, watch list, right? And I said, still and he goes, and he went, I mean, no, but there was, he said, and it was, he said, like, well, what did you do? I said, well, I was on the run for like three years. He goes, oh, okay. And I said, I have multiple passports and I go, but that one's good. And he goes, and so we had this like 15 minute conversation. And I'm like, bro, I mean, honestly, I said, am I going to be able to make my flight? Because yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, let's just wrap this up. Okay, so he scanned this and don't subscribe. Yeah, subscribe to the podcast. Hey, can you do me a favor real quick before I go? So I leave. Then there was the, the bomb scare thing. And that was three hours later. I got, but yeah, that was funny. Wow. It was funny. Like I really thought, I really felt like I was going to sail right there. Are you sweating or nervous at that time? I wasn't nervous until he started doing, once I thought, okay, well, maybe it's, I didn't really think federal probation. I just thought, fell in like I knew there had been what's called like what's called a red notice on me at one time. And all that means is like arrest him immediately and hold, you know, hold this person, not don't detain him, like hold him. Yeah. And don't notify it because they have other notices like look, let him in, but notify us. But it wasn't that it, but for me, it was like, no, no, you hold him. But I saw I thought it might be that, but when Vinny said federal probation and then he was like, do you have like when she gave, when my probation officer, she's given me travel permits before. And nobody's ever asked me for it. So when he asked for it, I was like, oh, geez, thank God, I printed that thing out. Yeah. Nice. Got it. And thank God, I brought the motion to and is that, was it, is this the first time you left the country sent you a release for president? Well, I went to Puerto Rico, but you need a passport for Puerto Rico, right, but they never asked me for anything I walked in and out. I wonder what they see on the computer when you're looks to see like what, because he doesn't know exactly what you did. He didn't, but he sees something. He didn't see, he saw something big. He only knew. He's a flashing red like warning warning. He only, he only seemed like he knew it was financial or bank fraud. Yeah, wonder if they see like a dollar or no more or something. Or just charges, maybe, maybe the charges. Like I don't know. And by that point, I am concerned. Like at that point, he's like, he's not kind of laughing it off like I was. I was laughing it off because I know I'm good. Right. Right. Then he starts like, you know, it made me feel like I was doing something wrong. Like I start feeling, I know I'm not. Like I start feeling like I'm doing something wrong. So that must be the best part of those guys jobs. Making people sweat? No, just like meeting people like you, like seeing those like interesting people come through, you know, with the crazy backgrounds or something crazy on, on inner pool on a watch list or whatever. That must be like the, they come home from work. They got a Google you after that or something. Yeah, they come home from work. Who is this guy? Doing new happen at work today, honey. You'll never believe the guy I met today came through customs. Just go. Matthew Cox, you know, it's, you know, it's funny because whenever I meet somebody, like typically I just talk to people, like I'm just talking like you would talk to, right. And every once in a while, somebody, it something comes up. And I realize like when they, I get that, that shock look on their face so that what I realize, oh, that's right. Like right. Right. That's not because for me, it feels normal. Yeah. And then suddenly they're like, well, what, what, what do you mean? I'm like, oh, man, that's right. Oh, see, okay here. And then I'm like, I explain how to real quick, but you know, I try and slim it down as quickly as possible. And then they're like, and then it's instead of them and like, oh, wow, that's another walk. Now they're like, pro like, how did you and then I realize here we go. Oh, yeah. Okay. Like this guy, this guy works, he works and, you know, he works in the mailman. He works in the warehouse at Walmart. So do this, the company that shot is shooting this documentary producing this documentary. Is it a six part series? Yes. Do you know where it's going to be published or they already have a sold or? Yeah. They said it's like, I want to say it could be wrong. It was like four different networks in throughout Europe. Apparently they're like, lost off like this. These two countries are part of this network. And then one, the network, it's up is it prime plus here in the United States or prime. And I guess you get so many channels with prime and one of them's like discovery to which is like all documentaries. Amazon prime. Oh, I'm sorry. Amazon. What did I just say prime prime plus? Amazon Amazon, I'm sorry. It's Amazon. So it's on Amazon prime. Yeah. So Amazon prime and they've got so many channels with that. And so you end up having like discovery to which is like all documentaries and it's going to be a part of that document. Those two. And I think it comes out in December. Oh, wow. It's quick. Right. But I don't think mine's done. I think they've done they've edited like three of them and they're still editing. Right. So, you know, so I don't know. I wish I'd have a watch party here. We could watch. Listen, listen, this one. This. So the two male doctors were pretty cool. Right. The female doctor, but this psychiatrist, like she didn't like me. Why? She immediately start, you know, I got this whole Nancy Grace feel, you know, where she hated me because I walked in the room like her. And she just had this. I could just tell she just this disdain for me. And and as we talked and I realized I'm trying to be nice and funny and joke around and, you know, be, you know, be charismatic or whatever charming and I'm working trying to work on your superficially charm. As superficially charming. Yes. It's not working on her. No, she's not having it. And then at one point, hey, can you hit the AC over there? Yeah, it's not. I'm dying in here. You know how to do it. You never done it. What happens is at one point she starts in with as well, she's answering asking questions. She's suddenly says, so you involved quite a few, you know, single mothers in your crying. And I went, oh, she said that. Yeah. And I went, she's a single mom. No, I know she's not. No, but she just like everything she was asking was normal. Yeah. And then suddenly boom. So anyway, she says something about mothers or women or single. And I went, well, what? And she goes, well, I understand you involved several, several females in your crying. And I went, well, no, I said I involved, there were people involved in my crime. I said a few of them happened to be single mothers. But I said, but I didn't involve them. Like, you know, pick them out. Yeah. And I was like, she's like, well, you were dating them. Right. I was like, well, I've dated a few women, but most women in their 30s, I go in the US, your 30 years old and you're single. You probably have a kid and she goes, not all of them have a kid. I said, yeah, I understand not all of them have a kid. But 80 or 90% of them have kids. And she went, she said, well, that seems like a high statistics. I figured what you know, I was just like, where we're going. She's kind of argumentative. And I was like, okay, so I said, listen, let me explain some. I said, she's like, why would they want to be involved in your crime? I said, because I was making money and I was dating them. I go, and I'm not running a charity here. I'm not just giving you money. And they start saying, hey, can I do something? Can I get involved? And so if I happen to say, well, I mean, you could do this or you could do this. And that would, we could, we would share in the profit or you'd make 50,000 or 100,000 or whatever. But you got to do this and this and this. Because otherwise I said, I don't need them. Yeah. So I said, I'm not going saying, hey, I'm dating you. Here's 50 grand. If you're saying I want to make some money. And I say, okay, well, here's what I'm doing. You can do this. And they say, absolutely, I want to do that. Then that's great. I said, I said, now, you're making it seem like I targeted them. I said, which I absolutely did not. And she's like, well, that's, that's what, you know, what she basically starts making it sound like. Like, that's what it is or something. I was like, that's not what it like. I don't know where you're getting this. Like, I mean, these women came up with this whole scheme to get a lesser sentence. And I explained how that whole thing kind of took off. And I said, I said, but you know what? I said, you know what? I said, listen, just to wrap this up real quick. I go, if that's what I said, that I said that if you want to wrap this line of questioning up, I said, absolutely, I targeted single mothers. I forced them to help me with their crimes. I sent them all to prison. I said, I left them with nothing. I said, is that what you want? Because I I said, that's what you want. That's what you want. I'm good. So it was something along those lines where I just snapped and she was like, well, I'm just, and then we went on. It was just like, like, I'm, you know, and this is that, and I even said, I think I even said this. I said, you know what the worst thing about this whole line of questioning is I said, really, you really went that far to say that to her? Well, because yeah, because she was a cynic. Well, here's the, the issue is look, I'm accused, you're accusing me of taking part in the Kennedy assassination. And then if I say, what are you talking about? Like I wasn't, I didn't help kill John F. Kenny. What are you talking about? That's ridiculous. Like I, I, you know what they, then they say, oh, you're unwilling to take responsibility is yes. Just like I'm unwilling to take responsibility for the bombing of Pearl Harbor or the, you know, the invasion of, you know, Iraq or, you know, whatever, all these other things that I had nothing to do with like, so you, it's hard to say that's not true without then they just spin it. And you then you look like, oh, you're done. And I said, so I said, look, I said, I'm willing to own up to everything I've ever done. I said, if I did that, I said, I'd be laughing about it with you. I'd say, yeah, that's what I did. Ha, welcome. I said, but I didn't. I said, so I'm not willing to live under that yoke. And that was it. And she went, well, and then she kept going that chick hated my guts. Like I know she just disliked me. And, you know, I tried to be nice to her. And everything was, she just seemed like she had a little dig every chance. Was that the interview where you sent me the photo where you're like in that big room with the cool landing where it looks like it's like a, like a psychiatrist office or something. Yes. Very modern. It's on the sound studio. Blond Lady. Right. No redhead. She was redhead. Redhead. Okay. Yeah. I can't wait to see that now. She really sold me on that part of it. She was super pretty. Like she was like the worst kind of woman. She was like pretty and smart. Oh, yeah. What a horrible combination. Like I mean, like like never win. No, you can't. You can't. You can't. You can't. You can't feel horrible. Yeah. For like any guy that dates her because she's also a psychiatrist. So no matter what you do, she's can spin it and twist it and tweak it. And this is like, I can't win an argument with you. Like the worst thing is the dating a chick. The worst thing is to be a dumb guy dating a smart. You know what I mean? Right. Or maybe it could be the best thing. Or a smart guy and she's smarter than you. Which is even worse because you can't even fall back on these stupid. Just like you guys were crashing, right? Horrible. Jesus bad as a psychiatrist at, um, at, uh, your appointed psychiatrist yet. No, the one, the one in Coleman. Like she's seen, uh, she's seen a thousand Matt Cox and she was cocky. And so it's like there's nothing I could do. This woman I walked into her office and I'm already just like the whole room is closing in on. It was like she knew everything about me. She'd already taken me and categorized me and said, okay, pop up, pop up, you sit down. She's like, so one of your parents was an alcohol like you're like, what are you talking about? How, how, would you know that? So your mother was she like super smart. Like anything you say, she just twisted this way, twisted this way. Of course she was divorced. Um, because that dude finally just said, I give up. I wonder if the lady in Amsterdam who's interviewing you, what if she was divorced or I wonder what I wonder what she was saying. She was single. She was single. She was single. She wasn't a single mother because I even mentioned she already said that. Yeah, but not just that. I had said something to her when we were talking about dating. She's like, well, you don't have to date single mothers. I said the bulk of them are or single mothers that I'm telling you. I'm not trying to discredit similar to similar. What am I saying? Easy for you to say. I'm not trying to discriminate. Disgriminate. Thank you. I'm telling you. I'm losing it. So, you know, I said, so I said, I mean, what do I care? I like kids that they have a kid fine. So as we're talking, I said, you know, I said, let's face it. I said, she goes, well, you could date, you know, what she started going on and on. I said, well, let's face it. I said, someone like you's not going to date me. She goes, oh, no, I wouldn't date you. And I was thinking, well, that, you know, like I walked into that, like that wasn't you didn't have to say that. I was just like, gosh, easy. Should it hit you while you were down? Was that filmed for the show or? Yeah, the whole thing, you should they had me doing all these tests like I'm answering. Yeah, it was all messed up. That's crazy. Yeah. It's crazy. They don't want to work in the time and the planning and the production that goes into those shows, man. Yeah, this thing was nice. This was a good show. Like, and they had a budget like everything was top notch. It's not like you can say, they were chintzy here. They scrimmed here. No, did you hear about the new CBS show? They just were announced called the activist? No, what is it? It's a CBS is they have, I guess they've already produced it, but it's a new show that they're getting ready to release called the activist. And it's a game show. It's a competition show for activists. So for like for like activists for social justice or or climate change and they compete. It's a game show? Not a game show. It's like a competition show. Kind of like American. So they follow you around for three weeks. Yeah. Who does the right? We'll do the most outright. You know, like the cooking shows where they compete or like, uh, how do you survive or how do you compete with that live? I don't know. We'd have to watch the trailer. But I could, you know, I was, if you think about how long it takes those shows to develop and they're just now announcing it, they must have come up with the idea during the whole George Floyd era riots. Yeah. You know what I mean? They had some fucking executive meeting. So guys, I'll see you guys on. Let's jump on this. How can we make money you want to hear a crazy show? Yeah. Activism. But people are going to get bored. So we make it a competition show about activism. Yeah. Sounds like I was just listening to Tim Dylan. He's released a new podcast and he talks about it for an extensive amount of time. And he fucking, he goes off on it. He has the funniest takes on this shit. Oh my God. It's, it's, I can't even imagine what it's going to be like, but it seems like it's going to be pretty good. You know what the funny thing is is like every time I'll hear about some show like that, I'm like, that's, that's never going to last. And then that runs eight, eight, eight years or something like, you remember ER? Yeah. Like I remember ER kick was coming out and I was like, that show is not going to do well. Like nobody wants to like we're talking about an emergency room, like people getting hurt. Like that's too much stress. Nobody wants to watch that. He went like 10 years or something. It was outrageous. It was like the tops. It's like, I can't pick a show. Yeah. So I'm sitting here thinking that sounds stupid to me. It'll probably be on for the next 12 years. Yeah. I don't even watch any shows really except for the only really like cable network shows I watched to support as a sports, you know what I mean, like football or basketball. But there's no really shows. I don't, yeah. I don't watch the only content. Only content. I watched on cable or network as sports. But other than that, it's just Netflix or like Amazon documentaries and shit. I watch a ton of documentaries. We're all watched maybe, I don't know. I do watch a lot of that. Like definitely watch a lot of World War II stuff. Really? Yeah. Why World War II stuff? I watch some stuff sometimes. The new ones when they put them in color that that whole series. Those are sick. I've watched that whole series like three days. Yeah. Which is not really cool. It's called World War II in color. Really? You take all the old black and white footage and put it in color. Oh, it's pretty early to see. It's pretty new. It's been on for a while. I mean, it's the same story. I just started watching this new 9-11 documentary. They just released on 9-11. I didn't. I've seen it. I haven't watched it yet. There's even one on what's the artist? Come on with the Afro, you know, the Bob Ross Bob Ross. I just watched that. Did you somebody did me? It was good. It was good. It was pretty good. Really? I should watch it. It's almost a little like a what's the Tiger guy. Tiger Tiger. Joe, as a little joke, exotic spin to it because like these people, he gets involved with it, they try to take all his copyrighted name and his work and shit and he leaves it to his son and his hair is just a perm and it's a but it's actually a pretty good. It's pretty good show. You should watch it. Plus, he's a painter. You would really like it. Wasn't he like North Florida? Yeah, he was in Florida somewhere. Yeah, I think he was in the underground Jacksonville area. Oh, maybe. Yeah. It was Florida somewhere. I don't know. That's wild. There's like these other painters. They paint flowers. He paints landscapes. They're like the competition and they, you know what I mean? Fuck. And the guy who's selling the books and TV shows, fucking screws the other guys over and Tom's doing. Daffodils now. Yeah. I'm going to start doing boats. What? Bob was pretty cool though. I mean, he's a super humble, like just super chill guy, all happiness and it was pretty cool. He's a weird guy, but cool guy. It reminds me like almost a who's the infomercial guy Billy Mays. You're a mind you of Billy Mays. Billy Mays is not laid back at all. Yeah, but he was like super nice and happy friendly marketing show because there was this other painter in Europe or something who had the show before Bob. And he, but he was like crazy. He was like German and Russian. So he's like shouting and I'm going to do a show and be the opposite of this guy. I'm going to be the nice guy. Fucking all the women want to watch the shows. Can you imagine some just meath out Nazi doing art? That's what this guy was like. We're going to do a tree. The scrape here. We'll take a little. Bob Ross, when did he first come on the scene? I don't know. I mean, that was way before my time. I'd be in that 70s right? Yeah. Yeah. It was back then. So like the whole the whole hippies move, the whole hippie movement was shit. Maybe just after like, yeah, or roughly during the same time, but he didn't see that hippieish to me. No, he wasn't very like hippieish. No, not hippie. No, but he was very like, did he have his own like TV network? His own like TV show? No, he had his own show. His own show. Right on show that like that they put on TV. Obviously not in that work. I mean, say network. Did he have his own YouTube channel? Not quite. Bob was that that's a good one. He should watch it. What's in there? Are you still doing art? Yeah. You just watched the video. You just you just watched a video on me doing. I did a biggie to agie smalls. Oh, I wasn't watching it. You're showing him because you don't care because when I send it to you, when I email, I texted it to you. You don't watch him. Dude, I'm so fucking busy. Stop. Stop. He looks at it. Yes. He has. Oh, Cox. I don't need him. I'm raising a kid. It's I have no time for nothing. Your wife's raising a kid. You've got a full time, nanny. You you you come home and you. Oh, listen, I have a buddy who literally his his wife makes him spend an hour with his daughter every day. One hour, that's it. And he'll call me. He's like, listen, listen, bro. He's like, I'm almost done with this. I got like 15 more minutes. And she's like, get off the phone. He's like, all right, all right, one minute, one minute, listen, I got I got 15 more minutes with this kid. And that's 15 minutes. It's like an hour. I mean, she's like, she's like four months old. She can't even hold her head up. What are we going to do? What bonding? She doesn't even know I'm here. She didn't know who I am. Like it's true. I mean, can I come back when she's seven? Like, okay, maybe we have something to talk about. Like it's horrible and it's horrible, Danny. I hear you. I see the look on your face. Oh, yeah, it's horrible. It's sad. He's it is sad. But it's a majority. It's a majority of parents. Unfortunately, yes, my wife knows. I mean, I'm not. I don't know. I don't really want it. But there's a lot of even moms who are just like, they have children, young toddlers, two year olds. And they're just like, they just want to get away from them. They're just looking for escape from they want to be they want to have a kid, but they don't want to be a mother. Exactly. Right. It's fucking sad. Well, anyway, it's the problem. It's the problem with with the world, I guess. The biggest problem is parenting. That's what creates all the problems. Bad parenting creates bad people. Maybe some case in point. What he's got. Look at you. He's got a job. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. It's doing all right. That is an occasional DUI and arrest and some domestic violence. Did you have good parents? Me. I had, I mean, I'm not getting flagged. Not great parents. What? I'm not getting flagged at the airport. I had a great mother. And she just got stuck with this guy. You know, my father. So Jeremy, you're done? Yeah. Yeah. He was there the whole time. It was growing. Oh, was it? Yeah. It's just, you know, how isn't that great of a guy? There are people that will tell you he was a phenomenal person. He was an amazing person. You know, and then there's his family. You know, it's just like like growing up. You know, he's an alcoholic and there are screaming matches and alcoholic benches and throwing bottles and calling, you know, your kids' names and, you know, it's, it's, you know what I'm saying? Like, my mom, like she's got four kids. Like, what you're going to do? Leave? She can't leave. How's she going to support four kids? You know, and he was just belligerent and he was just, you know, he was an asshole. But you talked to any of the people that worked with him and they'll tell you it's amazing. He was amazing. What did he do for a living? He was a state farm manager. So he would hire you to become a state farm agent. And you're showing up driving a 10 year old Volkswagen Beetle that's rusted out. And two years later, you're living in a three or 400,000 dollar house driving a $90,000 Mercedes and going on, you know, a month's vacation every year and just kicking ass. And they were set. I mean, state farm, it's here. So, and so they were like, you know, those were, they're everywhere. No. Yes, he lived in T, they grew up in Tampa. So, but I mean, and he had like 25 agents and they all, his, his agents were like always, they had this thing called like the millionaire school, but they were always in the top at the top of the whole country. Like they're always winning the trip through. So they'll tell you he changed my life. He was amazing. He was amazing salesperson, amazing motivator, amazing this. And he was. But, you know, he was like the bell for when he came home. Right. But when he came home, you know, it was a different story or he was great. And he was great for a year. And then he'd go on a three week, drunk, you know, drinking binge listening. I got so bad state farm stuck him in multiple rehabs at our whole family go to like a Alonon, your Alonon is. So you have AA and then for the families of people in AA, you have Alonon. So our whole family is like now my dad's got 45 days in this, you know, whatever this rehab. And now somehow or another, I just got sentenced to 45 days where I got to come twice a week and hold hands with all these people and talk about their how horrible their, you know, their, their alcoholic parent is. It's like, what the fuck? How did I get, how did I get stuck with this? He's got the problem. Like, I don't have a problem. Right. Um, but yeah, he, uh, and that's just, you know, that's the whole thing. It's like, you can be amazing in one aspect of your life and just a complete shit and another. Is your dad's so alive? No, that's when I was in prison. That would have been prison. Do you ever rip off state fall or matter spike? No, no, think about it. No, I'm not sure how I would have done that. I'm actually I'm sure how I could have done it. But, um, well, it's funny. I mean, it's, it's a sad thing, but the, the, some of the most six, the fact of the matter is some of the most successful and some of the most creative people are have drug and alcohol problems or, you know, are, have addictive personalities or have vices that eventually send them down the spiral, the dark spiral. Right. So, you know, it's a bit, you know, it's hard. A lot of people can't balance that. A lot of people can't balance having this successful career being really good at one thing and balance another aspect of their life, balance their family life and their professional. Yeah, nobody's got to, you know, it's got to give somewhere in his case, it was, you know, his family. And it's funny growing up like some of those people ever met have been alcoholics and drug addicts. Oh, without a doubt, you know, I, I agree. I mean, I, I know a bunch of guys are an AA and, you know, great, I know a bunch of guys that have drug problems that I think are great, great people. Um, I was just thinking like, I remember growing up, like my parents would get into fights and they might, they would threaten my mom with threaten to leave my dad, they get into arguments and they was, there was going to be a divorce and this and that like, you know, and like my brothers and sisters were like, no, let's, you know, don't get a divorce, like, you know, this and this, it'll be an issue and this and this and this and I was like, the only one atom was like, let's go. I'm done with this, dude. Like, what is with you guys? Really? Oh, yeah. I was like, remember one time my dad brought us drove up, my mom was like, gonna leave, like I'm leaving. I'm taking the kids and he drove us into like the projects, like a really, really run down area where the houses were just crap. And there's like houses, like, or there's like cars on concrete blocks. I mean, there's trash in the street. Like, it's a rough looking area and we're driving through my, my dad goes, if your mother leaves me, we can afford two houses like this. This is the kind of neighborhood you'll be growing up and I'm terrified. Like we're like, this is, wow, he's selling it. Oh, he's really, I mean, and I don't think he goes, and you'll have to, you all have to make the decision. I remember my mom said, oh, George, don't say that. Don't tell them that. And he said, your mother will, you will all have to make your decision on who you want to live with. And I before it is that who you want to live with. And I said, mom, like eight years old, nine years old, and I'm like, mom, I want to live with mom, mom, like the look on his face was like, geez, the words were still lingering in the air. Like it was like, yeah, I'm good. Wow. Yeah. Wow. So never had a good relationship with them. No, no. No. lingering in the air like it was like yeah I'm good wow yeah well so never had a good relationship with them huh no no he died so he died I think 2014 and and my mom died last month oh yeah yeah yeah oh man I'm sorry yeah yeah I've been wanting to do like on my channel I want to do a video because people leave the you did you ever see the videos where I I mimic my mom's voice where I do the whole you know yeah I've heard you know you've done it on here yeah yeah you've called your mom on this podcast yeah yeah yeah we've had her in the photo couple times so sweet rest in peace yeah it's Cox you know I so I want to do a video on my thing because I've got guys leaving comments in the in the comments section saying bro you got to do another video on your mom and then people will leave comments on the mom videos like new subscribers will go back and start watching all my stuff and then when they get the mom videos like bro your mom's a gangster bro your mom's awesome like you got to do and it's like that's been going on for over a month now month and a half now and I'm sitting there thinking I need to do a video but like for a month like I could even talk about it I tear up I was I was just I get upset and but you know honestly like I got out of prison like I was desperate to try you know I wanted to get out of prison because you know my mom's coming to see me every two weeks like and she's old she'd had a couple strokes like I want to get out I want to at least get out and have her see me free does that make sense like I don't want her to die thinking I'm in prison like I want to be able to get out and see that where she sees hey he's doing the right thing so you know I'm going to see her three days a week but in the morning I had breakfast with her three three mornings a week and then I would have dinner with her once a week Wow so I go get her like you know Olive Garden you're like the picture you're like the picture perfect son no honestly my sister like my sister would see her every day sometimes twice a day my sister handled all that's what and like any time anything that's a lot oh bro it's it's yeah she's my sister still breakfast three times a week that's a lot bro I mean yeah but that's a great son but stop we said that's also the reason I didn't get like people are like oh why don't you you know why don't you get a job doing that really because of our work at FedEx I can't see my mother three days a week I can't have dinner like I can't say hey look my mom she would call me in the middle day you know it's one o'clock in the morning or one o'clock in the day I'm new answer the phone hey mom she would FaceTime me oh you know you know and I'm painting my are you painting you know and I show her yeah so you know that that kind of stuff like so you know my sister's was you know the top notch like but you know I was trying to be what I could be but do you think that's why you're such a good son because your sister was setting such a high bar people say that bro I was a shit of a fucking son so you know because I got out and I went to go see my mother after she came to see me in prison every two weeks right and I yeah every two weeks she saw me for 12 years and so I got out and I go see her she would drive in the woman until she had the stroke and then when she had the stroke she would make my brother take her or she would make one of her nurses take oh absolutely she was a fucking gangster wow she wasn't fucking around that's about us and if somebody couldn't it she said well then I'm pay somebody to bring we're going mom you're tired you had the stroke you don't do well then I'll sleep in the car and they said you know and we have to wait in that area and you know and they said well then yeah I'm sorry sitting down in my chair I'll wait well you know and then what if this what if that well you know what if they won't let you bring your chair and remember that one time they wouldn't let you bring your chair right and I use their chair yeah yeah she's just like how well how was she was she when she passed 91 91 right so you know so I would go there and we would go for what we eat what she would eat and I drink coffee and we'd eat breakfast whatever I told you that she saw the commercial remember I said yeah yeah yeah yeah that was hilarious so then I then I would walk her around so I remember that it was on a on a no it was a Friday so on that Friday I went there and we walked around the whole compound right when I said walk around I pushed her in the chair and her her nurse would come with me her nurse is named Seline super sweet she loves Seline so we would walk around the whole compound and when we walked around once and then for some reason I went let's do another lap and like I never do know that is hot I'm ready to go and she's hot so we go around in the lab and then we go back and we get her out of the chair and she sits down on her bed and as soon as she sat down she went kind of rocked a little bit and Seline goes are you dizzy you know Ms. Cox are you dizzy you know she was I think she's dizzy and I went oh I said mom are you dizzy and she looked up at me and her face slumped and her eye shifted to the side oh and she just leaned into me and I was like she had a massive stroke so we later down real quick took her vital signs bro heart like our like like a bull like just boom boom just fine hearts fine everything's good so we call my sister what do we do you want to call 911 so we call 911 they come and get her she's in the hospital within 15 20 minutes hospitals right down the street so bring her the hospital they say we can give her a drug maybe it breaks it up they give her the drug it doesn't work now what do you do they're like we can put her in the you know we can put her upstairs we can make her comfortable we can do this we don't know no she's not like we can give her a feeding to like at this point she can barely communicate she can she can't swallow so you know she had a I forget what they call it but there's a form where it says like you do not resuscitate you do not do anything that will continue my life if I can't do these things and so if I can't feed myself and do certain things that you don't don't do any no procedures that will that will extend my life so that's a feeding tube that's like there's all these things and they're like well we can put her upstairs in the ICU we're like no no no she has 24 hour care we'll bring her home and they were like we can bring her to hospice we're like she has 24 hour care like she loves her her her nurses she had a great nursing so they bring her back and hospice comes in and they just monitor her does make sense like they're not there they come in once a day they call a couple times a day and they come in and hospice is amazing like if you've never been through like some people will tell oh the tourable to listen I don't know anybody's had a bad experience with hospice like they're there they're they're awesome so they come in what's going on they talked to her or they try and talk to her she can't talk obviously they basically give her pain medication but she can't eat she can't feed herself so basically you're waiting there you're changing her you're you know you're just waiting with her and you're talking to her and and they just they give her pain medication and so after a few days she kind of slipped into you know like not a coma but she just was sleeping you could wake her up but even then it's like she's woken up and she can barely she can you know maybe pump your hand or something and so then like the last three days like I was there like the whole time for literally like that you know so it was like a week so it was actually one exactly when we because it was a third the following Thursday so the following Thursday and I was there like I think I left other than going home to go sleep and come back I left one time to do a zoom call and came back and so it was me my sister my brother and for a week like her family came in like this is it keep in mind too she's been in hospice before and after two weeks she just got better wow she'd had a massive stroke I mean listen she's she's a Viking yeah like she's she's a gangster bro like suddenly she just one day she's sitting up and saying I want to play bridge what's going on why am I am I not at home and you're like the hell's going on like we're playing in the funeral oh my god she's like I want to be in my apartment I don't want to be here you know you're like what's going so Jesus Christ so I remember my brother-in-law he's funny he goes look at they have hospice come in they give us all a big talk you know we're all in my ex-wife's there she's a fucking mess crying she loves my mom crying like my sister everybody's upset and everything we're sitting there and my brother-in-law says can I say something he said I just want everybody here to know there is a good chance a week from now she's feeding the fishes out in the pond and asked him to be taken for a walk he's I'm just saying she's a Viking we all know that bro we just burst out like so like it was so boobies like so I know you're upset this doesn't necessarily mean what we think we've been through this before well they had I wasn't there so yeah so we I was there all the whole time held her hand and finally you know her breath it's you know it's she starts turning blue you know her breaths get deeper or further and further apart to the point where I mean like she stops for like a minute and then you think oh my gosh she's not like it's been a minute and also she goes it takes deep breath and then stops again man that's crazy bro it goes to a point where it was like you got to a point where it's like a minute minute and how where you're like like you know it's coming I remember I walked outside I said to my sister she was on the phone I go Helen come you got to come in come in we walk back in sat down she took her last breath I grabbed her hand took her last breath minute and a half later maybe two three minutes later be honest her nurse Selene goes up listens to her chest bursts into tears runs out of the room and she just never breathes again wow but here's the thing I got was upset about it but it was the best look like my mom said this you know life dangerous nobody gets out alive like you're gonna die in the game of life 91 died surrounded by her family yeah I mean just fucking one bro yeah like it doesn't get better than that and all this of all the possible scenarios that's the best you can hope for yeah absolutely so yeah it was it really thought I was gonna be able to get through this I've told this story a few times take I've told it once without tearing up but so yeah that was it so it was you know a week later we had the the celebration of life or whatever just as if she was in an earn so they's not like a thing you know some view of the body and then like a week later she was we buried her with my dad in Florida National Cemetery or something my dad was in the Korean War so they put her earn with his earned there wow that was it wow yeah so I got to get out of prison I got to be with her for two years that's possible like I'm a post-scenario right right most mothers probably don't get to experience that much time with their kids especially towards the end of their life listen and I was such a shit as a son if I hadn't got the prison I never would have spent that much time with her right because I wouldn't have felt obligated and I had a completely different frame of mind where I'd been like well I'm living my life man I'm living it's like well right then you go to prison and you get your priorities straight and you realize like every two weeks bro like I think she missed maybe two or three weeks when she had I mean when she had the stroke so like it was like a month that a half like she missed a few weeks and and then it was like boom I'm coming on my way you're in a wheelchair I've seen people in wheelchairs you let them in that's awesome she's badass that's crazy man yeah I wonder what I wonder what I must be like for to see your son or your child or whoever it is go to prison for that long for that long what it must be like you know I mean some you know oh yeah she's a they gotta be brutal especially when it's your own kid you'd be like oh what did I do you know what I mean there's so much like reflection that you must do but I mean honestly like you know you know how they this the whole nature versus nurture like you know but to be honest like it's in my opinion I've heard other I've heard doctors and you know geneticists and say it's really you'd be shocked how much nature it really is you know saying like it's a lot of nature like it's more nature than it's not 50-50 it's like 80-20 like you could be the perfect parent to this child and he still is just a psychopath just out of the box yeah yeah there was just nothing you could probably do that is crazy isn't it it's also crazy how some kids like young kids come out like you know people have two kids and one will be like completely calm you know and relaxed the next one will be completely fucking bouncing off the wall psychopath you know they straight out of the box they have all those twin studies where they've got like twins or triplets that were all separated at and moved around the country and then they find them and there are you know there's like three women and all of them are nurses and like that one right one of them was raised you know in a family of like doctors you know one of them was raised basically like in a trailer park where their whole family was drug addicts and they were in an out of prison you know and one of them was like we they're all nurses like how did you all of them manage to get through school and become nurses like you know I'm saying like there's all these nature right there's these guys that like boom these two two male twins separated one was raised in foster care the other one was raised with parents that were millionaires you know they both end up owning businesses that are similar and they're doing basically at the same level they have or married they have a couple kids like they both teach you know literally it's like like there's all these studies like tenure right that is weird it is it is I think that's super odd you know it's like when we when I first had my dog is a puppy we used to take it to like this doggy daycare during the day and it's an Australian shepherd or sheep herding dog and even it never like herded sheep before you know but we took it there and we see you know it's got all the other dog all the other cameras what happened this camera died sorry it's got all the other dogs are in the corner he's running around touching them yeah so they call my mom and they say you got to come pick them up you can't come here anymore they say we put them with the small dogs he's cornered them all and herds them in a circle we put them with the big dogs he does the same shit no but what's hanging out yeah but when my little teacup yorky comes around the yorky herds the sheep dog all around all around the pool that's like a fly buzzing on a caliper my friend Stacy's dog is the same thing he's constantly nudging me trying I'm like stop it yeah constantly trying to herd me and just in you yeah it's in some people and dogs animals everything so funny that is weird isn't it what are your brothers for that I was thinking this better go somewhere you started I thought it yeah just what it made me think of what are your brothers and sisters doing I mean my brother works like he's a manager at like a recreation center my sister is a she managed my brother laws law firm and raised three kit three boys my brother has four girls so no no no more no con artistry no they're all adopted every all three of my siblings were adopted any biological brothers and sisters now all three of them were adopted my mother went in for a hysterectomy at the age of 40 the doctor opened her up her ovaries were spongy and he was like did we give her a pregnancy test and they were like no she can't have kids and they were like he's like give her a pregnancy test because our ovaries are spongy like they went they test it came back boom she's pregnant so so Rob stitched her up she woke up my dad's there and she said how the surgery go and he said your pregnant she said I came in for a hysterectomy he talking about and came back off miracle baby yeah weird huh like she she had been told she was barren that she was a party yeah that's late keep him up yeah super life she been trying to have kids since they got married in there in their early 20s this was that they ended up adopting three kids but that's a new right and then just they were like well I wasn't even the bit like that she can't get pregnant right here in so that's wild as weird as crazy story I wonder if you're somehow related to Elizabeth Holmes I don't know is that is that the like I said was forced but it was maybe a little I was wondering what that was going I could have went anywhere we were separated you in Elizabeth were separated birth yeah it was only having like those that's not possible you know it's it's funny though is yeah she I like you were telling me about because this whole time like she's supposed to have been going to trial they spend years right had had been a couple years yeah it's been it's been two three years I don't know but I think it's close to five years five years yeah and now she's finally go I mean and I remember I told you she was trying to say like she was trying to do like wasn't that she was like a narcissist or so she was trying to blame it on some kind of psychological problem and they were like it's like the course not having that we're not you can't well I heard that she had some sort of like me too defense that she was being now sexually manipulated by Sunny her partner but that's what you said that's what you said that's her new defense right it's but you watched the documentaries on her right like there's I listen in the podcast there was like a podcast oh yeah I'm a three documentary in some of her short some are like 15 minutes and then there's one that's like 45 minutes or so like it's so over the top like there are so many interviews with people that work for her where she's coming to them and telling them you're gonna do this or you're gonna say or stop putting those in or you know any any of these that are negative you know we send them off and retest them we obviously like it she's running this whole scam so I mean if anybody doesn't know about the scam is that she went to what Berkeley for like one I don't remember for like a year or something or two semester or whatever I guess two semesters kind of is a year so for like a year she went to like Berkeley and dropped out because she was going to come up what she wanted to come up with first it started off as a patch that would constantly give you medication based on your blood like it would constantly see like how much let's say insulin you needed constantly monitor and that sort of thing and then it turned into or any type of medication really and then it turned into she wanted to come up with a machine that you with just a pen prick of blood it would do like 140 tests right and it was small and compact you could do it and it would be in your local Walgreens and you wouldn't need all these expensive tests and and so I would tell you what kind of cancer you had or if you had you know smallpox or whatever so and and so she started this company called Theranos Theranos and she immediately like she bought got like a million dollars from like a neighbor or something then she got another investor and then another one and then she started doing some advertising and then she did this and next thing you know she got into like some women's magazine and next thing you know she's getting in millions and millions of dollars and she had met a guy she gone to China I think and met this guy Sunny who was Indian happened to meet him on some kind of a some kind of a thing met him and now he ended up coming to the United States and helping her open this company then they started dating he's like what 20 or 30 years older than her yeah something like that yeah he's already successful investors right and not in her league like you know like to me I thought she was she's super I think she's super attractive so you know she's playing okay she's playing but I think she's she's not unattractive she's not unattractive no so she's not smoke she's not look in comparison to Sunny she's a tent yeah she's a dying piece compared not really I've seen uglier dudes in sunny score away hundred checks in her well he's also he's also got like 20 million dollars he's right he can do better for 20 million for 20 million you think well yeah if you want to just basically you just have to have them sign a contract and I'm just putting down payroll yeah of course anyway so you know so they end up starting this company he comes in and he's like a little tyrant he was a little tyrant supposedly and he's threatening people and they're signing non-disclosure agreements and they're threatening lawsuits and they're saying but they started getting all these big names on the board because if you can say hey Bill Clinton is on the board and right it's easier right it's easier like like oh well how do I know this is for real well Bill Clinton thinks it's for real he's he's on our board of right right and one of the main problems was a lot of the money they were raising they were they were spending a significant amount of the money on advertising and not actually making this thing work well for not actually on the product itself they're spending their money getting their name out there and creating a big name in the media but they are still putting money into the the the problem there's still some dumping money into it but you do understand that like the technology doesn't work like you can't do what she's saying you can do right even the machines they finally came up with out of 140 some odd test like it could do like 18 tests and even then half of those were they could do those from yeah right from one drop of blood right one finger prick right in a lot of those they were still sending off samples a lot they were taking full sample blood what it was a vials it's sending them off like the whole purpose that they did what did they get did they get Walgreens for 140 million was that it something like that something like that oh yeah they hit Walgreens for a lot and it's awkward here's the thing too like you're not even telling them what the technology is like they're like how does this work in that work and they're like oh she's like oh it's proprietary I can't we can't discuss that but we basically it's and she give the basic a very broad basic explanation that kind of seems like it works if you don't really know what you're talking about but if there's a biologist there or there's even some lady there was in the podcast I was doing there was even just some lady who you know lived and lived by herself on a single income and I guess she had like some retirement saved up and she invested a hundred thousand of her own retirement into the company and lost it all yeah that's and that's just left and right like this is this is that's what's just happening left right so then eventually it collapses eventually the whole thing collapses like finally it comes down to it we can't provide the machines we don't have the machines they can't do what we said what we've been saying they can do we can't get them they don't even the ones we've come up with they're like twice as big as the ones we've been showing yeah they only do like 15 or 18 tests out of 140 yeah it's just not working and so the whole thing starts to collapse and then the weather is an investigation there's I forget who the big part I just can't get I can't get past I mean you can't get past the fucking fake ass turtleneck and the voice yeah she starts that weird voice she starts she starts mimicking talking like a man if she was mimicking what that she she's trying to mimic Steve Jobs with the turtleneck turtle man Zuckerberg with the voice and though she kind of looks like Zuckerberg she's like the BDI's he does that so she would and everyone's while she would slip like they have her on recording yeah with her second yeah comes right back into her wonder if she's gonna change that for the trial because you would think she'd be more she'd be more likable and innocent being like a girl more more feminine you know I mean yeah and not trying to be like hey guys I'm innocent it's just it was just she's taking this to trial oh that they're picking the jury right now oh yeah she's done like I'll bet you they went to her and they offered her a plea of that's your cue Ryan what he's got to fix you could fix camera um well what was I gonna say oh yeah I'll bet you I was gonna say that's the wrong one yeah brother so picking yeah so that's this is the this is the Wall Street Journal article Elizabeth Holmes Theranos trial and pictures inside the courtroom saga so they're picking the jury and I heard that they have they're having a lot of trouble whittling down the jury because they're asking them okay what do you know do you know anything about Elizabeth Holmes and a lot of them know about her sort of like oh yeah I know she wears turtle necks and changes her voice okay you you're disqualified right you know I mean they want to find an unbiased jury and they're having trouble doing that everybody knows your story well I mean look you're actually they probably went to her and offered her 20 years that's probably what happened they probably came to her and said love yeah she's not gonna do any time male huh I don't think she's in her mind in her mind and her husband you know who the guy's going to prison she just had she just had a baby she gets I I think she gets 30 to 40 years really it's it's a ton of I mean these are people's retirement funds these are a few she's been lying she lied for years they're coming off she threatened worse than made off yeah she's for a reason made off she's people are leaving people are saying this is what's happening you're lying about this these tests and she's telling them we're gonna sue you we're gonna like I mean left one of the guys committed suicide one guy that has to do a deposition she's pressuring him to not say what he has to if he's being honest I have to explain that you're fudging all of these numbers like and so what happens is they put so much pressure on him he's so afraid to testify doesn't want to lie he goes home kills himself is it older oh I think they were gonna fire him too I think he had been fired they were going to fire him and they they what she he was saying like if I tell the truth she's gonna ruin my life and he's just commit suicide so he was yeah he was a lot older right his wife was I remember that in the podcast was fucked up I mean it's like this chick has been blatantly forging documents forging test results threatening anybody who dares to try and expose her and and then they probably went to her and said look we'll give you a 20 year deal like that's a gift but to her in her position where she's living in a multi million dollar house she's she's living in a one hundred and twenty four million dollar house saying guys her guy the guy she's with now he's like an heir to some big hotel empire and they and they just had a baby can't so I mean look she's setting herself up for like like she said herself you need to baby was early for the fence oh absolutely that bad of associate I'm absolutely I mean she listen they probably offered her 20 years and in her mind she's thinking I can't do 20 years now if she had already been if she'd been being held in the marshals holdover for a couple years instead of being let out on bond she would have gotten her head right like in her position she can't fathom being in prison like to her that's hell and she'll never survive it but if she'd actually been held for a year so she'd realize I can do this like right now her expectations of life are so high yeah she can't imagine it but if she had got him knocked down like look she'll be suicidal for a year so yeah in prison but after a couple years she'll start to realize her expectations of life will come down she'll start to appreciate a cup of coffee yeah you don't think all of the wealthy people that she's connected with all of the lobbyists and politicians she probably knows you don't think they're she ripped off nobody's coming to her there's still peep there's not still people that you there's got to still be people on her side especially but she knew her husband how wealthy he is yeah they got money they got a lot of fucking money Matt there's got to be a ways they can slip through this oh yeah this is a possibility no way we need to come back here after she gets sentenced I'm getting I'm telling you she's getting a minimum of 20 years get the right to trial loses she's getting 30 you get the right lawyers and the right jury you can she may get sure go wrong she should plead guilty to 20 years and take 20 on a on a on a wire fraud you're taking over 30 I'm saying over 30 I'm taking the under wow I'm saying she does on now but I'm saying she does for 20 and she gets convicted it's definitely 40 I'm saying under 10 there's no way under two way how much loss is there how much restitution would you go to the next slide uh Brian what do you think you're talking 500 million trial of Elizabeth Holmes founder of the blood testing company Theranos who was accused of defrauding patients and investors began with opening statements of number eight that California federal courthouse the one time Silicon Valley superstar has inspired movies books and podcasts how much money next slide okay as you shown we're Star has inspired movies, books and podcasts. How much money? Next slide. Okay, this is shown reporters, spectators, keep going. Oh, it's got to be hundreds of millions. This got to be half a billion. 37 year old founder of Theranos, faces charges of wire fraud and conspiracy to commit wire fraud. Once known for her black turtle next and baritone voice, she has worn a mask, ignored questions from reporters and stayed mostly silent. And of course, she's also walking around with her mom. They show her walking through, walking into the courtroom, like holding her mom's hand. Are those her only charges? Yeah. You're just a wire fraud. 20 years. So if they said, if she, if she had said, listen, I'll plead guilty to one count of wire fraud. Like it like, if I plead guilty, typically, if you plead guilty, they will consolidate all your charges. So I get the max, you can give me the max. I clearly have made, you know, hundreds, it's been hundreds of millions of dollars are lost. I'll get the max. It's 20 years. No, no, in her mind, I'm going to go trial and I'm going to blame everything on Sunny. And they're going to, you're fucking nuts. Nobody's going to buy it a batter. She's got some crazy lawyers. What is her fun trial? She's in a California court. Miss Holmes mother and constant companion has firmly held hands with her daughter while entering court and defense attorney described her to the jurors as a public servant who instilled in her daughter and desired to change the world for the better. Oh, yeah. She's going to sell it, man. It's going to be good. Did you watch the new cocaine? That's her. That's her. That was good. I got to watch it though, because you got to see the lawyers, these cartel guys hire bro and they get off on everything. We know a lawyer who represents the car. This guy reminds me of Bjorn to his brilliant, but he's like next level craze. We got to get Bjorn back in on this fucking podcast. You're, I'm saying one of the cocaine, one of the, the Colombian or whatever, drug dealers, I thought you would drop pilot. No. No. This was like a Spanish guy. Oh, yeah. George Valdez, George Valdez. Yes. Yes. I had him. Yeah. His son, remember his son had he was an accountant. Yeah. He was a, he did the accounting for a bunch of the, yeah. He was a drug. You've got to watch the new one. He started out doing the accounting, bro. And then he made a lot of fucking money. Crazy. You got to watch the new one. It's pretty, it's really good. I think George Valdez is in the new one. Yeah. He is in the news. He's a really small him. And I was like, oh, I got to watch it. I got to watch it. Yeah. Yeah. You can do it. And I saw, but I, I only, after I watched it for a little bit, like I watched like 10 or 15 minutes of it, I forget what happens. Somebody called or something. I knew. Yeah. They've got to watch when they start to go to trial, bro. It's so crazy. They hire like the craziest, most expensive lawyers. And then there's like a whole deal at the end where like the lawyers got paid by drug money, right, millions of dollars. So they try to like try to get them the lawyers or like oh, you're not allowed to take this money or whatever. And I think that's actually what one guy ended up down the road, getting popped for finally was he paid one of his lawyers one time with the check. And they couldn't, they traced back, they couldn't prove it or something. They ended up getting that charge and they hammered him because they beat the whole reason. Oh, you're serious. They're serious, right? They beat everything. It's fun. So what were there any cops? Because I was tons of cops. The cops that were indicted. Oh, yeah. They came out with a, they, you'll like this part. They put the lawyers pre trial. All of the people who were testifying, there's like a hundred people, a list of them. They printed in the jail magazine in the New York Times in the taper with everybody's name. Everybody gets killed. And so free fucking buddy. So there was a cop and call me. Do that. Yeah. In that prison time magazine, I mean, they're not supposed to, that's just like a murder. They say, basically they put a kill. That's what they said. They said, you put out a kill list. They said, look, we're looking to talk to these people. They're trying to try and try and try these people now. We're trying to talk to them if you can find them. Please help us. So they got found. So, so one of the cops involved in that whole thing, I was locked up with. He had an amazing story. And there was a, there was a hit man that I actually read. There was a book called Making Jack Falcone. So, and I, in that book, in a lot of Jack Falcone, who was Jack Falcone? It was a fictitious FBI agent. Like it wasn't because there was, there was an actual like big time cocaine traffic down there named Willie Falcone. That's in this whole documentary about Willie Falcone. Is it really? It's about Sal and Willie. P.B. Which friends with Willie, the whole thing is about Willie Falcone. This is a different person. So this was like FBI agent pretended to be a guy named Jack Falcone. He infiltrates. But in the infiltration, and when you read the book, there's a guy who keeps, there's all these murders happening happening. And at one point, one of the guys goes to kill a lawyer. He, this guy's killing all these lawyers like, so not the FBI agent, but the murderer who's out there, one of this one murder. And he goes in and he kills this lawyer. He's killed a bunch of lawyers for the drug dealers and some. So he kills this one lawyer, him and another guy. And when they're leaving the secretaries there, like she sees the whole thing. And the other guy is going, let's kill her. And the other guy is going, no, no, they argue. No, no, no, no, killer don't kill her. But then it finally comes down to it with the guys like, why is he like, listen, we didn't get paid to kill her. You understand? You weren't told to kill her. We're not killing her. And he said, and he tells her, listen, this is a guy in prison that I knew named Gordo. He's the one who wouldn't kill her. And he says, and he got 40 years. And he testified against everybody and still ended up with a guy 40 years. So that's how bad. He's got like 12 fucking lawyers that were murdered. He killed. And then anyway, he ends up telling him, no, no, no, no, no, no. And he tells her, he says, listen, when the cops come and this and this, you know, you don't, you've never seen us. He's like, cause I will come back. And if I don't come back to kill you, some, I'll have someone come and do it. Like I know who you are. He got her like license or something. And then he said, you know what? She never says nothing. She said, I am not talking to you guys. The guys, some guys came in here and killed them. I couldn't recognize them. I don't know who they are. I don't know. I don't know. He's like, she never said nothing. It was like, oh, okay, Gordo was really actually a very nice guy. I'm not a lawyer that actually, you don't have a hit out in the documentary. Oh, that's what I'm saying. So I'll kill a couple of lawyers and they do, they do kill somebody, somebody sees it and they take their driver's license and he goes, yeah, I mean, I think that's pretty common. But yeah, you know us, but we know you and he takes their license and puts it in his pocket. I want to say this happened in Miami. It was either like Miami or maybe it was New York or something. I, cause of Jack Falcone thing happened in like New York, but they were talking about how all these guys are connected and they were murdering all these lawyers and this one guy. As I'm reading the book, Jack Falcone, Gordo's in the unit with me. He's like, you know, as I'm reading, somebody saw it and said, hey, you know, Gordo's in that book. I'm like, what? And they're like, yeah, I walk, I go, this, you're in the, he's like, yeah, yeah, page 142. I'm like, yeah, that's funny. He knows the exact page. Yeah, of course he's a big shot. That's funny. So Elizabeth Holmes, anyways, we were talking about her, yeah, Billy, that's the rich, that's a new husband, her partner, a company her to trial, the 29 year old hotel air. Once worked at LinkedIn and Luminar Technologies and is the father of her infant son named William Evans, like his dad and grandfather, how long royalty, how long the plane fucking feds flying in. We got a fucking airplane flying like 10 feet above our building right now. How old know when we're doing the podcast? How long was she trying to get pregnant by this dude? Say one. Oh, I mean, she's second every time. She looked at him, said, you know what we're doing. Come in me, come in me, every single podcast. I wonder if he was just, you think he was just cloud chasing because you know he could do way better than that. Listen, I gotta be getting something out of it. He's getting, he's cloud chasing for sure. She's probably the best, she's probably the best girlfriend he's ever had. Yeah. She's probably the best chick he's ever, because think about it. She's not going to argue. She needs you. Yeah. Even the prisoners after the prisoners are there for once along enough time. They think they run the asylum. I'm not sure what that means. I think she's got this guy roped in whatever it is. Definitely. She's got him roped in. What's his angle? His angle is probably thinks my poor baby, she was taking advantage of by that mean Indian signing. Seem manipulated. And like Sonny's like, so her, the guys, the guy's dad is a San Diego hotel proprietor who's joined the Theranos founder in court during jury selection. He don't, he don't, a ball cap and introduce himself to reporters as an interested spectator named Hanson. An interested spectator. So she's got a lot of rich people around her, Matt. I can't imagine she still has any money. Go next. Right? She still have money. Yes, she's got money. How do you have money after? Well, no, she got this. She hasn't been doing that. You think they were having on a court? Yeah, but you would think they would seize everything. Right. She's got money stashed. The fans look, she's got, she's got fans, there's women, blonde hair, women wearing black clothing. That's crazy. Probably wouldn't be amazing if I have the crowd were all women with blonde hair wearing turtleneck. So they're all just like, tan girls. These girls are like, fan girls. They're all, she's got like a fan club in it. Oh, that's dirty. They talk like Elizabeth. We want to be just like you. Elizabeth, you're innocent. We know you're an, she's got it at this point. She's got to be like, this is nuts. Like even I think this is nuts. And I'm crazy. Where's her trial at? What state? It's California, California, California, Northern California. In her hometown. You know her mom has to know. She's nuts. Like my, like this didn't slip up on her. Like she's already got to know like she's crazy. Like she's been lying her whole life. Like she's, I've got to feel your mom's probably not too far from that too. No. Next. Oh, listen. Guy looks like a fucking dude. I read it. So when I was doing the, the Marcus shrinker story, yeah. Um, when I was doing the Marcus shrinker story, I had to read, I read all these books on sites. He's the pathological liar. Yes. So I read all these book on sociopaths, like go pass everything. And they have all these different examples. Like there was this one guy who like literally had gotten a hammer. This is when he's like seven or eight years old. and they, her, the family had gone to some lake house that they had and he went down and they could hit, he took out a hammer and he went down by the lake and they said, we could hear like, they said, but it wasn't like, it was like he's banging into the, we didn't know what he would. When we would listen to it for God, she said, I mean, you know, for a while we thought maybe he's nailing something to tree. Maybe he's just, he's hitting stuff with a hammer, but there was nothing down there. He could do any damage with it. She said, well, finally like her husband, her husband went down to see what is it? And he was smashing frogs with, and I mean blowing on the park. Like the, like an egg, if you smashed like guts and blood, but she said they were just, he'd been doing it like there were hundreds of them. And it was just death, like just blood everywhere. And he was just having a blast. She said then later did it with kittens, like the neighbor had a drinker, not shrink her. You understand right? Red a book, a red a book about during the show. While I was right. Just how you were doing this right. And she was explaining like like the, so the psychiatrist that wrote this book is explaining just like the psychology and the whole thing. And it was just horrible. Like at some point this guy goes and it gets a job. Like graduated college. He's never had real friends. He's never, she's like, he's all, like the mother was explaining like he's never had a connection with anybody. He's always used people. He's always, he would lie and do whatever he had to do to get what he wanted, then not own up to anything. Like his parents were just like disgusted and terrified by him. He goes to college. Like he didn't do with it. They were, you know, they knew, this is our son and we love him. But we don't like him. And so at one point he gets a job and he immediately, he gets some job in some corporation, starts moving up the ladder basically by just fucking over everybody. Like everybody hates him. He, very quickly the CEO of the, or the owner of the company, he finds out she's, he's got a daughter and he immediately hooks up with the daughter and they end up getting married. And his mother actually goes to him and says the day of the wedding or a few days before the wedding, she says she's a wonderful girl. And he's like, yeah, I know. And she says, do you really have to do this to her? Do you have to marry her? And he says, come on mom, we both know she'll never see it coming. And he, she said like it was like a moment where they, they both kind of admitted, I know that you know what I am. And you know that I like, but they never really had that. She said at that moment, she said, I desperately wanted to go to this girl and say, he is a sociopath and he's going to ruin your life. She's like, but I couldn't. He's my son and I love him. And she was just trying to tell him, please spare her whatever you have planned for. Yeah. Fuckin reading that. I read that but it was horrible bro. It was crazy. The mother just described this guy was just a maniac. So I mean, so what I'm saying is like that out there. But that's what I'm saying is like, so you think that's what she is. I'm saying you know that the mother like, like shrinkers parents, his whole life, he's been lying. Like they've, they've all known it his whole life. There have been all of these signs his whole life. Like you've got, you've got a couple of brothers, you've got three boys, two of them are normal and you got this psychopath. Like you know, he's doing shit that these two, these two may, even if they're lunatics, they're not like this. This is just nuts. You know, this mother has got to be like, she knows. Oh yeah, like she's fucking disturbed. What about this new kid, Steven Laundrie? Is that his name? Steve Laundrie? Is that the one with a girlfriend to die who are hiking and his girlfriend disappeared? Did they find the body? Yeah, they found her. They don't know if it's her though. They haven't confirmed it. They said it resembles her but they haven't done the DNA. I mean, how many fucking dead blondes are out in the desert? Yeah. Like where'd they find her? Well, they found a bunch of dead people over there. They found two other people that they think he might have killed also. Yeah, where'd they found two other sea areas near an area like a restaurant or a bar they went to? I mean, how many cross country tours is this, or trips is this guy taking with girlfriend? Well, the funny thing is, they have a YouTube channel where they travel the world. Hey, I didn't know that. They travel the channel. That's nuts. They have a YouTube channel. I mean, I saw the videos and I saw the video with the cops where she had been, he'd been scratched and he's like, yeah, we got into a fighter. That was like, they got into an argument and scratching it. But she was still alive. Yeah. Not anymore. Yeah, you watched the video that I'm getting pulled over. Yes. Yeah. He seemed pretty normal. She seemed like the psycho. When I was watching and I was like, yeah, she's crazy. But he's trying to downplay it. Like, yeah, well, she might have. We both, we were both upset. But he said it was like, I'm like, OK, he's like a good dude. Right up until he, the theory is what I heard is she's all distraught because he might have just killed those other two people. Where they, I thought where they were together, I thought it was just the two of them. Yeah, but there's two other dead people. So what he said, oh, by the way, this is where I dumped the body and that was an accident. Maybe she saw, they had a pretty, they had a pretty, their stories were pretty identical when they got pulled over. Like she was crying. Said she says, I've been working on my blog a morning and then they pulled him out of the van and his story was to the tee almost exactly to what hers was. So they either, I mean, they had a pretty well rehearsed story or that's just what, that's what I'm in later sparked into. I'm done with this chick. That's time. Oh, we're at mile marker 32. What happened? Getting close to the grave to the burial. We kind of got to choke this chick out. I mean, you think that like it's like, it's on the lamb now. He's from Virro Beach, Florida is where his parents live. It's a lot of crazy people. It's literally directly across the state from here. Exactly two and a half hours east of here. And you saw the third floor. I surf there all the time. Exactly where they live. You know, the sort of... You live on Wabasso. Did you see the search warrant where they were served? Yeah, it was today. They were there for like two hours. There was a search warrant where they went into the house. Well, I think the parents led them in and they were bringing out boxes after their box it. Are they ringing boxes, loading them up and taking them out? So yeah. So I think the parents are like cooperating. Wap rate like look, you know. But they're not. Crazy when we've known it for a while. Like he was probably smashing fucking frogs too. Well, I heard his mom told him to like the night before he went, he went out and he like packed all his camp and shit up all his gear and fucking hit the road. After he came back without her, I think like after they found the body or after he knew they were coming. Well, he's been gone for a week and they just found the body yesterday. Where was the body? Found what? And Utah. Utah. New Salt Lake City. Our scene was coming out of a hotel near Salt Lake City. This is their YouTube channel where no Maddox static and look, they posted this video a month ago. It's got 3.5 million views. It's all from the girl. The girl. He's banking too. Oh yeah. The girl who died or is missing. She had, she got like over 600,000 Instagram followers in the past five days. Well, I mean, it's not for, it's not for, you know, interaction or with a client. And then they got 60,000 YouTube subscribers in the past week too. Yeah, that's a crazy story. 60, 50, 50, 50, 60, 50, 60. So we're looking for our daughter and he says she's in Utah. And they said we looked in Utah and he said, did you dig? Yeah. Crazy fucking story, bro. I don't get it. Like I don't understand. I just, like, I'll commit crime. Like I get monetary gain. I get that. But the desire to murder someone. It's got to be baked in. Like I've hated people. Like I've been furious with someone. But I'm not like plotting their death or I'm not thinking I'm going to choke you to death. Like, and there's people that do it once and then they're like, that was easy. This was good stuff. I got to get me another one. I mean, it's like, what are you doing, bro? Like you're going to, how many people have you dated and dropped off in Utah? You know, there's a, there's a, a psychiatry center in South Florida. I think I want to say Bradenton or Sarasota. And it's an entire sort of like, it's like a university for psychiatry that specializes in psychopath and, and, and murderers. Hmm. We've got to interview some of those guys. Well, I have one guy that actually did a book on that place, a guy who came from there, who wrote a book on it. And I'm having, he's coming on in like the next couple of months. And basically they dedicate their lives to studying people who are serial killers and, you know, do commit the most heinous murders. Crazy. And yeah, I can't wait to have him on here. And because, you know, I think that shit like that's got to be big. You got to come like that out of the box when you're born. You know how can you- I think those guys- Well, I think sometimes you're probably just born about it. And also there's also the study that says that typically it's like a, you can create like a psychopath or a sociopath. Like someone can be created with antisocial disorder if there's some kind of a traumatic event in their childhood. Well, cause that. You know. And others say that they're just born like that. Like there's, there's a case for both. You know, so I think you could probably be some are created in some are probably just born like that. Right. But yeah, but I'll bet you like that guy. I'll bet you he'll be either amazingly boring and clinical or he'll be like have some crazy fucking story. Like he's got to have some like he's bet some fucking he's bet some nuts. Yeah. That guy's met some people there is like, oh, let's not listen to this one guy. You know, tell you. Well, yeah, I don't know if he's met a lot of the people that he's, uh, that he's studied. A lot of them are people that have been already died or, you know, have, you know, like Jack the Ripper was one of them. Oh, that's not good. A bunch of people like that. But I'm sure there are some that he has interviewed. Yeah, I would want to enter. I got to interview these. You have to talk. Yeah. Yeah. That's a talk. Oh, fuck. So what did you show? So after you took her head off, yeah. I took the skull out on war. You know, I put her head off. I put her head on my head and wore it as like a hat for a little bit. And then I took the, you know, it's like Ted Bundy. Ted, why? I think you seen that we've talked about the Ted Bundy dump. Yeah. That was, yeah. That was nuts. Yeah. He was, and he was got married in, in, in jail and didn't get the chick pregnant and married. I think so. Yeah. Boy, he was talking at the end of the country. Oh, yeah. Women loved him. I was crazy. I was crazy. Groupies and, oh man, it was so crazy. What do you deal with? Yeah, that was wild. I have Ted. Ted. Well, Matt, I think we've hit a wall, brother. All right. I'm, uh, what we did in two hours. Is it two hours? Yeah. What's coming up next, man? For me? I mean, I know. You know what? I've hit, speaking of hitting a wall, I hit a wall. Like, so I was getting like two to three thousand new subscribers every month on my YouTube channel, right? In the last month or so, it's dropped down to like a less than a thousand, like 900, 800, 900. Like the closer I get to 35,000 subscribers, the slower, like I'm like, man, it's like I can't break this thing. I mean, at one point, I was getting three thousand a month for several months. Huh. And I don't know what happened. And yet I'm putting out more content than ever. Are you really? How often do you put out videos? Um, oh, uh, every day. Every day. All last week, we put out a video for six days straight. It's every day, bro. And then this week, we're, we're putting out on the new Logan Paul on Sunday. We're doing Sunday. Well, no, we did. Sorry. Sunday. We're doing Sunday, Wednesday and Friday. And then, and actually I think Colby Colby's my video editor, he's breaking up this one video I did with this guy for like two and a half. Or like, it's a little over two hours. He's breaking that thing up into five. And I think he's going to release that every single day. Oh, so you're doing the Vlad TV thing where you do a long podcast and you, you only release sections. Right. I mean, you know, I'm trying to get something to hit like every, you know, look, like I get a ton of people that like, you know, in the comments, I don't have a comment section like yours. I don't know how you, you can't, it is accessible. You can't look in that. Like to feel good about yourself. You cannot read the comments. You read my comments every once in a while. Like maybe every once in a while. Uh, you went a good laugh, Rita. Oh, God, they're horrible, bro. Like I don't, you have almost half a million subscribers. People hate your guts. Yeah. They, they, they, they say what? I mean, they really say horrible things. What do they say? About you? Yeah, I remember right at a long time. Bro, you give a couple good ones. Yeah. What do you mean? They're, I mean, obviously, you know, that, that they're not thrilled with you. They dislike you the most. Yeah, yeah, yeah. The most. Like I've seen some pretty good ones though. And on the last few podcasts that you did, there were some pretty positive ones. There were some good ones that I, yeah. I remember I sent you a couple screenshots. Oh, the last time I dug into the comments, it was pretty positive. But I haven't been in their sense. A lot of them are what I've been staying away. The interrupting the, these guys have a, what really is that kind of really like, I mean, look, I know, what am I supposed to say? I don't want to say it. I mean, they're all, you know, stupid. They're, you know, they can't travel a conversation. True. I mean, just, it's just, it's drawn and on. I mean, it's all true. We are stupid. We can't follow conversation. We don't, we're fucking retards. They, they go on. I mean, I listen to them. Well, then why are they watching? That's the internet for you. They tell it in mine is like completely different. Like I probably get, no, they genuinely love you. For every 20 I do get one guy who's like this, rats, come on. He's with garbage. And I'm like, I'm like, well, did you at least subscribe? Yeah, right. Please share the video. Please, come back low. Yes, I understand. That's the guy who's already subscribed. Right. Yeah. You know, so yeah. So I, but for the most part, mine's positive. And I get a ton of like likes, like there's always like what, I think there's maybe three guys that as soon as they, oh, Cox just posted dislike. And then they, that's it. Now leave a mean comment. Dislike, just like two or three guys like that for every video. And then there's like 350 or 500 that are like like like like like like as much as the comments are so can be such a cesspool and so negative. I do love the comments. There's so some of the insults. Oh, they're good. Our whole life. Use dive sharp. The thing about it is is once you actually dive into it, it's hard to get out of it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, easily. Yeah. And it's like, it's like the greatest thing about those comments is it's like a whole separate organism from the video or the content. So you have the video, you dive into the comments and it's like a whole other world. It is. You know what I mean? It's such a cool thing. I love it when they argue with each other. Oh, yeah. It's like 17, 18, 20, 30, 30 different comments back for that. The guys just, it's like, nice. And it's one of the greatest things about YouTube is that when you see the video, you know you get this great fucking edition of this comment section, you see something like, oh, I know someone said something funny about this. You immediately scroll down. You want to see. And it's like a competition. It's like a writing competition to see who can come up with the funniest. The funniest take funniest or most clever take on what just happened in that video. And then that person gets attention. They get up, up votes, you know what I mean? So they get more people go to their channel or whatever. So it's cool. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't know that. Yeah. What do you mean? You're just like, right? I see that. So it up votes it to the top though, the top comments, it takes up there. Oh, okay. So popular comments within the comments section. Exactly. Well, I thought you meant going to people to see, oh, this guy fucking left a comment with 100 likes on it. Let's see what he's got going on. Right. He's funny. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I folks in the comments about how much they hate me. I love them. What I'm going to get here, he'll have, he'll have diving into tonight. 50 comments now. I say, we love you, Dan. I'll listen to the box. No, they'll be like, yeah, you're right. We hate you. We hate you, you fucking rat. The rat. Oh, what? All right, buddy. Parlay the Plugs, man. What do we, what do we have to do? Subscribe to Matt's YouTube channel. Nobody's, at this point, you know, 95% of, no, I mean, I have a YouTube channel. I'm like, subscribe to my YouTube channel. I need to get over 35,000. I need to get up to 50,000. I feel like 50,000 and I can actually start making some money. But, you know, but yeah, I'm, Zach, my buddy, Zach does the podcast with me. And yeah, so we do that. We interview you ought to interview Josh. Did I send you Josh's, I interview Josh? Who's he? Josh is a guy that runs a YouTube channel called, we'll talk about it after the show. Oh, okay. He will. Anyway, he's got a great crime story. Super cool guy. Okay. Perfect. We'll do it. I sent you this stuff. Anything I send you, you don't, you don't look at anything I send you. You're not the only one. He just, everybody. He's a big shot. You're a big shot. You don't use, you know, he gets it and he's like, Oh, it's not true. What do these peasants want? Yeah. Yeah, okay. Please. Matt, thank you. Thank you for being on the show. I appreciate it. Everyone else appreciate it. And I stopped and got you Starbucks. I got you. Got you. Yeah. All right. I'm not a bad guy. You're a great guy. I'm not a great guy, but I'm not bad. All right. Are we done? Goodbye world.