Last night at 632, Eastern Time, right in the middle of dinner, Donald Trump said out a truth post, his version of Twitter in which he announced a ceasefire with Iran. Here's exactly what he said. This would be a one hour and 28 minutes before the total destruction of Iran that he had been promising, the use of the implied use of nuclear weapons or some other weapon of mass destruction of weapon powerful enough to eliminate an entire country in one night, as he said. So, that's what people were expecting to see. That's what he promised to deliver and instead this statement. Subjects of the Islamic Republic of Iran agreeing to the complete, immediate and safe opening of the Strait of Hormuz, I agree to suspend the bombing and attack of Iran for a period of two weeks. We've already met and exceeded all military objectives and are very far along with the definitive agreement concerning long-term peace with Iran and peace in the Middle East. We received a 10-point proposal from Iran and believe it is a workable basis on which to negotiate. Almost all the various points of past contention have been agreed to between the U.S. and Iran, but a two-week period will allow the agreement to be finalized and consummated on behalf of the United States of America as president and also representing the countries of the Middle East. It's an honor to have this long-term problem close to resolution. Well, amen. Cold water on a hot day, the nation, the world, breathed a sigh or relief, and particularly pleased for people who have fought in previous wars, people in the GWAT generation, people who are conspicuously absent from the Fox News analysis of this war, people who know it is to fight wars, because one of the things that people who fight wars or see them up close to learn is that almost anything is better than war. Even a step back or a step down, even giving up something you want, well, bitter is better than total war, because there is nothing worse in this life than total war. And that's a generational lesson. Every generation that experiences total war learns that lesson. And so the most eloquent writing about why war is bad is written by people who have seen it and experienced it. Every big war produces an degeneration of writers calling for no more wars. And then, predictably, inevitably, cyclically, the next generation forgets that lesson, maybe the key lesson of existence and the cycle of wars continues. So last night, seemed like a victory for the United States, even though it was strictly speaking probably a loss. Now, the president didn't explain what's in this 10-point plan, this proposed agreement that he'd receive from the government of Iran, but we know roughly what was in it. There've been a bunch of versions of it floating around, are they real? A 10-point, 15-point, it's impossible to know. But the big picture points are known. And first among them is the current government of Iran will stay in power. That's the first point. So regime change did not work. Everyone emits that now, including the Israeli government with whom we're embarked on this adventure. It understands that there is no way to dislodge the current government's short of nuclear weapons. And so when this ends, whenever it does, the regime, the Ayatollahs, the terror regime as the sandbox news, will be in place. And that's not a win. That's a loss. US military bases in the region have been destroyed, certainly badly damaged. From some of the military, US military personnel have withdrawn, retreated. That's not good. That's not a display of power. That's a display of weakness. So there's no way to spend that. That's a loss. This war has cost hundreds of billions of dollars of US dollars, taxpayer dollars. That money comes from debt, from selling our debt, our treasuries to other countries. So that's a loss. That's a big loss. Commodities prices have risen. Not as dramatically as they might if this were to continue, but they've risen a lot. That's a loss that's attacks on people who buy things in the United States. And then of course, Americans have been killed. It's not clear how many, because there's an awful lot of lying about it, but it's a substantial number more than a dozen and maybe much more than that. We don't know yet. We will know at some point. So Americans have died. America's gotten poorer. America has become weaker demonstrably. We can't open the Strait of Formus, which is the overriding objective of this where we can't do it by force. That's been proven. And the regime that we described as illegitimate, this craze theocracy, the Stone Age people are going to when the sellover remain in control of Iran. So again, those are losses just objectively. And yet, and here's the point, a ceasefire would still be a win for the United States because war, total war is just that bad. It's so bad that even absorbing some humiliation and some measurable losses is still better than that. And most people understand that intuitively. You don't need to be ideological or just in geopolitics to understand that Americans getting killed, the country going bankrupt, commodity prices, wrecking the global economy. The uncertainty itself is a cost. You don't know what the future holds. You can't plan for it. All of this is much worse than what we'd be getting with an agreement that diminishes off some extent because it's very obvious we could be still further diminished and further wounded by this. So that was the state of play at 632. The president announces what is objectively speaking not a win. Yet most reasonable people accept it as a win because relatively speaking, that's a win. A ceasefire is a good thing. And anyone who doesn't think it's a good thing has to explain why it would be in America's interest, the tangible interest of the United States to continue this to what objective what is the goal known as ever really explained what that is. Degrade Iran changed the regime. What does that mean? Open the straight of our moves. How? Tell us how. There's a one person in the Pentagon who can figure out how to do it. These people wage war for a living. Not all of them are stupid. Some of them are pretty smart. They can't figure out how to do it by force or they would have done it already. What's your plan? Well, there's no plan, of course. So anyone who opposes the ceasefire is not an ally of the United States, but an opponent of American interest, maybe even an enemy. So with that in mind, it's worth assessing what happened to the peacefire. Well, it seemed to last a very, very short time. So not a name known as saying there's no peacefire, ceasefire, but certainly in practice, because very shortly within hours of the president announcing this, Israel are unmentioned partner in this war, decided to bomb civilians in Beirut, Lebanon, bomb civilians, apartment blocks. It's not anti-Israeli hyperbole that's not blood libel. That is measurably true because there's video of it. A lot of it because Beirut is one of the greatest and most civilized cities on the planet. It's not Yemen. Lots of people have been to Beirut. Beirut is also, by the way, the capital of the only country in the Middle East whose president is a Christian. The president of Lebanon has always been a Christian since the founding of the country, over 100 years. So in some basic sense, this is a Christian country, certainly a Christian-led country, and it's not a primitive country. It's probably one of the top three most beautiful places in the world, but it's also one of the most civilized places in the world. And for many years, the southern portions of the country have been controlled or at least influenced by a Shiite militia group, which has become in effect the government of those parts of the country. Cold Hezbollah, you've heard of Hezbollah. I think the US Congress has declared a terror organization. No one's defending Hezbollah, but Hezbollah's main thing to know about Hezbollah is that they are sworn opponents of Israel, and that's why you know their name. That's why it's not just a regional problem in the Levant for you. It is an ever-present slogan that people are shouting at you all the time. Hezbollah, they're bad. But why are they at? Well, they're against Israel. That's why. They're also the people, apparently, who perpetrated the 1983 barracks bombing against US Marines and killed almost 300 American Marines. The United States was in Lebanon at the time. Why was the US there? Well, because Israel had invaded Lebanon. So the Reagan administration in response to what Israel did decided to get involved on behalf of our closest ally and almost 300 American Marines were murdered by Hezbollah. Now, blaming Israel for that, apparently they had advanced knowledge of it. That's pretty clear. It's been documented. But Hezbollah did it. They did it, not Israel, but we were there because of our alliance with Israel. So Hezbollah has for many years been active in the southern parts of the country, south of the now famous Latani River on the border of Northern Israel. So it's a concern for Israel. But Beirut is a separate question. Beirut is a Mediterranean city that is not controlled by Hezbollah. In fact, it's filled with Christians. They define the life of Beirut. They may not be the majority, but they're in charge. And they certainly have defined it culturally. And Israel is bombing apartment blocks in Beirut, Lebanon. You know what the name of the military operation was? Eternal darkness. Israel named this operation killing hundreds of civilians in Lebanon, mostly in Beirut, eternal darkness, because like why even pretend anymore. No darkness, by the way, is mentioned extensively in the New Testament. It's a euphemism for health. And that's exactly what Israel brought to Christians in Lebanon today. Here's a video of it. Okay, a little bit like Gaza. And of course, that's the point of operation, eternal darkness. But what does it look like on the ground? Again, these are civilians who are murdered by the Israeli military using American weapons and American tax dollars to do it in order to stop a ceasefire that the American president happily announced to the great relief of the American people. All of it stopped by operation, eternal darkness targeting civilians. But if you were civilian on the ground in Beirut, what did it look like? Well, we have this video, which is distressing. This is a little Lebanese girl walking out on a sunny day with her father in a residential neighborhood in Beirut when the Israelis come in and level the city. Here's what it looked like. It's like that. Hey, you're not in a... Right, all right. What's going on? Operation eternal darkness. That's for sure. So the net effect was to end the ceasefire. Again, it hasn't been announced, but the straits for moves are closed once again, not open, totally closed apparently. And these Israelis are continuing to blow up Christians, murder Christians, and other civilians in Lebanon. So this afternoon, the administration announced, well, there's been some confusion here, an agreement that Israel would stop destroying Lebanon was not part of the agreement with Iran. And so clearly they thought it was, they thought somehow the United States would get Israel under control as its patron. We never promised to do that. So this was all a mistake. And we'd love to negotiate the terms, but exclusive of Israel's behavior. Israel's going to do what it's going to do. And they may kill more little girls in Beirut, but that has nothing to do with the bilateral we'd like to have with you. Well, race is a couple really interesting questions that need to be resolved before we can fix this and fix our country. And the first is why would you ever go into a war with another country when you don't have a line of interest? When you know how this ain't goals? Israel is a whole separate goal from ours. Israel would like to leave Iran, a husk, a civil war between various ethnic groups just to bleeding wound. And therefore permanently weakened, they don't want to coherent nation-state in Iran because that wouldn't help them. The United States, of course, doesn't want that because you can't open the streets of war moves unless you have someone in charge of the territory of Iran because then pirates will close it. Anyone with minds or drones can close the street. You need a central government in Tehran to keep the straight open. And the United States being, of course, subject to international commodity prices like everybody else and the big economy doesn't want that. Doesn't want the refugee crisis in Europe and the US that will inevitably result if Israel gets its way. The United States would in there with goals that weren't exactly clear. I don't know, somehow ending the nuclear program because it's such a threat even though US intelligence had repeatedly concluded that it was not an imminent threat. They didn't have a nuclear weapon. They didn't have ICBMs. It didn't exist. It was the WMD story from 2002, Redux. But the idea was to apparently push, brush them back a little bit and let them know that you can't do anything crazy in the region. That's not Israel's goal. So the first mistake was lashing ourselves to another country with separate goals. But more immediately, the mistake would be if you want to wrap this up with a ceasefire and a peace agreement, you would of course tell Israel to get on board because Israel is a tiny insignificant country with infinitesally small population and economy that only exists because you protect it and pay for everything. Well, is your client state? This is like taking orders from your housekeeper, which you would never do. Why would you do that if you had self-respect? So the first thing you would do if you were sitting down to come to terms with your opponent, this big country, Iran that you haven't been able to beat militarily would be to tell Israel, hey, we're suing for peace. We're going to get this done. You knock it off. But the US didn't do that. This administration did not do that. In fact, apparently according to the Israelis, they never even consulted Benjamin Netanyahu. They did not tell him that we were right in the cusp of ceasefire talks. Why? Because they were worried that he would do what he did with Operation Eternal Darkness, Operation Hell, and scuttled the whole thing by doing something crazy like bombing apartment buildings in Beirut, Lebanon. So apparently getting Israel under control so the United States could save its economy in the lives of its troops was not even on the table. The one thing we know we're not going to do is tell the Israelis to behave. And that's why there is in practical terms, in effect, if not name, no ceasefire right now, the one that everybody in the United States desperately wants. So the question is, and it is the question, unfortunately, why can't the United States get its proxy, its client state, its effectively its employee Israel under control? Why is that the one thing that's never on the table? That's the question. It's the question that Joe Kent, one of the top US intel officials asked when he resigned a few weeks ago. We got into this war at the urging of another country Israel. The war did not go well. Now we can't get out of the war because the behavior of that same country Israel. Why? Why can't this president or any president say no to Israel? And we have a right to know why. It's not just because we love Israel and it's the only democracy in the Middle East. And if it is, then our leaders are dumber than we thought they were, but it's probably not that because they understand perfectly well how bad this is for the US. And there are, believe it or not, a lot of people in the White House who care about the United States. People with power in the White House, they're not all, whatever you think they are zombies, doing BBs bidding, some of them can see very clearly where this is heading. It's heading toward a nuclear strike by Israel on Iran. It's obvious and that would be a world historic disaster. It's also clearly terrible for the American economy, for the American people, not even to mention the Americans who will die in numbers if this becomes a land war. So there are people working really hard, really late trying to fix this to get a piece even one that diminishes us where we have to take some lumps. They are doing that. That's the only reason we got to where we were yesterday is because people in the White House taking no credit for it whatsoever were working to end this because it's bad. But those people predictably were undercut, our country was undercut by Israel and there's apparently nothing we can do about it. So again, why is that? And once this is over, even before it ends, every American has a right to know why does this tiny country have so much control over our government? Is it consent? It doesn't look like it. Now, Joe Kent said point blank when he resigned. And by the way, the day he resigned, he retained highest level security clearance. They tried to tell you, oh, he was a leaker, he was under investigation, he was a lie, they admitted it was a lie, he was an under investigation by the FBI untrue. And you know what's untrue because he held his security clearance till the day he left the building. So there's no intelligence in the US government that Joe Kent couldn't see. None. He was one of the most informed people in the world and his conclusion was there's something weird going on here. And one of the clues is the butler shooting shooting in the summer of 2024 during the presidential election where President Trump was shot in the ear by a gunman, little over 100 yards away in the roof of a building called Thomas Crooks. And according to Joe Kent, who would know that investigation was closed before it pursued every possible lead. We can be fairly confident that Thomas Crooks pulled the trigger. We cannot be confident at all that he acted alone. And of course we can't know because that investigation was shut down. That's what he said. And Joe Kent, who you can dismiss is a whack over a trader, but you can't say he doesn't know what he's talking about. And you can't say the Trump administration didn't trust him with all available US intelligence until the day he left. You can't say that because they did. He has said out loud, he thinks the failure to investigate the butler shooting, the shooting of are now President Donald Trump and why wouldn't they investigate that by the way? That alone is baffling. Why wouldn't they release all the information they have about Thomas Crooks? They haven't. Why? It was a lone gunman wanted to tell us all you know, but they haven't. Why? He believes that is connected to the control that Israel has over the United States government, the demonstrable control. He said that. He also pointed to a couple of pretty shocking violations of the president's personal security by the Secret Service. They allowed things to happen that never happened around a president. Now maybe they were mistakes. You want to think they were. But who's been fired at the Secret Service over those mistakes? No one that we're aware of. There's not been a wholesale reordering of the Secret Service. Their job is to protect the president, the elected president of the United States. And you do that not just because you love the president, but because our entire system hangs on the idea that the people get to choose their president and he can't be removed by force. That's democracy. If you could just take out the president by force and how is democracy real? People choose someone that larger forces don't like and they kill them then you don't have a democracy. So protecting the life for the president is essential to the functioning of our system. And yet on at least two occasions, they've proven that they haven't been able to do that. Has there been an investigation into that? Has anyone been fired over that? No. Now those of us who don't work there have no real idea what that means. But someone who just worked there until the other day, Joe Kent said, I think that may be related to our inability to say no to Israel. Now maybe Joe Kent's a total wacko in which case why was he head of the counterterrorism center for the Trump administration? That's another question. But let's just see he's a total wacko. But what's the answer? The facts, the known facts have never been explained. And at this point, watching Israel once again not for the first time, hardly for the first time, short circuit American diplomacy, the expressed will of the American president elected by the rest of us to have some foreign country of 9 million people to say no exercise veto power over our president. Short circuit our interest is bad for us. We're doing it anyway because Benjamin Netanyahu wants to. You see that enough time. This is again not the first time we've seen this. It's not the tenth time we've seen this. We've seen it generationally. You have to ask what is this? And you have to find out and you have to err it publicly because it has to end. We cannot be a free and prosperous country until we are a sovereign country. What does that mean? Our leaders elected by us have to be able to make decisions in our interests. Not to think's who's in everyone else. You don't have to end other people's civilizations in order for your own country to prosper if it doesn't work that way. But you have to put your people's best interests first or it's not a legitimate system. And if there's another country and an arrangement with another country that's preventing you from doing that, you have to fix it. And then there are also moral questions. If that partner, your closest ally, the only democracy in the Middle East is killing kids in Gaza, the West Bank, Lebanon, Iran, and doing so without apology. If it's committing war crimes every single day for years with your money and your weapons, at some point you're implicated in those crimes. And you have to stop that too. It's all bad. There's no upside. Where's the upside? And so the United States has to and hopefully the first thing we do when and if this war is resolved is detached from Israel. Not to clear war on Israel or treat Israel as an enemy. They may treat us as an enemy as they have before when they try to sink the USS Liberty in American naval vessel, a surveillance vessel. They treat us as an enemy. We don't have to treat them as an enemy, however, and we shouldn't. But we should treat them like we treat every other country as an ally, but with restrictions and reservations and red lines. No, you can't act against our interest. And this distancing should begin with a total end of aid of any kind to military or economic to Israel by the U.S. government. And people who love Israel, some of whom are pretty successful, can send all the money they want to Israel. And that's fine. But the U.S. government should send not one more dollar to Israel and not one more piece of military material to Israel, not one more fighter jet or bomb or missile defense system or small arm or ammunition of any kind. Because Israel is aggressively acting against our interests and so to continue to arm and finance them, their generous welfare state, for example, or their military to defend their nation is not only country to core American interests, it's just masochism. Watch us hate ourselves. As we fund a country that's killed more Americans than most other countries have, that's just a fact. And not just on the liberty. Every war that Israel has pushed us to join has resulted in dead Americans. And the fault lies ultimately with our leaders who are going along with us, it's their fault first. It's not these rallies fault, it's our fault. But they're implicated in it. This relationship has resulted in a lot of dead Americans a lot. And it's time not to end it, not to set up an adversarial relationship, but to set up a healthy conventional relationship where Israel can pay its own bills and fund its own military and act within the constraints imposed on it by its own economy and population. That's what normal countries do. Most countries live with neighbors that don't like them with whom they have testy relationships, but they make accommodations because they have no choice. There's no country in the world that acts with total impunity because it knows a much larger country will backstop it no matter what it does. That just doesn't exist in the natural world because it's not natural. It's grotesque and it's terrible for the United States and now it's obvious. And by the way, unless our lawmakers, unless the US Congress, restrains this relationship and changes its nature, there's going to be political turmoil in this country. So no-MOS, it is really clear. Israel is pursuing what it thinks its own interests are, but those are not the same as our interests. Now one of the problems with changing that relationship is, well, you're going to have to deal with Israel's agents and advocates in the United States. And there are many of those. There are many of those. And by the way, just to be completely clear, they're not all Jewish. In fact, most of them aren't. This is not about Judaism. It's about blind support for a nation state called Israel to the extent that it harms our interests. And you saw that on full display in the last 24 hours, so the president excitedly announces a ceasefire. A pause in the fighting in a war that cannot result in American victory, but only in further American defeat and degradation and ultimately in bankruptcy and possibly in nuclear war. So this is a great thing. Immediately, advocates for Israel appear on Fox News telling you that this is not acceptable. This is a loss. This is cowardice. Here's 83 year old former general, Jack Kean on Fox, telling you that this is disappointing that the killing has paused just for a moment. Here he is. So there's a lot wrapped up in the deal. My preference would have been to keep the war going as leverage to make that deal. But we are where we are now. And I really do think if the deal blows up, it comes down to car gallon and forcing either take control of car gallon and take control of the distribution of oil or destroy it and force an economic collapse. What do you say to something like that? Most people watch him like, oh, he was a general. He was a general. He knows what he's talking about. He's probably war game this whole thing out. He knows what it is to take car, a guy, land. Most people watch him like, he was a general. He was a general. He knows what he's talking about. He's probably war game this whole thing out. He knows what it is to take car, island. Talk to anyone who actually has been to car, island, where understands the geography of the person golf. How do you take cargo island? Is general Jack Keene of Fox News the first person ever to think, hey, we should take cargo island. Then we control the commodity flow through the person golf. That would make us powerful. No, he's not the first person to think of this. Cargo island has actually changed hands quite a few times through history. Various empires have controlled it because geographically it's a critical piece of real estate. And it's extremely hard to control at this point or once again, we would already take control of the oil. Oh, really hadn't thought of that. How would we do that? And of course, no one ever asks a follow-up question. How exactly would you do that? What would it cost us to do that? How long could we hold it? How far from mainland Iran is car-guylant? Is it within, I don't know, artillery range? Have the Iranians bought this through two? Do they see car-guylant through which 90% of their energy moves as a key piece of real estate? Have they taken extraordinary steps to defend it? What are those steps? And how do we mitigate those? No, not a thought. Just take car-guylant, take control of the energy flows, collapse their economy. Well, that what happens? You collapse their economy and then what? Does that open the streets of our moves? What does that leave us? What does that leave the seven countries that face Iran? No, no thought to that. I'll just do it. And by the way, it's kind of cowardly not to do it. They're children. And not only are they children, we know they are because they have a decades-long track record of bad decisions, not just bad but disastrous. These are the very same people who've gotten the United States into every pointless conflict really since the Second World War. How many of we won zero? Just a fact, a fact that you would admit with sadness if you love the United States, as most of us do. None of this has worked. And if it has, tell us how. Just explain what the United States got out of any of these conflicts. With accelerating absurdity, each one more absurd than the next you can understand. You don't want China to control South Korea. Okay. Let's do the Enchon landing. You could sort of understand why you wouldn't want Ho Chi Minh sweeping into Saigon, which is now called Ho Chi Minh City. Can you really understand why we invaded Iraq not at all? And this war makes the least sense of all. If you view it through the prism that most Americans would, which is as good for us, no, obviously not. And there's no way to achieve it. And you know there's no way to achieve a military victory, meaning a return to the status quo of February 27th because they never explain what those means might be. Because they have no idea because they're children. And so really it's incumbent on the rest of us to increase our self-respect and stop giving airtime or any attention at all to people with a long proven track record of failure and absurdity and silliness, listening to 83-year-old generals who couldn't find cargo island on a map, pretending that their experts on the subject, because they're not. And again, they've gotten it wrong again and again and again. Would you take a real estate advice from a homeless person? No, because they're not going to real estate. So they're homeless. This is nuts. And so for this government to function, people who've gotten it wrong again and again and again cannot be persist in positions of leadership. Doesn't mean they have to be imprisoned. They'd like to imprison their enemies, but in a free country, don't imprison people because of disagreement. They're saying, wow, anyone who disagrees with us should be in jail because they're authoritarian. But it means not allowing them in government. Why? Because they don't have the best interest of the country at heart. That's why, obviously, or they wouldn't be calling for military action that is by definition fruitless and syssophianic doesn't work. Who does that help? Not us helps Israel. That's the whole point of the program. So why do they still have positions of authority in the US government? Well, that's a really interesting question. But we could start the great sorting could begin by disqualifying anyone from government service who holds a second passport. That's really simple. Not just in Israeli passport, but a Belgian passport, a Sierra Leonean passport, any other passport. If you're a citizen of another country, obviously you shouldn't be running our country because you have by definition dual loyalty. You can just leave and go to your other nation. No normal country would allow that. Why would you allow the consuming people with dual citizenship can't live here, though there's an argument for that too? Strong argument for that. Pick a country. If you don't like it, leave. That's fair. Can't use this as a place to park your money. It's a place to hide out or hang out until you get in trouble and then flee to your other country. Why would any nation allow that? Most don't. We do. We got to stop it. But you could begin with, no, you can't serve in government if you've got two passports. Sorry, period. Did any level? DMV up to DoD. No. And if you've served in a foreign military, come on now, especially when the US is at war, you can't serve in the US government if you've worn a foreign uniform. Of course not. You can't hold elective office if you fought for somebody else's country because by definition, you have fought for aims that are not the same as ours. In fact, they may be in opposition to ours. You may have fought against what's good for the United States. Certainly, if you serve in the IDF, you fought against what's good for the United States. Knowingly or not, you probably didn't mean to, but you did. You shouldn't go to jail for that. You can't be allowed to work and say the Pentagon. But right now you can. And by the way, there are IDF officers working out of the Pentagon because they have an office within the Pentagon as they do at CIA and Langley. A foreign government has offices in our critical executive branch headquarters buildings. That's just not healthy. That's crazy. And it cannot be allowed a single more day. Why would it? Oh, that's hateful of whom? Would Israel allow that? Would they allow Americans? I don't know to open an office in the Domena Complex? No, because they're not insane, but we are. So we should stop that immediately. But the main problem with neo-cons of all religions, just to be totally clear, is that not only are they not, on board with the interests of the majority of our country, they work in opposition to those interests. Wars you don't need mass migration into this country and the West. And that would include Canada and New Zealand and Australia, Western Europe and the United States. That migration, which I think even liberals would acknowledge, has not been good for anybody. The fact is destroyed these countries because a country, a sovereign country, is controlled over its borders. Change the population in the generation. Can't do that. That's all been abetted by the neo-cons. 100% now why is that? Well, that's another question. But the whole thing is dark. The owner of only fans is one of the biggest contributors to APAC. Tell me how that works. Don't know the answer, but it's not good. It's not healthy. It's not good for the United States. None of it's good. APAC's not good. Only fans is not good. So maybe it's not surprising. There's some nexus there. But above all, what is degrading to our country, bad for our strategic objectives, and just rotten for the nation is the lying, the non-stop lying, the refusal refusal to be straightforward about your aims. What do you actually are doing for? You never know because lying is totally acceptable among neo-cons. Completely. You always cloak your real objective. You saw this in the 12 day war. Oh no, no, no. We're just gonna get rid of their nuclear probe because it's an imminent threat to the West. Okay, it's an imminent threat. And some people piped up and said, I don't know, this looks like the opening salvos in a regime change war. Oh, shut up racist. Of course, it turned out to be. But nobody ever apologized. And well, you actually are right. You caught us the first time and now we know because we're in a regime change war or an attempted regime change war. Yeah, just keep lying. Just say whatever it takes, whatever's expedient to get to whatever the goal is. But you never know what the goal is because they'll never tell you. It drives people crazy and makes people conspiratorial. That's the other problem with it. Somebody can spare a seat theories. Well, there happened to be quite a few conspiracies. What's a conspiracy? Well, it's a group effort to achieve something whose goal is never stated in public. That's what a conspiracy is. And there's obviously a lot of that. Here's one example. This is from Fox News yesterday. One of its top shows here are two neo-cons talking about what they think the US we should do next in a run. Hopefully if we can get arms in the hands of the people, they'll take over. I'll give you the last four. We have about 30 seconds. That that to me is very key. I've been talking about that in multiple appearances here in on radio. We have to arm the people because if we're not going to do regime change, they need to have the ability to do it. Reagan did it in Afghanistan. He did it in Nicaragua. He did it in Honduras. He did it in Angola. Trump can do exactly the same thing. Somehow some way those people need to be able to get armed and need to take their future into their own hands. It's like they can't even hear themselves. I mean, the other problem is, and one of the reasons you have to laugh at all the conspiracy talk about the neo-cons is a lot of them are not super bright. There are really no very much. So here you have that guy just said, Reagan did it in Afghanistan and Nicaragua. What happened? Well, let's see when Reagan did it in Afghanistan. He sent weapons to a group of freedom fighters called the Mahajidine Islamic Warriors. This is back in the 80s when we were on the side of Islamic extremism against the Soviets. And now you fast forward 40 years in who's in charge of Afghanistan. Well, Islamic extremists, the Taliban. Nicaragua 40 years ago we sent arms to the countries. A lot of people supported it, including me, by the way, to be clear. Because the Soviets are making inroads in Nicaragua, they're funding a group called the Sandinistas led by a man called Daniel Ortega. And we're going to regime change Daniel Ortega. So 40 years later, who runs Nicaragua? Anyone got Wikipedia? Oh, Daniel Ortega. So whether you supported or not, it didn't work. It didn't work. You're pointing to those successes, really? Is it 40 or 40 years later, are run by the Taliban and Daniel Ortega? And that's the argument for sending arms to the opposition. But what's so revealing about that clip is how the actual point, the object of the strategy, is never stated. In fact, it's hidden. And it's hidden in the most sinister way in the language of idealism and ideology. We have to end Islamism. We have to stop the threat of the terrorists. We have to bring freedom to the poor, but I did people of Iran. Well, of course, the actual aim is Israel's aim, which is chaos. The whole point of this, from an Israeli perspective, is not an attack on Israel, by the way. I mean, it makes a kind of evil sense. If you want to eliminate a threat, you can't kill everybody even when nuclear weapons. But what you can do is set them at war with each other. And this has been the way that Israel has conducted asymmetrical warfare since its founding. You sow chaos among your opponents. You get them to fight each other. And that's the goal for Iran, which is just a little bit over 50% Persian. Not everyone who planned the war seemed to know that are advocated for the war seemed to know that, but the Israelis know it. And they know that the goal is to stoke ethnic conflict into some extent religious conflict in Iran. Most Americans have no idea that there are up to five million Christians in Iran. They've no clue. Of course, the Israelis know that. There are lots of Jews in Iran. The Israelis bomb one of their synagogues yesterday. Why? Unclear. Maybe they're just the love of bombing things. But it is a multi-ethnic country with religious minorities. And countries like that are ripe for internal division. So the point of the exercise is not to get weapons in the hands of freedom fighters. Who would those be? How do we identify an Iranian freedom fighter? No, the point is to stoke an endless civil war, which one's ignited or famously hard to end. That's the point. How does that serve our interests? Of course, it doesn't. Israel would seem to have an interest in destroying Europe, certainly a desire to destroy Europe. Prime Minister said it himself, Rome is a real enemy. Still angry about 70 AD 2000 years later. His words not mine. So clearly Israel wants to harm Europe. They've said so. They've helped do it. That would definitely harm Europe and the West. How does it help the United States? Well, not at all. But here you have two prominent analysts on Fox News telling you that for the sake of the Iranian people, we need to do this really. The same people who are being bombed, whose infrastructure civilian infrastructure is being destroyed, the same people who will starve to death if this keeps up, really doing this for them. How is starving me to death in my interest? Are you really trying to help me? Of course not. How much better it would be? How much more Christian would it be just to say what you're trying to do out loud to tell the truth for once and then the rest of us could assess it, which would argue against it on good faith terms? We could probably even accept it, even if we disagreed with it, if we knew what it was, but you never know what it is. With liars, with people who are committed to saying whatever it takes to get their goal achieved without explaining what the goal is. So that mode of communication, of operation that whole worldview is totally corrosive to our country. It is totally immoral. Lying is bad. And because lying is now the currency of government, thanks to people like the people you do saw on the screen, some of us have lost track of this. So you can't accept anything the government says at face value to parse every statement. Well, maybe this means that or it's a bank shot intended to achieve this. You have no clue. That is so bad for your society. Living in a hall of mirrors gives you vertigo after a while. Those kind of people should have no role in any decision the US government makes going forward, period. And if they support harming the freedom fighters of Iran, let them do it themselves. And if they support overthrowing the regime, let them fly their themselves and attempt to do that if it's that important. But for now, one more day, should people like that have access to the levers of power in this country and they should absolutely not be allowed to write our legislation. This country needs to free itself from the influence of a foreign power and restore freedom to its own citizens, the freedom to criticize a foreign country, to boycott it if they so choose to speak their conscience without the fear of being arrested or accused of a thought crime. People like that have made this country increasingly authoritarian where people who are born here no longer feel free to say what they really think. The last election was supposed to end that instead it accelerated it. How did that happen? It's not even clear, but it did happen. And so the first thing we need to fix when this is all over is the system that produces disaster in the first place. Not just to change the president's, that won't be enough. We've just proven it's not enough. You need to change the system that acts on not just this president, but every president to produce results that are terrible for the United States. That's the first thing we need to do. The second thing we need to do is figure out how exactly Iran was able to do this. How did that happen? It'd be fun to go back and look at the tape from cable news in the months preceding this war. And just clip the portions where they describe what Iran is like. All experts on Iran, not a first speaker among them, but no, a lot about Iran is before anywhere heard of car-guyland. They'd know the population of the canoe nothing about the country except that it was a primitive country. And so in the president's, we're going to bomb them back to the stone age. Most Americans, most of them thought, well, I thought they were already in the stone age. Well, who knows what age they were in, stone age or medieval? Who knows what their caliphate was really like? It turns out that their military power and their economic power, we vastly underrated. Vastly, they've done, and this is noted with real sadness, much better than anyone expected, including the Israelis, apparently. No one saw this coming. So how did this happen? How did this primitive country that shoots protesters in the street and beats up women because they're women or whatever they were telling you on TV? How did that country chase away US aircraft carriers that aren't anywhere near the coast? How did that country shoot down some of our most advanced aircraft? Warthog, black cocks, et cetera. How'd they do that? We have gotten as a society into a very bad and self-destructive habit of not allowing questions like that. Honest questions about our own failures. And the reason that's bad is because unless you understand what you did wrong and repentive it, promise not to do it again, you tend to keep doing it. And yet in this country, for some reason, the reasons are pretty obvious, we have allowed the people who make those mistakes to browbeat the rest of us into silence. And whenever someone pipes up and says, wait a second, we're spending a trillion dollars a year on this military, and we can't get our aircraft carriers within striking distance of the coast of Iran because why? Shut up, is law missed? Are you siding with Iran? Well, no. I'm siding with the United States, but what's the answer? We paid for this military. We were told we had total dominance of the skies, but then they shoot down our aircraft apparently a lot of them. We can't know because everyone lies about everything, but apparently a lot of them. But one is shocking. How did they do that? Is it worth having an aircraft carrier in 2026? I don't know, but the people who build aircraft carriers certainly have an interest in telling us we need them during the Ukraine War at the point, maybe a year or two in when the public was starting to ask like, wait a second. Our airports are filthy. Our schools don't work. I've worked two jobs just to pay my bills, and I still can't afford a house, start to add those people, which is most people. Started to ask the question, why are we sending all this money to Ukraine? By the way, where is Ukraine? Putin bad, okay, Zelensky's Jesus got it, but what has this got to do with us? Why is it good for us? And the answer that we all received from members of Congress, Republicans in the Senate and Democrats, was it's a great deal. Actually, it turns out, this is like congressional accounting, actually that money, which seems like it's going to a foreign country, actually comes back to us because it goes to American defense companies, Ray Theon and the rest, Lockheed. And so what we're really doing is funding American jobs. This is an industrial policy, really. And so it's a kind of slight of hand where we seem like we're being generous, but actually we're benefiting. And there may be some truth in that, but totally, I mean, you can assess whether that's like the country want to live in where the only real manufacturing basis weapons, probably not, but that's where we are. And it's not a crazy argument to make on a practical level. I mean, there are military contractors in every congressional district, you're always aware. And so it does produce American jobs, but it also sets up an incentive for those companies and the lawmakers who fund them to maintain the status quo. Of course, always going to favor a larger, more expensive weapon systems because those are the most profitable. A system like that will never invest meaningfully and say drone technology because there's just not enough money in it. But you watch the war on Ukraine and you watch the 40 odd days of the war with Iran and you realize, well, wait a second, maybe we should have invested more in drone technology or taking a big picture look at what the United States would need to project military power beyond a shores and maybe aircraft carriers and the whole suite of weapons systems, the most expensive in the world, aren't really the way to project military power because it doesn't work and they can be defeated or at least constrained at a thousandth the cost by less technologically advanced countries like Iran. That would be a very obvious conclusion in fact that was the conclusion of any smart and non-aligned person for the last five years. Just really worth having an aircraft carrier if you have to open the Straits of Ramuz, maybe not, well apparently not. But we have been unable to have that conversation because the vested players in the whole economic chain coming from the United States Congress through the Pentagon and out to while the entire economy of North Virginia has discouraged it. So we've continued to do the same thing the same way except at a higher volume for a very long time and now we are seeing the results which are embarrassing. And we actually can tell ourselves with the strongest military in the world and you want to be the strongest military in the world because that's great. But if you are the strongest military in the world, why can't you force Iran to open the bottleneck at the end of the Persian Gulf and let vitally needed commodities out to the rest of the world including you? If you're so powerful, why can't you get it done? And so what we've learned is we're really not as powerful as we said we were and probably as we thought we were and that's bad for us but it's also dangerous because it invites aggression. We need to fix that by being honest about what just happened no more lying. We should learn something from what is happening right now. And that process will require the people who made bad decisions to be punished for them, not imprisoned or killed but certainly humiliated because they deserve it. What was that? I mean public official was ever really humiliated even the ones you get fired get fired with like a statement like we think you fear service you're so great you're doing something more important. How about you committed dereliction you did a terrible job. You don't you don't have to kill yourself or anything which can't work here again and we're not going to endorse you we're not going to pass you on to the next employer with like a fake letter of recommendation or you did such a good job. Now you're terrible that's why you fired you only in a system like that a true meritocracy can you have excellence but that's the opposite of what we have known as ever punished nor is ever criticized no one ever takes the fall no leader is ever humiliated only the people beneath him who carried out his orders. That's the definition of a perverse system that produces not surprisingly perverse results like the ones we're experiencing now. That's the next thing we need to do be honest about how Iran this primitive country just humiliated us. That's not anti-American that's pro-American we love our country enough to want to know and we need to know. And the final thing we need to learn from this particularly ugly experience is that you have to have leaders who care about you because that really is the basis of good governance is not brilliance or superior planning those are important sometimes but what really matters is intent is the will to protect and serve the people you've been elected to protect and serve to put at the very center of your agenda the people who put you there the people in your country a love of those people gets you a lot farther than the best funded government program ever made it's a lot like parenthood you don't have to know a lot but you have to be totally committed and the commitment has to drive from the love that you have for your children and if that is the case you'll be a pretty good parent good enough for sure and if you don't have that it doesn't matter how much money you have your kids are going to be screwed up because you'll do a bad job so it's about intent how do you divine intent how do you know what a person wants well by the way he behaves you judge the tree by the the fruit and so any leader whose focus is outward rather than on his own country is going to be a bad leader and this is the core problem with maintaining a global empire you are never going to find a leader you will never find an American president who is more interested in governing America than he is in governing the world and honestly would you be what job would you rather have king of the world the world king of the world classes subscribe here I am I'm king of the world I make all the decisions I'm going to eliminate your civilization for breakfast I'm going to overturn your economy for lunch and tonight we may have operation eternal darkness I mean there's an appeal to the megalomaniac to all of them it's not just this one it's all of them that is irresistible to leaders I run the world now running America by contrast is hard and messy and you know a lot of the people you're going to make them mad you go to ortho who these people don't know who the is they're never going to meet a who the there's no cost to you whatsoever in the short term but let's say you just ran America how'd you like to fix Baltimore be responsible for Gary and Deanna or Detroit or Los Angeles or New York these are hard problems how do you fix American schools they're totally useless no one's even trying and the reason they're not trying is because they're totally distracted well because it's hard of course the solutions are not obvious but they're not even being attempted anymore and this is a generational thing 30 years ago people still talked about our schools we got a we got a way to make our schools better school choice sound like a good idea did it work I don't know no one ever mentioned it again nobody cares our leaders don't care they don't care and that's why the country is withering because people who don't care are in attentive sometimes they're actually a little bit hostile sometimes they're very hostile but no matter what their disposition they're never going to save you because they don't care enough to save you no leader who really loved his country no matter what they tell you would have embarked on this disaster they kind of nod to caring we're going to save you from the nuclear threat of Iran was there a nuclear threat from a run shut up a painter was there a nuclear threat shut up okay okay there's no even real attempt to tie what they do outside our borders with most of our money to any benefit to you whatsoever because that's how little they care and that actually has to change and it's not just a matter of the looming debt crisis which is real the fact we spent hundreds of billions on a fruitless war that diminished us it's not even about that it's bigger than that coming out of this we have to demand regardless of party or even ideology leaders who have a gut level love and concern for the American people that is the test that's the acid test for holding office in the United States you have to care we probably devise ways to measure whether you care but if you don't care you're going to have to join the neo-cons in doing something else so that's what we've learned so far for where we're going whether this ceasefire assuming it even is the ceasefire will hold we want to talk to someone called Alistair Crooks who is not famous in American media by large but is outside the United States I think regarded as one of the most experienced and why is this. famous in American media by large. But it is outside the United States, I think, regarded as one of the most experienced and wisest observers, mostly non-aligned observers, of what's happening in the world, particularly in the Middle East. You spend most of his career as a British diplomat, intelligence officer. It's not endorsement of British intelligence, which has been much discredited in the last 25 or 30 years. But certainly one of the most knowledgeable governments, for most of its existence, I mean, they managed the world and they sent people out into the world to really understood how things worked at a granular level, not just a 40,000 foot level, but understood the languages and the cultures and the geography of the nations that they were trying to influence. So he has spent his entire life outside his own country and has actually personally negotiated cease fires in the Middle East. And knows it very, very well lived for years in Beirut. And so we asked him, where do you think this is going? Here's the conversation. Mr. Druck, thank you very much for joining us. Do you believe that the cease fire that the president of the United States announced last night can hold? It's very trivial. At the moment, it's very tenuous. It's already eroding somewhat. And I'm not sure that the contradictions and the underlying tensions within the cease fire, it can hold. It may be that it's already eroding. The being Israel has been attacking Lebanon. There is some dispute as to whether Lebanon was supposed to be a part of the cease fire or separate to it. It naturely, it was definitely a part of it. Now, Mr. Netanyahu is saying it is not. And it seems to be that that it's being confirmed by the press secretary at White House. The Iranian reaction to that is that they have an equation. Either there's a cease fire or or there's a cease fire, a nobody. I know that was happening in the markets at the moment in the parliament in Tehran. It is the security committee that are saying, okay, if Hezbollah is a target and is being targeted and being killed at the moment, and it is not finding a cease fire. But when they may be real consider that the whole of Israel is not part of the cease fire and will continue to target there. So it is quite tedious and I understand that in the last period, the Iranian authorities refuse to allow ships to pass through Hamas. They've stopped at the moment. Well, here's something that thieves count on security cameras usually stop where Wi-Fi stops. Right? Makes sense. So if you've got to barn a job site equipment parked outside long driveway, criminals does a good chance that nobody is watching this because there's no Wi-Fi. And that's why we like defend by tactic. Cam, it's a new sponsor of this show. Defense cameras don't run on Wi-Fi. They run on cellular just like your phones. They work everywhere. If you've got self signal, you've got security, middle of nowhere, edge of your property, construction site wherever you need it, you don't need Wi-Fi. Big difference. And you can see why it matters. So we use these cameras in places where Wi-Fi doesn't reach. The setup is super simple. You mount the camera, open the defend app, and you are live. You get clear footage, night vision alerts sent right to your phone. It's great for construction sites, ranches, farms, or anyone with a property that stretches beyond a router. And here's something we really appreciate. Defend does not sell your data. Not to tech companies, not to advertisers, not to China. No one. Your footage belongs to you. And that's big. Plan started about five bucks a month. No contract cancel anytime. Visit defendcellcam.com. This defendcellcam.com. Can you describe what you referred to at the beginning as the underlying tensions in the cease fire, the misaligned interest that may torpedo it in the end? What are they? Well, I would explain it, not in terms of just sort of literal what is in, what is not in it. I would say, probably Iranian perspective, the purpose of what happened, or at least the attack that took place on Saturday last until the Supreme Leader, that has given an opportunity to change the situation, to break the corridor. They want to get out of the case. What do I mean by the cage? Well, it's not the sort of physical cage of Gaza, where there are fences and roads buying over. But nonetheless, it's been 74, 75 years of cage. My, if you look at a map and see all around every side, it is 100 in binary basis, all around. It is hemmed in by the city, seem counterintuitive to many of the audience, but actually around this emerged stronger from this month of war than it did at the end of the Cold Day War last two, in many words, firstly, because in economic terms, they are benefitting. For example, in the last first month of this war, they have owned more revenue from their oil sales, from very capacity from car, highlands, from the homeless and being sold. In this one month, they have done double what they've ever in previous years, in one month. And just to take us an example, for example, on something, they loaded five tickets in car garland in it, the terminal there, that was 7.7 million barrels of oil, and they earned $850 million in one day from that. So the revenue from, if you like, the potential revenue from almost will be enormous. It would be probably in a year, I just found that it's really $1 on the basis that they're charging at the moment. They're not going to be charging that but they're also to mandate it in quan, which is part of the bigger, if you like, ban they have, which is to break the sanctions, not only to break the homeless, but by insities that caucus have to be charged in quan, Chinese currency, and not in dollars to be get commercial to pass through bar, test their mile in the Darada island. And they then escorted by the Iranians through the element, the other. But in the other aspects, which will be seen strike probably listeners as even more surprisingly, is that their casualties are probably less than in the 12th day war. Why? Well, because what they learned from the 12th day war is evacuate all public buildings that you possibly can, absolutely hospitals, but everything else, empty state buildings, security buildings, educational buildings, all our effort. And so the attacks which are focused very much on those, of course, who far fewer casualties, you know, there may be a take or someone who unfortunately killed in these, and of course the values be killed. I mean, many civilians be killed where residential areas have been attacked. But on the whole, they have had two or the second thing is that their military is in better shape than it was at the end of the war. But the first of all, the reason for that is again rather strange one, the Iranians bought a lot of these decoys, huge numbers of decoys from the Chinese that are imitated airplanes and missiles and so on. But the Chinese gave them a twist, which was interesting. And I didn't know this before, but they have a heat source. And so the women picked up by regular or by senses. It looks real because, you know, it's not only looks apart, but it actually emits the heat of a real missile or an airplane. And so largely the Israelis and the United States have been bombing decoys. They've also been trying to bomb the main missiles, it is. But if you take a main one like Yaz, it is varied in a granite mountain, 800 meters steep. Really, and there's a whole railway system underneath the tunnels and railway systems under the mountain. And they deliver the missiles on railway trucks. And the railway takes it right up to the entrance and there's a door open. It moves to the entrance. And the missile is, but the air high door comes down and the train withdraws. Well, the Israelis have bought the bombing and bombing this. And, you know, the mansion is getting black or black, but it's not affecting their missiles. And these missiles, and I made this point many times, you know, what they haven't understood about the mosaic system that the Iranian started planning for the St. Patrick War 20 years ago is that they are dispersed across the extent of Iran, which is a huge country with mountains and forests, the size of Western Europe, effectively. And they are very deep deep. That was the lesson that the Iranians learned from the attack on Baghdad in 2003. They saw how our part would come in and could destroy the command center and the military capabilities. Or Saddam Hussein at that time. And they decided we have to manage your way that we will not suffer a decapitation strike. They implemented this asymmetric role where the leadership is completely dispersed across the country, again autonomous, if you like, commands. They have their own missiles. The commander has the initiative fathers to use troops. And they are completely immune from any cattle or communications or an assault or a decapitation strike because they have reset plans, sealed plans. Each commander has these sealed plans of what to do if a supreme leader is killed. And they've held him what the next proposal is off. So it's like a sort of huge retrobuter machine that's stuck into action. The second the command is lost. And it will continue the war with continue with preset plans. And we saw that happen on that Saturday when the Supreme Leader were killed within the hour. Those plans were unfilled and attacks were starting on Gal state military, new s military bases in the area. So all in all, what I'm saying to you is that and people I think could be quite surprised at the resilience that Iran has shown in this. And now they're trying to, if you like, leverage this resilience to bring about a major change in the situation. And the Iranians have some equations that is best to understand, if you want to understand what their position is. It's like the one I mentioned about the ceasefire, but it is security for all or security for no one. Prosperity for all in the region or prosperity for no one. If we are attacked, we will move up the escalation ladder calling. But the aim is to try and bring about a complete change. As I say, the change, the region through the control over the hormones, the change, the region away from being a $1 region, away from it being, if you like, part of the economic, the economics here of Wall Street. And to try and to move to a different economy in the Gulf area. And also by insisting on one, it is trying if you like to change the whole, if you like basis and the whole geopolitical, sit slightly of Iran. And for it, come back as a major geopolitical part in the region. That's it essentially. It's probably pretty obvious by now that you definitely need the hallow app. You need peace and the hallow app can bring you there. There's something pretty starting on Hallows starting April 13th. Mark Wahlberg begins a new series called Stay Prayed Up. His message is simple. Go to church. Take your faith seriously and pray. And Hallow can help you with the last one. Millions follow that routine on Sundays. That Monday comes. You'll have to get busy, the connection to God fades. Now with Hallow, Hallow offers daily prayer challenges, not just encouragement, but structure. We'd actually live out your prayers. Prayer is not complicated, but it's hard. It is a discipline. It's about opening yourself up to God's will relinquishing control and letting God lead your life. And that can absolutely change your life. In fact, it's the only thing they can change your life. Hallow helps users embrace the rhythm of prayer and scripture into the regular routines. Listen, reflect, let it speak into your day. That's what it means to say Prayed Up showing up daily, even when you don't feel like it. And when you do that, God meets you directly. So, stay Prayed Up, download Hallow today for three months for free at hallow.com slash Tucker. There's nothing we recommend more strongly than this. If Iran, it's from what you've described. If Iran were to achieve those goals or even the majority of those goals, it would be a major global power, not just to regional power. It seems to me. Yes, exactly. And this is why I mean, you know, what is happening in Iran and with almost four towns, big ship in the global path. Because already we saw see, you know, signs of us taking place. Their demand to the membership has got to confirm that it is its target is paid for and on. And we're seeing consequently, Russia has already announced that in future any sales, any electricity, the Russian oil or gas or products, fire will have to be in one from now on. That's it. Then you've seen a big European bank, Deutsche Bank, now stopping if you like the issuance so much of that, their debts in dollars, and are actually kind of what that is. But based in either the digital room in the or the ordinary room in the and was a shame, because people have been, it's been over subscribed, people coming back and taking this. So what they're doing is actually, if you like, in a small way, but they're trying to tat a lot, a need a moment shift away from the very leverage financialized economic world, which incidentally has been so damaging to America and Europe too, because it's prioritized the financialized world at the expense of the real economy and real jobs. And it's all about trading and making money by trading or something else, but it isn't from making goods. No one does that. No, not enough money in it. You can make more money in an hour on the stock market is trading across futures markets and other things. So it's also part of if you like that greater project that the Chinese and Russians are engaged in of going back to multiple self-sufficient economies. Then a lot of us based on financialized products and dealings, but actually produce things for people, produce things for people and therefore contain calories to people. And they think this is what they need to move towards and they want to change the Gulf in that direction by persuading them to deal with Iran that they have no choice, but they need to deal with Iran. And they should give up if you like all these big data centers by Amazon and AI centers, thanks to change to a much more simply comment. It's been clear from an American perspective since the first days of the war between Russia and Ukraine that the US dollar as the global reserve currency was in retreat and it was obviously going to change at some point. It always was. And maybe that could be managed in some way. You're describing a very abrupt change. I mean, if a fifth of the world's energy is settled in Chinese currency, that seems like just the end of the dollar as the global reserve currency or maybe I'm overstating it. I mean, I don't think that is the aim. I see a moment this point is to construct and not paid to get labor over the West and to get to understand because it's not just oil and gas. It is also the precursors for equipment, helium, sulfuric acid and all these things that we need for our supply lines. So if there's a parallel I would say that the sort of second part of it is a parallel to what we see in China when Mr. Trump composers tariffs high tariffs 155 percent China's time saying, well, I'm sorry, we're going to influence restrictions on rare and important minerals also until you bring down the tariffs. And that was achieved by China, by using that leverage to bring about a change in the trading system there. And in the sense, hormones, stress gives the opportunity, particularly if the Red Sea is included where so much of the world's commodity is passed and the of course, I'm sound at the least, are quite capable of controlling that in a similar circuit way. So yet it is in that direction. But China, I believe, is very, is very powerful. I was in China at the end of last year. And I was very much aware that they are cautious because the way they've applied AI and sound is not in the way we do it in the West. I was talking to some of the factory owners and he said, look, you know, I was the one, you know, at the beginning of this year, I take it into Go Factory. I avoid this as men. It's now 200 one year later. And he said, all that is because we provide stock AI. You can call it robotics or automation or what or to message or whatever, we apply soft AI for productivity to get our cost. And our cost of falling manufacturing cost of 40 by 2%. And I turned him and I said, that's terrible because, you know, we can never teach with that. We, you must feel where that's quite dangerous because you are into a two cities point when you, because we have cost inflation and you have cost deflation, this is not going to be a very easy thing. So you have to manage your, but you know, your two city and point with great terror, otherwise you end up in a worse conflict with with the West. But the Chinese don't want to push themselves to the forefront displaced the United States. And the special currency to date could do it. You're right. You could do it tomorrow. For example, when I use we chat that in China, you know, it has 1.4 billion users on that 1.4 billion. And you can pay, you can take insurance, you can get a loan, everything you want on that. They can rule that out. So I mean, you know, the scheme is already there. They could rule it out of causation tomorrow. But I don't think they want to do that. They're not trying to create a crisis that will affect the whole of the trading system of the world because China depends, you know, on trade. And it doesn't want to break this system, but it wants to gently remove the system in a different direction. Cost of living is already making it hard to live here and it's not getting any better. Unfortunately, it's likely to get worse. And a lot of Americans feel the gap with credit cards, not just for fancy dinners, but to cover things like groceries and bills. That is a disastrous understandable, but don't go down that road because there is a tax in effect, a survival tax, if 20% interest or more. Why would you do that? Why would you hand money to the big banks when you can keep it for your family? Our friends at American financing have a better way. If you're looking to buy your first home or refinance your current one, they're helping Americans achieve the dream of a ownership with monthly mortgage rates currently in the fives. American financing saves its customers an average of 800 bucks per month. That's nearly 10 grand every year back to you. This isn't just a loan. It's a total financial reset. So debt is tough, but there's a smart way to do it in a reckless self-destructive way to do it credit cards. And so we recommend American financing. They're salary based, not commission based, which means they actually work for you, not the banks. They're called America's home for home loans for a reason called 800 6 8 5 56 96 96 8 6 8 5 56 96 or visit American financing dot net slash Tucker. You mentioned that Iran between the end of the 12 day war in June and the start of this war at the end of February had received quite a few decoys from China. Is that the extent of the military aid that the Iranian government has received from the she government? No, but people say, well, I don't see anything. We don't see it in Iran. No, because you wouldn't see it because what they have provided is that the Iranians used to use GPS. And the West was a hundred quite easy to disrupt GPS signals when they wanted to or to think he was a different location. The Iranians had gone on to the Russian system first of all. But now at the beginning of this period after the June they moved to Baydou, the Chinese digital system, which is linked to their satellite. They have complete satellite system. As you know, the data that we see some of the pictures from them that they're very good. And they also in the in the agreement in the cooperation agreement between Iran and China agreed that they might have access to the highest grade military quality digital communication system that they do. So the satellite system there are first receivers in Iran. The satellite system is linked to that. And the radars are linked to Baydou to a single command post or to each single. If you like mythality to provide the targeting and the data. And during the first stages of this, they also put one of their intelligence ships called Ocean One for the coast to Persian coast. And which was able to intercept communications. It was also able to map under sea. In other words, they could map any Israeli or United States submarines that were operating. Or this was linked. And it's linked in the sort of huge digital map that is available, which gives the targets. And it gives the way in which those targets can be attacked. What type of missile will be used. It was used by the Pakistanis in a rather simpler form in the war against India, which, you know, the the the pilots in the Pakistani pilot didn't have to see its target on radar because it could see the whole the whole situation, the whole map. We call this in the West that I are arrested, politicians, reconnaissance, the valence. This was the big asset that the United States big for the Ukrainians, the ability to have an integrated type of targeting and data all in one or presented even down to a laptop if necessary, but onto a cockpit or into a missiles center. So what I'm saying is, and there's no confirmation of the Chinese or anyone they keep quite a button. But this time that the few is on the other foot is the Iranians that have the IRS, the intelligence, reconnaissance, the valence. It's quite clear. I mean, you know, I don't have to prove it because you know, when it be one, it's so wrong. intelligence, reconnaissance, the way it is quite clear. I mean, you know, I don't have to prove it because, you know, when it be one takes off from therefore, the report that RAF in England, the the Iranians pick it up within a second that it's taken off and they can talk where it's going and what to do by it. So they obviously have much more sophisticated, if you like targeting and data management, fill in the past. I think the Russians helped within a different way more with drones. You know, the Iranians helped the incident with their drones, the shark in drones. I mean, the Russians asked for them for use in Ukraine and they took them and then they upgraded them and now some of them upgrading is coming back to Iran. Go to see. I think. How, how difficult would it be for the United States to defeat militarily the Iranian regime at this point? Oh, I, I, as such I don't think it's possible, not in that sense if you mean to destroy their ability to continue a military conflict with Israel and the United States basis of liberation. I don't see they can the Iranians have even buried the construction ones for missiles. They're not on the surface. And these missiles, they come up if they're not on in a bank's incoming out on the trade. They come up from silos, you know, 200 meters deep and they get to come straight up out of the silo. And then the new rocket, the new missile is automatically there's a rotating. If you like, I don't know, Graham and it moves the next missile directly. It doesn't get exposed. It's not out in the open. It's 200 meters underground. And then the attack or shots assume is the missile has, has left. So you'll be very, very difficult to defeat Iran in that sense to destroy its military capabilities. And it will be even less possible to take control of almost now from Iran. You have to look at the geography. I mean, and the trade of almost, do I understand why this would just really be a non-star? Well, you probably heard a lot about the Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, BB, on this show and elsewhere. He's the guy who's always at the White House working to suck the United States into some war of conquest on behalf of his country. But what you may not know is that the charges against Netanyahu are real. Corruption charges. They tell you a lot about him. What exactly do you know about this man who's apparently in charge of the United States? Well, we are now streaming the BB files. It's a documentary that pulls back the curtain on Benjamin Netanyahu. This film traces the rise of the longest-serving Prime Minister in the history of Israel. And the corruption case is surrounding him. Here from former staff and Israeli insiders describing what Benjamin Netanyahu is really like and see leaked interrogation footage from his corruption investigations. The deal that you were not meant to see and that they definitely don't want you to see. The BB files that offers a rare look inside Israel's power structure and the man whose decisions have once again drawn our country into another war of big war. You can stream it now only at Tucker Carlson dot com. So if Iranian oil sales, as you described them, are potentially going to bring a trillion dollars US to the Iranian government over the next year, that would, I think, from an American perspective, increase the incentive to blow up Karg to blow up Karg, where I think the overwhelming majority of Iranian energy is loaded onto ships. And you're hearing people talk about that. Let's just eliminate Karg Island. Is that what would that work? Is that possible? No, it wouldn't work. And this is a festival called, a festival called, as you know, licensed foreign or most. And on the other floor there are on cliffs and then behind that, it's very, very, very, very with no vegetation. The hills and mountains, those four range mountains goes right down to the streets. So, first of all, is how would you get to Karg? I mean, you can't sail up the whole news. In fact, the met the what I understand is that what they call, I think, any use of the marine expeditionary unit. Each MS something or as from USS something rather economically is proper name. They did a run with 2000 breeze on board and they run a file a couple of missiles across its bars. And it is now removed about 1000 kilometers of the Persian coast because it doesn't want to risk moving any closer, which is what happened to see. Also, which happened to the carriers, they have to move further and further by so that they couldn't actually use the the the fight of the strike aircraft on their deck because it was too far. They'd have to start refilling them even over the target and that is an Alexor risk for them. So, I don't think you could get to set could you land on on on on the borders. Well, how guy on this in our temporary range of the Iranian side of the whole woods. And it's certainly within ballistic missile. So your troops would be there and they would have both missiles and they would have artillery part and all the time. How would you read supply. How would you deal with which you create a sort of an air base for the back. Well, actually, the Iranians would allow them because they they in the Iran air up or they were specialists in the alternate corridors. They were military. The Iraqis to go in their corridors because they thought they work unprotected and then they close the corridor and then they kill the kids in it. And the country has a big moment. But it is a million men under arms and the busies are the are another medium. They were I think not find it difficult to deal with a substantial landing of our troops. And that is terrible. The mountains that you know there are the cliffs awful and she shipped myself. And the mountains also. Or sort of caves and tunnels where artillery is in position digging artillery out of mountains is a terrible expensive job. And in any case, you can't get into that would be to give you if you had our guy and you wouldn't have control of almost because the Iranians have, as I say, and the ship missiles, but they also have which we haven't seen you so far. Submercable drones. These are small drones that are in tunnels under the water. They are submers tunnels and they can exit under the water from those tunnels. They have lithium batteries which can last about four days. They have the capacity to loiter and then you use artificial intelligence to select the target and to attack the target. Then they have surface drones, I mean by 600 fast ship surface drones. Most of those are concealed also. And they have finally which is not not. But they have about 25 to 30 milli submarines. And the the draft that hummus is relatively shallow. The disturbance marines on these submarines are many. They are small and they can fly up and down almost and they can fire and ship themselves from the first, the submerged, they under the water or attack it with other forms of drones by these small submarines. Very long time to go to the uncertain moment where we see what happened over the weekend where the US law of many aircraft partly because of an attempt to rescue to prove from the F-15, but also the subsequent operation which was probably an operation to try and take the enriched uranium from this. And they were very much clear to select the went wrong and there was an ambush. Many things were and helicopters were destroyed in that process and it failed. I think I was what some was very much comfortable. They could do a mid euro, do a Venezuelan. You know the special forces would go in one night over a long Easter weekend when the markets were closed. They would go to where the grossy that has the IEL safe. You know there's half of the enriched uranium sitting in a tunnel in this for harm and take it and then come back and before the market opens. We've won. It's a great success. But it went badly wrong. My guess is that so bad you can't repeat that exercise. Not because the uranium is no of it. They knew all along. They knew that the main aim of Trump would be to try and take these uranium and then put it off. I think we destroyed that nuclear capability. Now we have more than half. And also he said it was 60 to 70 percent for over 40, 30 kilos of 60 percent enriched uranium. When the president threatened yesterday to eliminate the civilization and to destroy the country, what weapons do you think he was thinking about using? I already don't know. It sounded very ominous to me. I mean that he could take a human. This is a big conflict. I mean the huge country. A 95 million people, you know infrastructure or an industry. I mean the size of the whole of Western Europe across it. I mean how could he, how would you do this for any convention? I don't understand. Maybe he was delivering to you getting some sort of nuclear device. But I can't tell. But that's I suppose one possibility of what he meant by. This would be the death of a civilization and it would not return again. In the future it would be over. Well what do you do that in such a big escape? I don't know. Or maybe he was just talking and didn't really mean what he was saying. It was a blaster. We just we just don't know. This makes it very difficult for not just the Iranians but everyone sort of negotiate in the same because they're finding it very difficult. One less time. What is now from. And this seems to be that he wants to get out. Of the storm. To which he was invited by Netanyahu. And then she's just 50. So he wants to get out because he has this timeline. The midterm elections are coming up. Lisa was said. You know I've got a you know we've got to get us Iranian things settled. You know in four to six weeks. So that I can concentrate on trying to say the midterm results. But now after the failure. There are trying to extract the uranium from his ban. I think the only thing that the space. Was a long war or matter that's. That's the best relation. And I wasn't going to work well for the midterms or its situation in the country. So I think he was hoping for a way out. Is it going to work and it work. Well that's what I mean about the contradiction. Iran doesn't want a safer. It wants an end to the wars and end to exceed. It wants to be able to get out and play a role in the region. And of course that is not the interest. Not only from particularly obviously Israel has been pressing. Read the Hebrew press originally. We just were a summary of it. And they've given up on the idea of what they call the regime change. and they're on the realize it's not going to happen. It's not going to work. Maybe it never was going to work. I mean, they change this. You know, the people that press that much frame. And they change this very clearly. It wasn't good. It wasn't good. It wasn't good. Then, they met in the outhouse that they Mars hate car. This has got to be done. Post on the ground car. The key thing that they have to do. Well, they have now come to the regime. I mean, the Israeli military experts who know the region. Like the military defense agency of said, you know, you're not going to. What you're going to do. He said on call card and you'll just basically talk. You will have huge cash in. And so even the Israelis understand that. So that's why we now have the switch. That is taking place, which is over. Okay. Now we have to destroy that infrastructure. Electricity water supplies. Railways in this last day. The entire railway system. All of Iran was has been attacked by. By Israel across the entire country. They've been destroying the railway system. I mean, it is civilian infrastructure. It is a criminal thing to do this. And to the civilian population. And that's what pressing on Trump. To do. Trying to push him further down and playing. They won't hit really so that Iran is. Not functionable as a going state. But it is too broke. And then they want to see it divided up into sort of. Ethnosed sectarian. Speakers. And a rather like Syria is happening to Syria. So then it is weak. And easily dominates it. What would it take to do that? Is that even leaving aside whether or not it's evil. And of course it is evil. But if that were your goal, do you have a realistic. Chance of achieving it. And if so how. it will be difficult. But you could do some of it. The Iranian electrical system. Is not a British centralized. This is all part of the. Refinking of a symmetrical warfare from the 2003 period. So. I think it's a hundred and fifty hundred and sixty different. You know, electrical plants that are all interconnected. and so they have the huge number of small. The decentralized across Iran. Rather than. You know, a few big. Harp. And we'll share it probably the biggest one. That they have. But that's a joint project was right. The day that Iran is attacked that. And I think this was a message. And you are three walk was happening. But first of all, Israel attack. And that's which is another nuclear site facility. It. And has this. Or goes still, you know, damaged from when. From. But then they told Blended and myself quite near to. Which is a functioning. Our nuclear. Far. New. Add fled. Jointly run by the Russians. And is under full IE as served because the. One step like that and then they landed a. lockdown far through the future and then now they've landed in. A recent days. Missile that has damaged. Not heavily. Just. But hit it. And of course the. the I.A. were very concerned about this and the Russians have now withdrawn all their staff from it. But in my view, this was a message not to Iran, but the United States. And the message was to say, you know, well, if you don't do it, we have the capability to eliminate these nuclear to go down the road of it's like attacking the nuclear issue. In other words, to use a technical nuclear weapons. So I think I think this was a pressure point that was put on to the White House to say, look, I do you do what we say and you know, destroy their capabilities, infrastructure. Or maybe Israel will be forced to move to a different level of attack. To a nuclear level. That would not be the first time the Israeli is threatened that they threatened that in 1973. So it's been over 50 years of the same threat. What would, do you believe that that's a real threat? Do you think Israel would use nuclear weapons in Iran? At the last resort, possibly, but not before. No, I don't think so. I think it would be very much a last resort. But you know, Israel is becoming less. I've been writing it for some years to say that, you know, it's no longer possible to see and understand a large segment of the Israeli population through secular rasping or less lenses, which we tend to do. We have to look at it through as pathological ideas and see what they are looking to. And there you see, I mean, you take something someone in the middle, like Smotridge, I remember six, seven years ago, you say, you know, this is the plan. We're going to get rid of all of the Palestinians, all of the Arabs, out of the territories. But we require one thing. This was seven years ago, six, seven years ago, we're missing one thing. We need a big crisis or a major war to finish off this project. In other words, there is a large statement that are not lightning department getting, but actually, are looking forward because this is the redemption in this, in this scheme. So there's no point saying to them, you know, as, you know, way in Europe, you said, well, it doesn't make any sense to provoke a big war. It makes absolute sense that you're an at this pathological, a messianic believer to do these things. So, you know, we have to try and understand it in these terms too. I see. And there is the danger, the sort of eschatological, the messianic theme, but it is present. It's been predicted that it would be present. And it's probably more than half of the Israelis, the sense of the family, the tale, icing the war of Amalek, and this is going to lead to a very fluid to get a redundancy. Given that, how do you understand the pressure from Israel on the United States to continue fighting Russia? It's very clear now. It's always been clear, but it's rarely spoken in public in the US that Israel and its advocates in the US have been the prime drivers of the Ukraine war, pushing the United States to fund Ukraine in a fight against Russia and Putin. Why? What is this thinking there? What's the strategy behind that, do you think? I think it's the same people, and it's the same supremacist taking the idea of control. And the is, I think, in the case of Russia, great ancient resentments, I mean, dating back first of all, to the failed attempt of robotics to institute societies that ended or relies on Amalek community, religious decree, people as just units, units in a society, in a sort of technocratic society that failed and then Stalin was instrumental in the say, believe it, in killing many of those people who largely were originally many of them came from the US and were prosecuted. And I remember watching a video of Putin addressing some of the acidic members in Moscow, and he was saying to them, you know, and he was worrying them and he said, you know that I think that a day was 83% of the Bolsheviks, and most of them didn't speak Russia, basically. So the Russians are very aware of this history, and then they were made aware of it again in the 90s when the oligarchs, the period of the oligarchs, or Putin, and down on that, the oligarchs, there were seven oligarchs, normally, or a sixth of a Jewish, and tied to financial institutions in the West, whether in America or in Europe. And the consequences of that period with the shock treatment, the shock economic that was visited on Russia. I mean, what were terrible consequences on the society. So I think Putin has always tried to carefully maneuver and manage its life. What he understands is the a part system, which is higher and larger the part system in Europe and the United States in the conventional way, they much of it on finance and banking going back to the 90s essentially, and the importance of people, yeah, have pranks and so on. And that has given a very culture to their relations. And we've seen that culture in the sort of obvious Syria at times, but also in the Putin's relations with Israel. I don't mean any delicate way, don't know. I'm just saying that I say he's a cautious person, a lawyer by training, and he understands the power, the global power and its ability to mobilize and its ability to use proxies to work, damage, and maybe even defeat the country. And so, you know, this is, I mean, it's interesting because this is exactly the parallel that we're dealing with now, or with the Iraq in the sense that I think the United States and would like and Iran would be content to define security solution, a permanent security solution, not just a safer to which would involve, of course, things like sanctions or removal of sanctions, very similar to what Russia has been looking for. But just as in the Ukrainian situation, the European determination to continue the war on Russia, you see the Ukrainian proxies has really stopped the ability to define the opportunity to solution. The political architecture, because what Russia wants is quite clear. I see Russia wants to set the bounds of very clear waters of boundaries of the share of interests of nature and water Russia and China and Asia's sphere of interests. What where does the boundary between its life and what does that mean? That's what I think he means when he talks about security architecture. And this is what Iran is effectively saying. You know, you'll have to curb something about stopping Israel because otherwise Israel will not allow you to come to any, you know, any serious meaningful agreement with Iran. And if you don't, and then Iran will do it his own way, which is going to be, and you said what happens about almost, but you know, they only have to keep almost highly close for three weeks, and the pain across financial markets in the west of one of supply lines and the bomb food and all these issues will become very, very severe. So, you know, they're saying, you know, this is your, these are our equations. It's either security for all or security for no one. Prosperity for no one. And we are intent on it. And, you know, the, the Iranians have a huge resilience. They're unusual people, remarkable in many times because they're reading of the revelation of the profit is that you because they're reading of the revelation of the Prophet, is that you are mandate as a human being to oppose the oppression of others. You are mandate but similarly to look after and to take care of the disaster. I mean these are the fundamental things you go back to Kebelai, you see that is the principle. These were the principles, these were the principles of the Imam in use and the third principle was the need to have a tip-mind. I want the people to have active minds to thank for themselves and to think well. And for that reason, maybe compulsory that you are. If you went to university, you have to want to study Islamic philosophy, you also have to study Western philosophy. The two brought together in Iranian universities. So this gives them a very strong and it explains why Iran is doing this and enemy by people who you know are oppressing other people ways who enforce these special lives on some people and off on others in the region. That is where it is. And I think that eventually we're going to get to the point because the tensions in Israel are enormous things that are there. You know the Kishka star went to the cap and the other day and said, listen, the IDF military forces collapse it will totally overexpose. It is collapsing and there's nothing we can do by it unless you want to produce another 400,000 tips. We can't do it. We're overextended. We need to get out of level. We are failing. We have failed with Gaza. We have failed in 11. We thought we defeated Hezbollah and now it has been tricky huge costs on a huge damage on us. You have failed. They are saying that to Netanyahu. It's in the Hebrew press movement. It's in the English language press. It's a real crisis. And why is such a big crisis is in Israel? The army has always been the spinal cord of the state. Left, right, religious, secular, all did their service in the army. It was the thing that kept together. And the people start to say, it's broken. It's completely bust. And the political leadership says, no, you're just being defeated. We are on our way through a great victory. We're going to establish greater Israel across the Middle East. And within Israel, people are saying, you're wrong. It's not going to do that. Actually, you're going from one defeat to another to a bigger defeat by that we have to take stock and take a guide on where we got. Why given the fragile state of the IDF would the IDF be bombing residential apartment buildings in Beirut, not in southern Lebanon, but in Beirut, a country with a Christian president? Why would they be killing civilians in Beirut right now? Well, what's some of the military people in Israel are saying that this is clearly a lost cost by the government there to present if you like, and they could be before they have to receive that they will join the ceasefire. And of course, that this was a show of force even though it was completely ineffective show of force in many terms. This was just simply destroying residential power blocks, many of them, many of them. And it was no purpose other than for, you know, the political grandeys to say, oh, look, we've done we've got freedom of action in Lebanon. We can go over and destroy what we want. Well, maybe we will agree to join the ceasefire from which is a start enough to do that. But it served no purpose and the idea of no, it is actually, they are going to, I think, completely withdraw, except that they say, and this is what the judgment is during the Mississippi. They have to demolish all our houses for a yet of seven kilometers into 11. Black and they have to be like, I mean, they don't hesitate to say it's got to be like cars. And there's going to be a buffer. And the military say, what is the point of that? The idea of saying to their leader say, what is the point of that? Because actually, the, the, the, the, the, as Bullers miss us, most of them are North of the returning. The Natani is the rebel that provides their balloonists about, I can't remember how many kilometers, but it's about the third of the way up in Lebanon. And he says, they can still file from North of the lieutenant into Northern Israel. And they're causing huge damage and huge losses. In one day, I mean, the idea of lost nearly 800 my car about tanks, I mean, battle tanks. Now they, they, they did an ambush and they saw that on other days. And over the days they lost AC and maybe 50 in another day. It's like 2006 in Lebanon when I was there and they did essentially the Mercova there. And you know, of course, I mean, actually, I think a few of the lead tanks to crew get out, but for most of them, they don't get out. So there are big casualties taking place. I mean, the thing is a mess that is asked. And this is why I think that ultimately the demand for that sort of a real see spot is mostly going to come not from those associates around him that are close to Israel to make him from Israel itself, because they've experienced huge damage. And you know, what is the point of this? I mean, they cannot make a political game from the system. They've created mayhem across the region. And nothing is working through their paper. This is not going to be a sort of loving with the Gulf states, a brown courts or anything after what has happened in these in this period. So they have to rethink where they're going. And I see that probably will happen. Maybe not yet. It's not right yet. But I think they will think and start. I think in the United States, in doesn't the US have to think about how to disengage from Israel, given that the cost of the relationship is very obvious to the American public now. We would not be in a war with Russia. We're not for pressure from Israel and its advocates. We would not be in a war with Iran. We're not for a relationship with Israel. So can the United States disentangle from Israel without getting hurt in the process? Do you think? Well, there are those in Israel who advocates me. I know that's surprising. But on the right way, there are those who say it and even let me out who said it's time across the disengage and we less remind on the United States. I think he reads the writing on the of frankly, this is the writing on the world. So let's anticipate it. But how they're going to do that? I mean, is a different question. As I was saying earlier, the whole is not just geopolitics of the region is shifting in because of almost the way the war is. But I'm saying that the main mistake of Israel has been the tactical industries of the Gulf and the Gulf states and the money of the Gulf states, which have supported it. And I think that is probably going to change and change quite dramatically. I'm not sure it depends on the degree with which the Gulf states can also writing on the wall and realize some of them I think have begun to do that. They're thinking about how to deal with how to deal with Iran that they need to come to terms and to come through no arrangements. So they can export their energy and whatever else they want. But that is going to mean and the Iranian say that, you know, you can't do that and also be beholden to Microsoft and Amazon and have all of their data centers. And because, you know, we understand what data centers are, they are for security. They are for surveillance, for monitoring every telephone call, and every structure that takes moves in the Middle East so that you can assassinate them if you want. We are not going to accept these type of technology in the region. And that's why they attacked them. And I think they attacked that big Amazon center in the UAE. I think cost 30 billion to set up. It's the biggest, you want to find it on Google Maps because it's hidden, but it's a huge AI center there. So I think, I think, yes, I think, you know, that is the way. So where, what is the business model for Israel for the next 10 years? That is going to be a question. Where does this war leave the Gulf states, the GCC? It leads to highly damaged many of the people leaving. I think you can do that. And UAE, it leaves some needing to rethink how they can get in life. Manage a relationship with Iran, which allows them to export their goods, even though it will mean disengagement from the Western financialized world. But they will need to do that. I think they will find they have little stories ultimately. That's the moment that for the indignation and they will be attacked and blah, blah, blah. But also, I think, if they want to lose their products, either in the Red Sea, by the way, Saudi pipeline to the Red Sea has just been attacked. I don't know if this can be a destroy, but it's just been attacked for the adversarial alternative to supplying oil, they could supply 5 million pounds per day from both the coast of the Red Sea. But that's been attacked now. So I mean, the pressure is on the Gulf states to come to terms. And some of them will, I mean, some of them will more easily and others may not. And finally, how do you think most likely this is resolved in over what time period? I think that this is going to be resolved in a way that I indicated. I think that initially we will see the negotiations of the Americans, although they've said, the White House has said that the 10 point plan is the base for discussion of our political session. This is the base. This is the anchor if you like the 10 point plan that Iran has produced. It's a real, I mean, it's a real initiative. It's been signed up by the Supreme Leader, the young Supreme Leader and by the security council. It's not one of these plans that have come in from Pakistan by foreign to sort of ephemeral people. This is come out of the security instructions and with the support of the IRGC. And the Supreme Leader, read it, ask for some amendments to it and gave it an imperative. So it is a serious problem. I say that inevitably, in the negotiations, whoever is negotiating with these banks or with calls or whoever, they will then revert or try and say, yes, but we have to go back to these other issues. You may not enrich uranium in Iran. And one of the principles that the Iranian has said is we have the right to enrich in Iran our record for as a source of energy. They will then say, well, you cannot have such missiles. You're going to have to dismantle your missile systems. And you will need to put limits on them and we will have to inspect them and we will have to monitor. And in Iran will say, no way is that going to happen. And they will say, you'll have to give up the whole news completely that will have to give up the rules. And and they will say, no, we are in control of it and we don't intend to give it up. And then the negotiations on the American side will probably say, well, if you do what we set out in our 15 point plan or whatever it is, then slowly sanctions will be lifted on you according to how you behave. And Iran will say, listen, you forget our basic equation prosperity for or prosperity to enough. If you do that, you're going to have an economic crisis. And I think probably that is where we're going to go. There will be eventually financial economic crisis in certainly in Europe. But in America too, the death market will will turn the market, the stock market will go. It will be a crisis and people will eventually, you know, that unfortunately, pain is the greatest instigator of pain. I mean, I see when the pain becomes sufficient, then there will be an assistant in the White House that they have to rethink how they approach this. And maybe at the end point plan was something that they could actually work with. And that they understand that there's what preconditions to us these far, not to discussion once during the season, but to preconditions. And they include the lifting of sanctions and first primary sanctions and second sanctions at the rate. Iran. I mean, you've heard these same stories from Russia. I mean, this is the same sort of thing. And either people will face help to that, or it's going to be a long and painful period in coming ahead for us to because of our lives. It's important. But nonetheless, I think that's not about not a disaster because I do think, I mean, maybe I'm speaking, you know, I'm going to confer it. But I think we in the West need a process of capacity. We sunk into Nehilism, and we sunk into a negative, a small, and economic structure, the damage, the majority of our peoples, the minority that she's reached by doing very little, but many people are suffering today. I mean, it's hard. Jones who get his cancer, it's hard. And I think that we do need a sort of what I call creative destruction a little bit to to help us rethink for a start. What's all the economic structure do you need to to address the problems we have? Because the economic structure we have in this period has not has brought about despite how the world there is you know, the world of the billionaires and the world of the rest which is getting progressively intolerable. And you know, our people are only people wherever it is in Europe and others they think, well, you know, protest doesn't work because we protest nothing happens. We've grown to it doesn't work. We can vote between the oil, freedom, power. It doesn't change the economic system and bring about a change. And that's what we want to see. And I think the whole of this period partly stimulated by what the Iranians are doing, and even by that sort of sorts of about it, these are going to provoke people to think more deeply in Europe about, you know, how do we actually not just produce the cosmetic market relations type of change, but how do we actually find a solution that would provide a decent living for people? I think that's the that's the most hopeful thing I've heard in a long time and I'm grateful for your analysis. Alistair Crook, thank you very much. So if you've made it to the end of this episode, one recommendation, go back, rewind the last three minutes of what Alistair Crook just said about what this crisis could lead to, that the shoots of renewal are poking up from the soil. They are there if you look carefully, see them. What we're doing is not working and hasn't worked for a long time. It's not even worth a portioning blame for that. It's enough to just observe it, acknowledge it, and know that it's true because it is true. The majority of the American population is not being served by the current system. And yet some sort of horrible revolution is the last thing we want. It is possible, and if we're wise, we could make it true that what we're going through now leads to something better, a better future for our country, the United States, and for the West and maybe for the world. This doesn't have to end in total destruction. It could end in renewal, and no one has ever put it better than Alistair Crook just did. So watch it again if you have the time. Thanks so much for joining us. We'll see you next Wednesday.