Three two one Brian Green leaves gentlemen. How are you sir? Good? Thank you How are you doing this man? I've enjoyed your work for many many many years So I really appreciate you coming in. Thank you. I appreciate that. I just tell you I just started your new book and Has it going? It's going well. It's hasn't confused the shit out of me yet But I know it's coming they will be coming no doubt with all your work So the beginning of time the beginning of the universe to the end That's essentially what you're summarizing yeah, that's the that's the backdrop to the entire narrative of the book I basically want the reader to get a feel for the whole thing how it started How things like you and me rise up how consciousness emerges issues of free will and whether we have it and then on to the future What's gonna happen to us and the world and the universe as time elapses to the far far future? It's I'm just getting to the part where you're talking about how entropy and evolution sort of comingle to to create life and When you think of entropy a lot of people think of something dissolving in the chaos Yeah, exactly, but that's the not necessarily the case. It's only part of the story I mean entropy kind of gets a bad rap right? It's the thing that you want to avoid but somehow the laws of physics Don't allow you to avoid it. It's this disintegration. It's this decay. It's this drive toward this order and that's kind of true but the reality of this situation is more subtle because Overall entropy needs to go up, but that doesn't mean there can't be little pockets of order that form along the way In fact, the universe is incredibly clever Stars the ubiquitous feature of the heavens. They are pockets of order that naturally form But as they form they increase the entropy in the surroundings So the net entropy goes up even though this beautiful orderly bright object in the sky appears and it's only because of the appearance of stars that the universe is an interesting place Without stars the particles of the universe would just disperse the universe would get bigger and bigger colder and colder And that would be it there wouldn't be any structure in the universe. It wasn't for the force of gravity Stars themselves just the fact that they exist is very strange that you have this thing And ours is fairly small right? It's a million times larger than earth And it's going to burn for billions of years and it's just hovering there And it creates all the life Yeah, literally responsible for all the life and When they supernova that creates the actual ingredients For life, which is even more strange like you can't have biological carbon-based life if it's not for a star exploding Yeah, I mean we often in a poetic way said that we are made of star stuff Yeah, I'm sorry But you can also say that we are Are made of you know nuclear refuse right? We heard the detritus That the death throes of a star puts out into the universe and it rains down on planets And at least on one such planet that stuff comes together and yields life So it is a cycle I mean, I want to sound like the lion king here But you know It that's really what it is Well, what I'm so interested about in getting into your book is the fact that you are sort of detailing all these steps That have to take place in order for all this life in order for this universe to be what it is and then where it's going to go Yeah, yeah exactly and the remarkable thing and Sort of the main point at some level is That look we're special Entities we can think we can reflect we have emotions, but ultimately you and I and everybody else were just bags of particles that are governed by physical law and So there's this continuity between the stuff of the world the anatomy stuff of the world the anatomy stuff of the heavens and us We all come from the same fundamental ingredients in the same fundamental laws now some people find that that gives them I don't know a sense of desperation a sense that we're not special a sense that somehow The universe is pointless or meaningless But you know my view on this is it's spectacular That we're made of the same stuff that makes up this bottle of water or any of the wonderful little statues you have on this desk Because that means that How remarkable that collections of particles can do what we do And I think that's really the way of looking at the continuity We don't need to be endowed with some special quality by some external entity You don't need that Particles can do miraculous things and that is the message that I think you can draw from a more complete understanding of where we came from and where we're going That the fear of death and the attitude of the finite life being insignificant that like what is the point? Yeah, sort of existential angst that many of us struggle with right? Yeah, right? That's something that you touch upon really early on that this This thing that makes us unique is that we know that we're gonna die. Yeah. Yeah, yeah that that to me is The vital distinguishing feature of our species You know we can reflect on the past we can think about the future and recognize that we're not gonna be here in the future At least for some period of time and it's It's an idea and it's powerful motivating influence as one that has been explored throughout the ages Out of wrong who's one of the early disciples of Freud who ultimately broke with Freud Developed this thesis that our awareness of our own mortality is one of the driving factors in what we do and then when I was I don't know It was in my 20s or 30s. I read a book by a guy named Ernest Becker called denial of death I'm gonna have you ever heard of this book It was it was big in the 70s and one actually the Pulitzer Prize in the 70s and it's a wonderful distillation of this way of thinking about why we humans do what we do and in many ways in my own book the one that's coming out actually today until the end of time it's um It's extending this notion that Becker developed in the Nile of death But now seeing it in a cosmological setting because it's not just we that are going to die It's every structure in the universe is going to disintegrate in time Our our best theory suggests to us that even protons the very heart of matter There are quantum processes that in the far future will ensure that every proton disintegrates falls apart into its constituent particles and That point there's no complex matter around at all What are the timeline are we talking well pretty pretty big long timeline in fact I'd like to use a metaphor to try to give you a feel for the times involved I like to use the Empire state building and imagine that every floor of the Empire state building Represented duration ten times out of the previous floor so like on the ground floor It's like one year first floor ten year second floor hundred and so forth so you're going exponentially far in time as you climb up the Empire state building and in that scheme of things everything from the big bang until today you're about at the 10th floor 10 to the 10 years 10 billion years and As you go forward you are looking at things very far in the future and to answer your question We think and I underscore think because we're now at the speculative end of our theoretical ideas protons will decay roughly and say by the 38th floor So 10 to the 38 years into the future so we can relax for a little bit, but here's the thing the amazing thing obviously is It sounds trite but time is relative right so any duration that seems long It's only long by comparison to another duration and on say the scale of the entire Empire state building up to say 10 to the hundred years into the future which is what the peak would represent 10 to the 38 years is like Less than a blink of an eye. I mean, it's nothing on those scales So you sort of have to be careful whether you're your intuition if you're willing to entertain the kind of fantastically long time scales that You necessarily need to if you're gonna think about the very far future. Is there speculation as to what happens when protons do cease to exist? Yeah we anticipate that all Complex structure will fall apart so if there are any stars left over We believe that by the 14th floor most stars will have used up their nuclear fuel There'll be little bit dark embers just sort of you know smokey out there in the cosmos But if they're still hovering around by the 38th floor they will all just dissipate into their particulate ingredients So it's hard to imagine Pass say floor 38 that there's gonna be any life for any mind or any complex Astronomical structures out there in the universe So the window within which the universe as we know it exists is kind of small when you think about it in terms of the entire cosmic Timeline so impossible to understand the actual span of it because it is so long but yet so small like in In the human mind. Yeah, it's very hard to hold these durations in mind. I mean, I don't I don't feel like I I've been thinking about this stuff for a long time I don't feel like I have an intuition for the durations that we are talking about in fact the Empire state building that little analogy Helps me to sort of give some relative sense of when things of interest will happen in the universe But you know, we're good at understanding days weeks months years the times of you know conventional experience We have no basis for Understanding the universe over these scales that we've never experienced You know, and that's true not only for time. It's also for space, right? I mean we have very good intuition about Every day phenomena. I mean if I have to take this bottle of water I've throw it at you you'd catch it. You know where to put your hand you wouldn't have to calculate It's Newtonian trajectory to figure out where the water is going But if I was to do the same thing with electrons You don't have another do I a quantum intuition about the wave functions and the probabilities that govern how a particle like an electron behaves and That's simply because we were unfortunately or fortunately born as big creatures relative to the scales of quantum mechanics And because of that our intuition was never under any evolutionary pressure to understand how electrons behave In fact, I like to say those of our forebears wandering around the Africans of Anna who started to think about electrons and quantum mechanics They got eaten right there the ones whose genes didn't propagate onward and therefore those of us who are the beneficiaries of the survival of our ancestors were good at understanding Newtonian physics But we're not good at understanding anything else about the deep reality of the world Do anticipate that someday in the future? Whatever is next after human beings will be able to understand these concepts because if you stop and think about what human is We've only really been this for x amount of hundred thousand years. That's right And it's a it's a good question and it's a tough one. I like to imagine That as we get ever better at creating virtual world virtual reality or whatever augmented reality whatever Version of that kind of technology takes over in the far future We might be able to experience these Distinct realms in such a powerful way that our innate intuition may begin to shift to change so that we Grasp the quantum realm the way we grasp Newtonian physics. I can at least imagine that as a possibility what it would take to actually get there and whether our species will ever Last long enough to actually have that kind of an impact on our intuition. I don't know But it's all about experience and survival We have been programmed by evolution Not to understand the true nature of the world We've been programmed by evolution to survive and those are two radically different Pop positions because you don't need to know the true nature of reality to survive it's a distinct attribute and one that is not necessarily one that has any survival value to understand Black holes or the big bang or general relativity or quantum mechanics or entropy or thermodynamics These qualities we develop as we go forward and try to understand the world go beyond mere survival and figure out things that excite us But it's not something which obviously has any survival value. It may someday it may what's interesting is also how Relatively recently people have been pondering these ideas in a sort of a quantifiable way We can write things down and sort of Express it with other scientists and try to figure out who's right and who's wrong in terms of these calculations, but Human beings I mean what when did we really start pondering The scope of the universe pretty very pretty recently. I mean if you if you think about the beginnings of modern physics You know you can start with a Galileo you can start with Newton But in any event we're talking on the order of hundreds of years and The amazing thing in hundreds of years We've gone from a complete lack of understanding about how anything in the world actually works to the development of Newton's equations where you can make fantastically accurate predictions about solar eclipses or lunar eclipses or emotions of the planets and so on and Then you know a couple hundred years after that We migrate from that understanding which is basically an encapsulation of the patterns that we can all discern with the naked eye we develop a whole new body of physical law called quantum mechanics Which is so completely counterintuitive Which describes the world in terms of qualities that we don't ever see with the naked eye But nevertheless we can use the math to make predictions and the predictions are born out by experiment And that progression only took say a couple hundred years And that's where we've gotten so it's kind of spectacular that you know we beings who are Just coming of age here in the Milky Way galaxy Can sit down with a piece of paper in a calculation of pencil and we can figure out Magnetic properties of particles like electrons to ten decimal places That's shocking. I mean it's stunning and it's something that I think all of us should be very proud of that our species has been able to accomplish that Somehow I know that I don't think I'm responsible I don't feel proud. I don't feel like any of my people are involved. You've contributed your part No, it really is a collective effort um and That's a beauty of science in the end of the day It's not that most scientists are ever going to be remembered You stop someone in the street and ask them to name a scientist. Yeah, they may say hawking they may say Einstein That's kind of it. I think for most people and I don't think that's a bad thing per se because It's not about the personalities or the people that have pushed the frontiers of understanding It's the fact that we've got this body of insight that continues to grow and can can just allow us to Manipulate and understand the natural world and I think that's really what it's all about Don't you think that there are some personalities like yourself? like Feynman like Neil deGrasse Tyson that because of their personality because they're sort of their charismatic people It actually makes more people intrigued about these possibilities and makes more people attracted to the ideas Yeah, no doubt and and I think that's a that's a vital point because without That impetus from outside the traditional educational system I don't think we would have the kind of interest in science that I can feel growing You know in the world around us I mean the unfortunate thing in the educational system is that we teach Toward examination we teach toward assessment and if you want to figure out how to Flatten the kids interest in these ideas just teach some stuff and tell them you're going to be tested on this on Tuesday You're going to have to spit that you know everything that you've learned So I find it kind of heartbreaking the way in which so much intrinsic interest in these ideas You can see it a five or six year old right? I mean I like to say we begin as a little scientist We're exploring the world but trying to figure things out and then we go into the educational system and it's not by by malice It's just by the nature of how we teach in the in the current You know Approach to educational philosophy that so many kids wind up seeing these ideas as a burden Some bad I want to have to spend time learning about parts of the sale or how to balance reactions I see with my own kids now. We got 15 year old son at 12 year old daughter And all they are motivated by is next Wednesday's quiz And I'm like hey these ideas are they're kind of exciting they're kind of wonderful like I don't know that dad Dad I just want to know enough so I can you know do well on the quiz and once the quiz is over They just sort of leave the ideas behind when do these ideas become attractive to you? Well, I was I don't know Not unusual for a scientist but unusual I think in the in the spectrum of kids in the world Because at five or six years old I was just captivated by mathematics really yeah five or six definitely yeah my dad My dad was not an academic my dad was a composer. He was a vaudevillian He was a he was a comedian. You know he was in the early days We go around the country and with a harmonica group and a stage show that that's what he did You know he liked to say that he was an sphd a sword park high school dropout You know so at at tenth grade he just hit the road But he loved Scientific ideas So he taught me the basics of arithmetic when I was about five years old And then I would ask him to set me problems and he'd give me these 30 digit numbers by 30 digit numbers at right them out in big construction paper And I'd spend the weekend just calculating away on these huge you know Arith medical problems of no interest to anybody on planet earth But to me the fact that you could learn a little piece of math and then do something that nobody had ever done before That was exciting to me as a kid and that's really what got me going so you chose the right path clearly Yeah, yeah, you know What ever it is that it's right to do well you always wonder about that. I don't know if you wonder You know I was wonder how can you not you what what would have happened if a X would have Transpired instead of why um and in fact I have to say when I when I graduated college I had sort of a period of uh I don't know depression is too strong a word for it, but a a period of What have I done? I went to college. I could have studied all the great ideas of the world and all I did was get a technical education Where I could solve Schrodinger's equation and solve Einstein's equations And I felt like wow have I just like squandered the greatest educational opportunity that one could have ever had Because I was so completely focused on just trying to understand physics and mathematics How'd you get past that? Well, I was lucky. I was given a second chance I I won a scholarship to go to England to Oxford and Int ostensibly it was to study physics But when I got there I realized that I was completely free to do whatever I wanted to do at that point And so I took a year to study literature I went to the physics classes so I was sort of Showing up but I wasn't focused on it at all and instead I was focused I got a you know in England the tutorial system So I got a tutor which is somebody at the college that sets you assignments and you write papers You literally go in and you read your paper out loud It's not something we just turned it in and it gets graded So it's a very personal experience you write something and you're actually delivering it to this individual That is going to help you in your educational journey And so that's what I did for a year And at the end of the year I kind of hit to myself Okay, I've got it I understand now what it would mean to study these these other subjects And I sort of felt like I'll be able to do this on my own if I continued to be excited about it And I went back to physics with a vengeance And basically in that second year completed my doctorate in that year and moved on from there So this time that you took off this year we didn't really take it off but you changed paths Yeah, changed paths. Yeah. How beneficial was that for you? Do you think that it helped you sort of Appreciate what your original subject of interest was as well? Yeah, hugely so because you know It's funny. It's the flip side of something I often encounter with people that are interested in science But don't know the math and they always say or some say I'm never really going to understand this body of science because I don't know the mathematics And I try to convince them look at some level that's true If you really want to do research in the general theory of relativity You've got to learn differential geometry in all the tensor calculus But if you are really interested in the ideas you really can grasp the ideas without the technical background So I try to demystify something that can seem Inpenetrable because you haven't entered the field and I think the same thing happened to me in reverse for the more humanistic explorations It had this aura of of Grandeur that I was unable to penetrate because I'd never really immersed myself in the ideas and by spending a year in those ideas It didn't diminish them in any way, but I felt like it brought it back down to earth as Another journey toward truth another pathway toward insight and one that you don't have to have a degree in You don't have to know the ins and outs of the academic version of that subject to Understand it and grasp it and spend some time thinking about it So you think that for people studying anything particularly those studying science and mathematics Very rigid disciplines. Do you think that they all could benefit from sort of expanding their education into philosophy or art or Something that uses your mind in a different way. Yeah, um Some some there are some people in the in the physics and mathematics community who are so intensely focused That it would almost Be a shame to pull their attention away From the deep dive that they're going to do for the rest of their lives in the contributions that they're going to make and have made There are substantial and exciting But for I think for many others and certainly for me. I mean look I as most people do but not all But I've learned early on that I'm not going to be an Albert Einstein You know I can make contributions and I have had contributions to fails like string theory and in cosmology But they're never going to be at the level of shattering our understanding of the world Things that people are going to talk about 500 years from now that's unlikely And I think for somebody like that who's able to make contributions but pulling away from the technical work is not going to Extract some vital insight into the nature of the world that otherwise wouldn't be discovered I think there is great value in doing exactly what you're saying because by broadening your perspective on What the work you're doing is actually revealing? it's part of the human quest for Understanding and Seeing it as an isolated discipline where it's all about the next equation and the better unified theory or the deeper Understanding of the big bang To see that as isolated from the human quest for understanding I think to minishes the work that we as physicists actually do was that a part of your initial ambition? Yeah, well something that We just rocked the world. Yeah. Well to go back to the the comment that you made before about We being the only species that knows that we're going to die I think part of that instills in many people and certainly I see it in my own life even though at the Time that I was making various decisions. I wasn't literally thinking about these kinds of issues of mortality But how do you deal with that recognition of the impermanence of your own life? Well I think part of it is a symbolic kind of immortality you create something that will last you create something that will have such Impact that it will stick around for a long long period of time So I think yes, I mean part of my motivation in doing physics was Not merely to get the next decimal place in this or that physical quantity described in the natural world It was to try to have some kind of insight that would rock our understanding of the world and have Reverberations that would echo out for many many years to come. That's interesting. Did that torture you somewhat? I mean is that something that I would haunted you was it in your head all the time? Not really But an ultimate ambition. Yeah, for sure And you know look I think when when you're doing any work whatsoever The day to day the moment to moment is A grind, you know, I don't know how you find it in in the work that you're doing, but If I'm working on a research project Even if in principle the ideas are grand and wonderful and bold the moment to moment is calculating away It's trying to figure out that equation. It's putting an equation on a computer. I mean It is not sexy. It is not something that has that Glorious quality that you might ultimately describe when you're finished and you look back and you think about the implications of your work The moment to moment of almost anything that you do is a grind So I think that's ultimately what is the the the driver of Whatever you're doing in your life the moment to moment, but yeah, there was certainly a part of me that would Have a desire a hope that the work would Reverberate in a powerful way. I think that's true for most physicists that that notion That you can sort of sit at a table and think and Change the way we understand reality the way Einstein did the way Schrödinger did the way Niels Bohr did Like what percentage of people view have that revelation? Yeah, I think it's I think it's pretty few and and far between So what he else is sort of just contributing contributing and then and easily someone Exactly some light bulb goes off just sort of powerful new insight and you're like, okay, everything has suddenly changed That's so exciting though, and it's what keeps you going. It's okay to go You know to be the person who has the light bulb. Yeah, but I tell my students You know and especially young students who come in there still trying to figure out what they want to do if you're not satisfied with just contributing if you're not satisfied with being part of the journey But not the person at the head of the the breakthroughs It's probably not the field for you because it's so unlikely Because it's not just brainpower. It's thinking of the right questions It's thinking of things in the right orientation It's being at the right place at the right time with the right DNA that somehow is a tune to the question that's being asked So it's not even fully under your control It's not sort of a matter of you know exercising your mind and and building up the muscles of the brain and such a way that You are the strongest person to contribute to this in this idea. It's uh, it's luck It's timing. It's being there when the question's being asked and you happen to see the way forward That's it's so interesting to me that there's so many people working on all this stuff And the average person that doesn't contemplate quantum physics or Any of these equations we have no idea it's going on. Yeah And that this all this work that's so critical to our understanding of what the universe really is With the very fiber of the universe itself. Yeah All this is going on and most people are just sort of They're reaping the residual benefits of it. Yeah, but they're just wandering around not not knowing Yeah, hugely so in fact There's a number that's quoted that quantum mechanics is responsible for something like 35% of the gross national product So so it's like it's in a very concrete way now The problem of that number is I recently looked it up to find the source of it So I sort of went online and checked it out and apparently I'm the source There's number and I assure you that I've not done a calculation that really fully justifies this but roughly speaking You know anything that has an integrated circuit I'm the source of this number. And I assure you that I've not done a calculation that really fully justifies this. But roughly speaking, anything that has an integrated circuit is the result, a beneficiary of quantum insights. So we use this stuff every moment of our technological lives. And yet, as you say, for the most part, most of us don't have a deep understanding of the reality that's responsible for the gadgetry that the science has given rise to. And it's a strange quantum mechanics is an utterly strange reality. You choose strange. Yeah. I've tried many, many times, try to understand whether it's Sean Carroll's books or yours or any ones. Yeah. It's just, it doesn't get in. Right. And again, it goes back to, you know, our brains just weren't under pressure to think quantum mechanically. But I assure you, you give me a couple hours. I mean, books are one thing because it's a one-sided conversation. But you give me a couple hours in a back and forth. And I will absolutely get you to a place where you appreciate and have a sense of what these ideas really are telling us about the nature of the world. Here's the thing that I've always wanted to ask someone like you. What do you think was happening before the Big Bang? Yeah. It's a deep question and a subtle one. And there's sort of two ways that I like to think about that question. One is it could be that the Big Bang was an interesting event, but not the first event in the totality of reality. It could have been the first event that sparked the expansion of our part of space. But it could be that there's a grander realm of space within which we sit as a small part. And that grander realm may have been there for a far longer period of time. It may have experienced its own big bangs, maybe a collection of big bangs that may extend infinitely far into the past. So it could be that the answer to the question of what happened before the Big Bang is a lot of other big bangs or a lot of other quantum events that were taking place in a larger landscape of reality than we have direct access to. However, another answer is that the very question may not make as much sense as the words seem to suggest. We know how to parse that sentence. We know what it means to talk about the moment before the big bang, because we know how to talk about the moment before your birth or the moment before the Civil War or the moment before any event that happened in the world. We fully understand the meaning of that kind of sentence. But it could be that when it comes to the Big Bang, the sentence actually doesn't mean anything. It could be that the Big Bang was the place where time itself started. And Hawking himself had a wonderful analogy to get this across. He said, look, I'll dress it up a little bit. Imagine you're walking on planet Earth and you pass by someone. You say, hey, can you point me in the direction of North? I want to walk in the northward direction. They point you continue to walk you pass by somebody else, say, hey, which ways further north and they point you in that direction. But when you get to the North Pole and talk to somebody there and say, hey, how do I go further north? They look at you and say, whoa, that question doesn't mean anything, because this is where North begins. There's no notion of going further north than the North Pole. And it could be that that spatial metaphor applies to time. Talk about a billion years ago, 10 billion years ago. But if you go to 13.8 billion years ago, the Big Bang, that may be where time started. And you can't go further back in time than the very origin of time itself. That freaks me out. Yeah. See, that's one that it gets in your head. What do you mean beginning of time? Yeah. Why would time have a beginning? Good. And it could be that time is an emergent quality of reality. I give you an analogy, boy. What I mean by that is we all know what temperature means intuitively. Something's hot. You feel it. Something's cold. You feel it. Your body understands those concepts. What physics has done is it's gone deeper into the concept of temperature and revealed that it is nothing but the average motion of the particles making up the environment. So if the molecules are moving really quickly, you've got a hot environment. If the molecules are really moving slowly, it's a cold environment. So temperature emerges from the motion of particles. So if you have one particle, you can't really talk about it being hot or cold because you need a conglomerate. You need a glomeration of particles to be able to talk about their average motion. And in that sense, temperature is this emergent idea that rests upon more fundamental ideas, the molecules and atoms that make up reality. Maybe that's true of time. Maybe time, as we know it, is a property that only makes sense in certain environments when there's enough stuff arranged in the right patterns. But fundamentally, maybe there are atoms or molecules of time, which when not arranged in the form that we are familiar with, don't yield time as we know it. Time itself may be a quality of the world that exists here in this environment, but doesn't even apply in other environments that are configured radically differently. Whoa, that's a heavy one. Yeah, that's a heavy one. What also is a heavy one is what caused the big thing? Yeah. Why would something smaller than the head of a pin become everything that we see in the cosmos? Yeah, so there are ideas for the answer to that question. Look, all of this is tentative, because it's very hard to do measurements that go all the way back to the beginning. We have astronomical observations that we need to be sure are compatible with the predictions of our theories and so forth. So we as good scientists do what needs to be done to try to test these ideas. But the idea that, I think, most physicists or cosmologists by into at the moment is that gravity can have two manifestations. The usual form of gravity that you and I know about is the attractive version. You drop something toward the earth and it moves downward because the earth and the object pull on each other. That's the ordinary gravity that we experience every day of our lives. But Einstein's equations actually allow gravity to also be repulsive. It can push outward as opposed to just pulling inward. And this is something that we have never experienced because the gravity created by a rocky object, like the earth, is always the attractive variety. The gravity created by the sun, again, a compact object is always the attractive variety. But Einstein's math shows that if you don't have a rocky object that's isolated in space but rather energy, that is uniformly spread through a region of space, that that kind of entity yields repulsive gravity. Why is that important to your question? If the very early universe, that little tiny head of a pin that you're talking about, if it was filled with a uniform bath of this energy, we call it the inflatan field. The name doesn't matter. But if it was filled with that energy, it would have been subject to repulsive gravity. What does repulsive gravity do? Pushes everything apart, causes everything to rush outward. So the bang of the big bang may have been a spark of repulsive gravity operating with a tiny region of space that pushed everything apart. And this concept of repulsive gravity is just theoretical. We observed any sort of element in the universe that it is theoretical, but it's at a level of understanding that I think most physicists would say causes it to migrate into the camp of established understanding of how gravity works. So number one, Einstein's equations have now been tested over and over again in a whole variety of circumstances. The detection of gravitational waves, just a couple of years ago, it's like the crowning triumph of Einstein's math. The hundred years ago, the math says there should be ripples in the fabric of space. A hundred years later, we finally detect ripples in the fabric of space. So we are very comfortable with any prediction that comes out of Einstein's mathematics. And right in the mathematics is the prediction of what I was just describing. You've got uniform energy in a region, repulsive gravity. The other thing is we currently witness that the expansion of the universe is speeding up, not slowing down. Since the 1920s, everybody thought that yes, the universe is expanding, but it will slow down over time. Why? Because gravity pulls things back together. You throw an apple upward. It doesn't go up faster and faster. It goes up slower and slower because the earth's gravity pulls it back. Everybody thought that would apply to the universe as a whole. It's expanding, but expanding, ever slower. The observations in 1998, culminated in 1998, which won the 2011 Nobel Prize, showed that the distant galaxies are moving away ever more quickly. The expansion of space is speeding up over time. It's accelerating. How do we explain that? The best explanation we currently have is repulsive gravity. We believe even today, the universe is diffuse with a bath of energy. We call it dark energy. We believe it's uniformly going through space. I like to think of it almost like a Turkish sauna. It's like the steam filling the sauna, this energy filling space. And that repulsive gravity, we believe is responsible for the observations that the distant galaxies are rushing way faster and faster over time. So it's circumstantial, but the case for repulsive gravity is quite strong. And what would have caused it to coalesce? What would have caused it to compress initially? Why would all that matter be in this tiny lesson of pin-sized object? So I have no idea. And nobody else on planet Earth has any real idea other, but we do have theories. And one of the theories suggests that in the very early universe, it was a highly chaotic environment, very hot with all the fields fluctuating wildly up and down. And the idea would be that if you wait long enough, we're hard to know what weight means in this environment, but don't press me on my definition of time back, then just sort of intuitively. If you wait long enough, on rare occasions, the energy will just happen to flatten out in a region, become uniform. And then that region, explosively, inflates, grows large. So imagine you're looking at a pot of boiling water. The surface is, of course, widely undulating up and down. But if you wait long enough, very long time, since you've never seen it in either of I, there will be a little patch on the surface of that boiling water that flattens out. Why? That only means that the water molecules happen for an instant to be moving in just the right way to keep that little patch of water from wildly bubbling. It will happen. It's rare, but if you wait long enough, it will occur. Similarly, the widely undulating fields in the early universe, if you wait long enough, a patch will flatten out. You get the uniform energy, plug it in Heinz-9's equations. That region explosively inflates. And I mean explosively. It can go from size that's much less than an atomic diameter to larger than the observable universe in far less than a blink of an eye. And 10 to the minus 30, 10 to the minus 35 seconds. That's how powerful repulsive gravity can be. That is so baffling. Yeah. So before that, before this happens, you just have in this theory, you just have all this energy sort of randomly interacting with other energy in the universe, with no physical objects. Yep. Yep. And that could have been forever. That could, and in fact, that's the main point. There's nobody who was hanging around, looking at their watch, saying, good God, when is this big bang going to finally happen? So you can have this cosmological pre-show. You can have it last as long as you like. The only thing that you need to happen is that sooner or later, a region flattens out and then the cosmological show begins. And if we're looking at this model of the universe being this infinite universes with different characteristics and different qualities to them, this could be happening throughout infinity all over the place. Yeah. And in fact, this so-called inflation at cosmology is the technical name for the subject. Says that. It says that it's quite likely that this explosive inflation of the region that we currently inhabit, it was just one of many such events. And therefore, there are other far-flung regions throughout this larger cosmological landscape where things have also inflated, but the details can be different. The physical details can differ from what we are familiar with. And the differences can be small, temperature differences in one part of space versus another, or they can be far more significant, even the particles that make up that other realm may be different from the particles that make up our realm. Their masses can be different, their charges can be different, their fundamental physical features can be different. So out there in that wider cosmological landscape, it can be the wild, wild west of realities. And they don't have to worry about protons deterioration. There may be realms in which they don't have to worry about protons falling apart. The wild, the really crazy idea, is that if you're very careful mathematically in analyzing these theories, you realize that there have to be realms out there that duplicate hours as well. Many can be different, but there have to be versions of this reality that are also instantiated, occur out there in other realms. So you come to these crazy-sounding, sci-fi-sounding ideas that you and I are having this conversation out there in other distant realms. An infinite number of times. Perhaps infinite number of times, and more over small differences can also arise in these other realms where maybe our positions are interchange at the table, or maybe your name is Joe Green, and I'm Brian Rogan, or there's strange realities that can be taking place. And this is not an overworked, theorist imagination. This is the careful, dispassionate analysis of the mathematical equations. Now, I should say, there are some physicists who see this implication and say, whoa, you guys have fallen off the deep end. Your theory has imploded because any theory that predicts that kind of a wealth of realities that are kind of untestable, because they're so far away that we will never interact with them, that's the kind of theory that we have been trained to avoid, to excise. However, the more forward thinking I'd like to describe us, physicists say, hey, math has proven to be a very valuable guide over the course of hundreds of years. And if this is where the math is taking us, it's at least worthy of our attention to investigate it fully and possibly come to the conclusion that this is how reality actually behaves. Jesus. That's the weirdest one. The weirdest one. It's like when people talk about intelligent life someone in the universe, that you're out there. Or the aversion of you or infinite versions of you. Yeah, and it can be disturbing. Like what do you mean by you? If there are many of you's out there, each of whom has an equal claim on being you because they've had the same experiences, they have the same memories. And maybe have made infinite variations in the decisions that you've made through your life. That's right. You could meet a Brian Green, your age, somewhere out there in the universe that's going on. Make the right choices. Or the wrong ones. Exactly. Become a gambling addict. Yeah, it's like Facebook. Start your episode where you've got like Spock and Evil Spock. The one that had the little beard on. So there's gonna be a little beard version of me. Go to you out there. Yeah. So yeah. And the thing I wanna stress is this sounds kooky. Yeah. And the danger of kooky sounding ideas and physics is that there are people who then jump off it and say, well, if that's possible, then this is possible. Maybe I can with my mind, you know, affect what other people are in there. So there's all sorts of crazy ideas that can be inspired by the weird insights of modern physics. And you've really gotta keep straight, what's real. And what's ridiculous. Yeah, that's a problem, right? When people start using, especially if they're articulate, they start using scientific lingo to describe things that are very unscientific. Sort of like what the bleep. Yeah, well, God. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But that was one of those movies where a lot of people, like there was all this quantum talk and like Dr. Quantum was in it at the low cartoon, in the green particles and waves. And they're like, there's science behind this. But then at the end of it really, it was something that was created by someone who runs a cult, who believes they're channeling, someone who's like a thousand year old alien. That whole ramp of thing? Yeah, but let me tell you, if you have a moon, please. Show a couple years ago, I was in middle of a big project. In fact, I described this in toward the end of the book. So you'll get to this little anecdote if you choose to carry on reading. I was in the middle of a big project and speaking opportunity came in. And I didn't properly vet it. The money looked good and looked like a fine thing. And I signed off on it. And then a few days before I'm going, I realized it's to talk to Judy Zebra Knight, who channels, Romptha, the 35,000 year old and the merrier and sage. And I said to the folks who should have been checking in on this, like the lecture agent, I can't go. And they're like, hey, Brian, it's tomorrow. It's too late to back out. I was like, Jesus Christ. So I look at some videos online and I see her on the Merve Griffin show where she channels Romptha. On live television, I know what year this was. She snaps her head forward, goes back. She changes her voice. It becomes like something between the queen and Yoda. It's a weird place. It's just, hello, being. And she's talking to Merve Griffin. And he's talking about an airplane. She goes, what does airplane? That kind of thing. Anyway, so I go. And I show up. And the first thing I see is there are all these people walking around a grassy field, but their arms out like this. And I'm like, can they see? You're a, and I get closer. They're all blindfolded. And I'm saying that what is going on here? And they describe that each person has a card around their neck where they've written down their life's dream. And an exact copy of that card has been put out on this big field. And they have to feel their way toward the matching card. And if they succeed, this shows that this goal or desire is going to come to pass. Oh boy. I'm saying to those guys, like, so how's it going? He goes like, really good. One person found their card. The last few months, the odds of probability if that happening are kind of not unreasonable, but that's all that this is. And then they take me to the blindfolded archers. Oh Jesus. Yeah. So they're taking bow and arrow. And they're firing at these targets. And like, man, I'm like standing way back on this kind of thing. And they ask me, do you want to try it? And I was like, there's a photographer that's come along. I'm like, no, I'll avoid that. And then they introduce him to this woman who is able to predict the next card in a shuffle deck. And so she'd pull out this card and she'd say, OK, it's going to be seven of clubs. And it's like a three of spades. And then the next one is a seven of diamonds. And he goes, oh, well, there's the seven that I was talking about one card before. So it's this crazy circumstance where, and then I go to give my talk. OK, because that's why I was there after all. This was just like the preamble. They were showing me what they do. I walk into this barn. And I across the threshold of the barn, and they all give me a standing ovation. And I'm like, OK, I appreciate it. But why are you giving me a standing ovation? And I go in and start to give my talk. And I say to them straight out, what I've seen here is nuts. OK, I say, if you're going to try to predict next cards and then to deck, one hour or four times, we'll get the suit. One hour or 13 times to get the rank. There's nothing in there. But the pure probabilistic laws of mathematics, they rise up and give me a standing ovation. And I say, it's appreciated. But why are you applauding? I'm telling you that you're wasting your time. And they applaud me again. And I'm like, this is like so totally weird. But then I go to the book signing. And I finished my talk in the book signing. Because people, they come up with me and they talk real softly and say, there's a lot of crazy stuff that's happening in this place. But we come here because we feel that there's something else in the world and we want to be around like-minded individuals that are searching for the deeper truth. So thank you for calling out the silliness that's happening here. But we'll come here anyway and spend our money because we want to be part of the journey. And I have to tell you, I had a degree of sympathy for them because I get the motivation. I mean, as a physicist, what we do is we are revealing strange features of the world. So I get the urge, I get the desire. That the problem is that the methodology that's being employed is something that will never take you closer to the truth. However, much you may feel that you're among like-minded individuals. So I get the motivation. I get this sensation, I get the urge. But it's tragic that these individuals feel that this kind of an undertaking is the pathway that will take them toward the deeper truth. And let me just finish up. So after this, they take me to the dinner and the dinner's in a mansion at the top of the hill. And that's where Judy, I'm probably going to get suit for this conversation. But I don't know. But I've never spoken about it. Yeah, as you're well, they're quite litigious. Are they? No, they definitely are. So anyway, there's just one person's opinion. They take me to the mansion at the top of the hill. And that's where she is. She doesn't come down and actually participate in the talk. She's like watching it on close circuit television up in the mansion. And I walk in and she hugs me. But it was too goddamn long of a hug. You know what I'm saying? It was like, and she was like, thank you. It was like this big emotional thing. And I was like, I don't get it. But I think that's the way that she brings people in to the fold and gets them to spend the big bucks to enter on this so-called journey toward truth where she's channeling this made up fictitious sage at somehow people buy into. Is this all still going on? It was just a couple of years ago. So I imagine it is. Imagine if she's really channeling it. And we're just missing. That's right. That would certainly rewrite every rule of reality. Every law and physics that I understand. Will that be less weird than the big bang itself? You know, no, I tell you why. I tell you why. You see, when it comes to the big bang, I can sit down with the mathematics that I understand well. And I can follow the deductive chain of reasoning that gets us to some of these strange implications that we're talking about, multiple big bangs, other realities, and so forth. When it comes to channeling a 35,000 year old sage, I don't know what the hell that even means. I don't understand the physical processes by which that could possibly happen. I don't understand how there could have been a being of the sort that she's channeling alive 35,000 years ago, because it doesn't have any agreement with the archaeological record. You know, so there's a vital distinction between weirdness that emerges from careful mathematical analysis and weirdness that emerges from an overworked imagination. That possibly sees a business model whereby a lot of money can be brought in if you can get people to buy into your vision and how the world works. Well, it's sort of like what they do is they curate ideas and then they run them through their sort of filter of woo woo. Yeah, exactly. And then they distributed in a very palatable way that attracts people. That movie, I tell a story I've told this before, so I apologize to people who heard it. There was a friend of mine at the comedy store had a friend that I don't know her name, but she came to the comedy store and she was so happy. And I'm like, she was like, I'm so happy. I'm so happy. She goes, because I found the secret. And now that I know about the secret, I am going to be married. I am going to be this. I'm going to have this fulfilled life. I'm going to reach my dreams and I'm really excited about that. So, you know, at the time I had just seen the movie and then I was just starting to understand the criticism of the movie. I was reading all these, you know, accounts. We're scientists. We're breaking down all the things that were wrong. And I didn't dash your dreams. I just was like, wow, okay. And then I saw her a year later, the outside of another one of my shows, a different comedy club. And I said, hey, how you doing? She's like, things are just not going the way I thought. I thought because of the secret that everything would be great with my dad is still a pain in the ass. And you know, he's moved in with me, doesn't have any money. And I can't establish a good relationship, but I don't have the job that I wanted. I don't understand because I've been using the secret. I think about it every day. And I said, here's my take on this. If you talk to someone who's very successful and you say to them, hey, how did you get very successful? And they say, I thought about it all the time. I have a vision board. I took that photo of the house that I wanted. I put it in the vision board. That became my house. I took, you know, this idea. I want a beautiful wife. I want a family. I want sports cars. And this and that. And now I have those things because the mind is a powerful tool and the mind can create reality. But you're just talking to someone who is successful. How many people thought like that and nothing happened? I bet in millions. I bet there's so many, you have a bias in successful users. Those are the ones that you're talking to. And just because of the fact that they've been able to have these extraordinarily successful lives while visualizing these things does not mean that visualizing these things creates an extraordinarily successful life. You have to think and you have to act and you have to do. And there's trial and error and there's a lot of lessons to be learned. But if you wanted to simplify it at the end, once you're successful and boil it down to a philosophy that you could sell a course on, that's what it would be. Yeah, not exactly right. Look, there's nothing wrong with visualizing success. But that is not the causal ingredient that will yield the success. The thing that comes to mind is, I don't know if they do it any longer, but there was certainly a time when Olympic athletes would be taught to visualize, say, jumping over that high bar. And they'd run through the whole thing. But that's not all that they were doing. They were doing 10 hours a day of training that integrated this visualization as part of the training program. So it's kind of tragic when people buy into these crazy ideas. And I have to tell you, when they were making that film, they called me to be in it. And I think it was the director, one of the producers, I was on the phone with. And they were describing what they were doing. And I probed sufficiently hard. And some of my friends did not probe sufficiently hard. And we're in the film and regretted it. But I probe sufficiently hard. And I've said, look, what you're doing to me sounds really dangerous. It sounds like a really bad thing to be doing. And they took offense in that call back then. A year after the film came out, it was either the director or producer. I can't remember the gentleman's name. Called me up. And he said, I want to apologize to you. You were absolutely right. I have finally realized what a bad film this was to be involved in. And I completely regret it. So I don't think it's the point of view of the role at the School of Enlightenment, which is behind this, or at least part of what was behind this. But at least the director or the producer ever was saw the light and realized that this is not the kind of information that you want to put out in the world because it can change people's lives in a very negative way. I think your comparison to Olympic athletes is very good because the Olympic athletes are visualizing something that they already do. But there's a great benefit in visualizing for athletics, for martial arts, for a lot of different things. Visualizing success. Visualizing potential problems, failures of your process, how you're going to adjust on the fly. All those things are great because then when things do take place in real life situations, you've already prepared for them. You know the path. Right. That's what that's. you're going to adjust on the fly. All those things are great because then when things do take place in real life situations, you've already prepared for them. You know the path. Right. That's all about. I agree that. And in fact, I have to tell you. You know, in one of the chapters later, chapter in the book, I describe theories about why it is that we, for instance, tell fictional stories. I mean, could there be any evolutionary value in two individuals, telling each other a story that they both know was false, that they know has no connection to the world around them. But yet we've been doing that since the emergence of language. Right. And there are these interesting evolutionary scenarios in which what you're saying is brought to bear in that unfamiliar context. We tell stories because it's the mind's way of rehearsing for the real world. But it's a way of rehearsing for the real world that's completely safe. So you can go on all sorts of crazy journeys to the underworld up into the clouds. You can engage in all sorts of battles. You can fight gods or demigods. All these things can take place within your imagination. So you're completely safe. And yet when you encounter something that's analogous to the stories that you've been told or retold or embellished or told to others through other accounts, your brain is more attuned to respond and a beneficial way. because it's not as novel as it would have been had you not been engaged in this fictional account of telling stories. So there's value in visualizing, there's value in telling stories. But it's not the causal part that some individuals would want us to believe it is. Yeah. The only thing that I would say contrary to that is some people develop expectations based on fictional accounts. Yeah. And there's a real problem like romantic movies where some people will expect behavior that exists in these romantic movies only. Right. And it's not indicative of human beings in the real world. Yeah. Yeah. Point well taken. I mean, I think the vital thing is that your brain has had sufficient experience that it can wait these fictional accounts in a way that can enhance your response to the world but not set undue expectations of things that are just, you know, only going to be true at a fictional setting and not in the real world. It's just so strange to me that we desire those. I mean, here are movies, right? Yeah. Like hero movies in particular, especially superhero movies. Someone who possesses powers beyond anything known to human beings or any life form. Yeah. I get that. Yeah. I mean, I'm sure you love to just snap your fingers and fix everything. But I actually see it in a slightly different way relevant to what we're talking about before. You know, I think that the whole hero worship that we have as a culture comes again from our recognition of how powerless we are against the forces of nature, against the inevitable death that is facing us all. And therefore there's something deeply seductive about the possibility of a being that can transcend the limitations that we mere mortals are always subject to. So I think it's built into our DNA to respond to the way that we do them and the matter that we do when encountering a hero in the world. I mean, there's, you know, Joseph Campbell. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so, you know, in the power of myth but is more technical version to hear with a thousand faces. You know, he goes through the whole notion of what it is to have a myth and it's basic and individual. It's called to action to rise above the kinds of activities that mere mortals will be able to undertake, resist the call at first, but then rises to the challenge, goes out into the world, conquerors, comes back, and back a changed individual and shakes up the reality from which an individual initially emerged on this journey. And there is ample evidence that across cultures throughout the ages, we have constantly been telling these kinds of mythological tales because they speak to us. They speak to our urge and our desire to transcend the limitations that our physical form and the laws of physics necessarily constrain us to. Yeah, it is fascinating when you think of how many different languages and how many different cultures share those same archetypal themes. Yeah. Yeah. And I do think it all comes, if you look way back into the history of the ideas, it comes from this initial recognition that we are mortal. And the fact that our brains are able to not just fix on the moment, but can think about the entire timeline is the one that makes that a poignant realization. And if we couldn't think about the future, who would it matter if we knew that we were going to die? I mean, it would mean nothing. Right. So the fact that we can innovate and the fact that we have ingenuity that allows us to make the wheel that allows us to build the pyramids that allows us to come up with quantum mechanics and Einstein's equations and Beethoven Symphony and Picasso's work, the fact that we can undertake all of these expressions of creative will and the desire to transcend the world around us has a downside. We recognize that we are not going to be here for very long. And I think that motivates a certain kind of engagement with the world and hero worship is part of it. Curves while is a fascinating character. Yeah, he thinks he's going to be around forever. Yeah, yeah, I was bringing him up. Yeah. Have you discussed any of this stuff with him? You know, I don't know him personally. I have certainly gone to some of his talks. And I think he and I had one exchange at some point in the past. And I totally get where he's coming from. You know, he feels that we're perhaps the final mortal generation. And how sad it is after, you know, a hundred thousand generations of humans if we could only stick around for one more generation, science would come to a point where we would be immortal. And that feels like a tragic state of affairs. I don't think he's right. And I think most people who think about this deeply don't think he's right either. However, many vitamins you take and however much science is progressing, the notion that we are just a generation or two from immortality. I think is wishful thinking. The strange concept of immortality too, because it's not necessarily you. It's a downloaded version of you that will exist in some sort of a computer, which is what does that mean? Right. That sounds like hell. Yeah. It could be. Yeah. I'm asleep in that computer. Well, I allow for the possibility that that maybe it would be a way of being in the world that would have upsides that are hard for us as flesh and blood individuals who appreciate at this point. But it raises the deep question. Would that be a good thing? In fact, if you had that opportunity to be downloaded in some form and that would allow you to hold on to all your memories, build new memories on top of them, have experiences, maybe there's an avatar that you're able to drive, but through your mental machinations who's out there in the world, would you do it? I might have said yes before I've had some pretty profound psychedelic experiences. And then from then I've said I'm going to hedge my bets. Let's see what's next. Let's see what happens when the lights go out. Oh, really? So you think there may be something that happens when the lights go out? I don't know. Yeah. I don't know what, I mean, for sure your body is going to decay and you are going to become a part of the earth. You're becoming part unless they cream at you or unless they bomb you with some toxic chemicals and then nothing can use your dead tissue, which is really a shame. Yeah. It's really a shame that we do that, right? Yeah. Unless some of the murders you and you have to exume you in the past to solve in the future, whether to solve a murder. Right. I don't know what, what do you think consciousness is? Yeah. I think consciousness is clearly just a factor of brain tissue and energy or do you think it's possible that what our brain is is something that tunes into consciousness. Well, I spend some time thinking about this question. I think it's perhaps the deepest question that faces science or even humanity at some level. And my own personal perspective is that consciousness is nothing more than the choreographed motion of particles in various quantum states inside a gloppy gray structure that sits inside this thing that we call ahead. Do I have any proof for that? No. Does anybody have any proof for what consciousness is not at all at this moment? But the history of the reductionist program where we've been able to take some of the more spectacular creations that have emerged in the world and recognize that they are nothing but the product of their ingredients in the walls of physics leads me to extrapolate that idea to the experience of consciousness. And he said that there's a deep puzzle. It's called the hard problem of consciousness, which is if electrons and corks and particles and laws of physics are all that there is. And if you buy into the fact that electrons don't have an inner world that corks don't have an inner world, how can it be that by taking a collection of those particles, you can turn on the lights. How can a collection of mindless, thoughtless particles somehow yield mindful experience? And that's a deep question that science has not yet answered. My own feeling is when we understand the brain better, that question will evaporate. We'll look at the brain with our newfound understanding. Maybe it's 100 years in the making, maybe a thousand years in the making. And we'll say, aha. When electrons and corks and protons move in this particular configuration, one of the byproducts is an inner sensation that we call conscious experience. And that to me is the likely answer that we will find. But there are some very smart, well-respected people who go in a very different direction. There are some who say electrons and protons and corks, they do have a fundamental, proto-conscious quality. They themselves are conscious beings of a sort. Now, it's not like you're going to have electrons that are crying or corks that are anguishing. But if you have a little proto-element of conscious experience that is imbued into a particle, and then you take a lot of the particles and put them together, the ideas that yields the manifest conscious experience that we're familiar with. I don't buy into that. But why do you pick a position? I take a position on this because I guess my view is you look out at the world. And what you do as a physicist is you move the smallest degree required to explain the phenomena that you are observing. And to move from our current understanding of the world to leapfrog to a place where electrons are conscious and corks are conscious, to me is such a fantastically radical move that I don't consider it justified to make that move with our current level of understanding. There was a time back in the 1800s when life itself was so mystical that people basically said the same kind of thing. How could a collection of lifeless particles ever come together and yield a living being? They said that they can't. You have to induce a life force, you have to inject a life force, and that's what sparks the emergence of life on lifeless particles. I don't think any serious scientist thinks that today. I think most serious scientists say yes, life is wonderful, life is in some sense miraculous, but life is nothing but the particles of nature coming together to yield the complex molecules of DNA and RNA, the complex cellular structures, the cells come together to yield the more complex multicellular organisms, and that's all that it takes to have something that's alive. All life force is necessary. That way of thinking about the world has gone away. And my own feeling is that that kind of progression is going to happen for consciousness. Today it's utterly mysterious. How it is that I have this inner voice talking inside my head. How it is that I look around the world and I can see the color red and I can experience the color red. I don't just have sensors that can call that red. I mean an iPhone can do that. I actually have an inner world where I feel that color red. Where does that come from? Hard to answer that question, but I think 100 or 1000 years from now will look back and smile at how we in this era invested consciousness with such mystical quality when in the end it's nothing but particles and the laws of physics and that's all there is to it. What's interesting to me is that as a human being, my thoughts on consciousness are very deep and profound and this idea like what is this thing. But if I really break it down objectively, animals have some sort of a consciousness, including they have instincts, right? They try to get away from danger, they try to survive and procreate. And we developed something far more complex and our ability to express ourselves in language and in doing that language or during that creation of that language, we developed all sorts of bizarre concepts and we've developed all sorts of different ways to describe feelings and emotions and contemplate the future as well. And these things are continually getting more and more complex. If you go to single-celled organisms, work your way up to early hominids and then get to human beings, you just see this ever increasing form of complexity in every way. And in the way that the things see the world, of course it makes sense that there would be more complexity. But we don't think about that when we think of a parakeet. We don't think of a parakeet as being conscious. But a parakeet relatively speaking is far more primitive than a chimpanzee which is relatively speaking far more primitive than a human being. And it's just going to continue to evolve or if we survive, things will continue to improve due to natural selection and the mutation and all the other factors and will be something that makes this today look like primitive. The way we look at single-celled organisms or chimps or whatever. Well imagine that. Because we see small changes in DNA, tiny fraction of percent yields a radical change in what the being that has at DNA is able to accomplish. But at the same time, you made reference to psychedelic experiences. And I trust you agree, but tell me if you don't. That those psychedelic experiences were generated by a slight change in the chemical makeup of the particles coursing through your brain and your body. Sometimes not even a change. Sometimes a lot of them, the heavier ones are actually produced by the brain. Right. So to me, that's a great piece of data that speaks to the fact that all it is is particles and chemicals coursing through a structure. If the mind was somehow external to the physical makeup and the loss of scribing it, then how would the injection say of some kind of foreign substance or as you say the brain producing some sort of substance that it didn't ordinarily have within its makeup, why would that be able to have such radical impact on conscious experience? The way I would look at it if I was trying to argue against that would be that your eyes and the organs of the human eye are taking in light and through that light are able to perceive physical objects in the world that they would not be able to do without light. It's something that allows you to see and allows you to take in depth perception and understand shapes that the human mind and particularly these glands that produce these psychedelic chemicals when experiencing these chemicals, it allows the brain to experience things that might be there all the time. But that you cannot perceive with normal human neurochemistry that needs to be enhanced or the levels need to be changed and shifted. And what's really perplexing about these chemicals is that these chemicals are produced by your brain. And if you do take these like particularly dimethyl-triptomy, is the most potent of all the psychedelic chemicals, if you take that, you have these insanely profound visions which leads to a lot of people having these religious spiritual epiphanies. Have you done anything? Have you done any psychedelic experiences? You're allowed to talk about that? Yeah, I have. Not many. And I'm a complete lightweight in this arena because I hardly drink. You know, I hardly do anything that puts foreign substances into the body. But yeah, I was in Amsterdam. I was there because I was giving a lecture to the Queen of Holland and I gave the lecture. And my wife and I were both there and after that was over, we decided to do a little experimenting. And for somebody like me who doesn't experiment, I made a mistake because... Did you eat it? Well, well, well the first night we went out and we went to one of these coffee bars. And I guess it can speak about this. You know, I'm... It's legal here. Yeah, totally legal, exactly. We took the easy way in, like the novice version and it did nothing to me at all that first night. So the next night when we went, I went right to the bottom of the list where it was in Dutch or something, but it had like machine guns. You know, pointed out a brain kind of thing. Yeah. So I did that version and it was the most terrifying experience of my fucking life. I was saying you said it either. But we were in a club, we were in a club and all of a sudden the world changed. And what started happening is my brain started manufacturing versions of myself that would converse with me and convinced me that the reality that I was experiencing was real. And then that version of me would destroy that reality and the process would start over and over and over again. Is this something you smoked or you smoked? Yeah, wow. Definitely smoked. And again, I suspect that the impact was because my body has no experience. Overshore. Oh, you know. And so I think that just enhanced the impact. And you know, it was terrifying. It was, I was in the hotel room and I was clinging to the bed. And I actually said to my wife, time me up. Not in any night. It sounds wrong. I mean, time it because I'm like terrified of what I'm going to do. Right. You know, wow. And so instead, you know, she called the doctor and I was like, she was like afraid this would be like in the newspaper. Because I just like to be left into the queen. You know, but you know, they're so used to Americans getting in over their head with this kind of experience. So it was something that they were completely used to. So you know, they they sent up a doctor and the doctor basically just gives you sugar. And my wife knew that this was an extreme circumstance because I don't eat any sugar. But I was like, he said he does not. I was like taking a Milky Way bars. or some other sugar. I don't know. I don't know the chemistry behind this. But sugar is the the antidote caffeine is supposed to help us. Yeah. I guess. But it lasted eight hours. Even flying home on the plane the next day. All I did is I sat on my seat and I put on the headphones and there was a Beatles channel. And I just like listened to Beatles per for like for like seven hours. And I was just you know in this in this place that I had never experienced before. Now, you know, for our conversation, you know, this just made it so intuitively obvious to me that my conscious awareness is totally dependent on a few chemicals. That's all that's happening inside of the head. So in a way it was a valuable experience. It's not something that I want to ever experience again. Absolutely. It was something that helped align my intuitive understanding of what consciousness is with the scientific recognition that it all relies upon the stuff that's circulating inside of your mind. Yeah. What's interesting about this, this, these heavy duty psychedelic experiences because what you took was by most people's idea of very mild. Yeah. But that profound psychedelic chemicals that are also produced by your brain. If you just shift that ratio and not by too much really you're not talking about little small doses of this stuff shift that ratio. It produces these profound visions. It's like ayahuasca type. Ayahuasca is just an orally active version of dimethyl trip. Okay. Okay. They figured out how to you know your brain, your gut rather produces mono amine oxidase and it breaks down dimethyl trip to mean. And so they figured out how to combine an MAO inhibitor with the leaves of another plant that has the dimethyl trip to mean. I say. But you could take it, there's synthetic versions of it. But the point is this is something that your brain produces, your liver produces. We know it's produced in the lungs. It's the body makes it. Yeah. Right. But it's got it's in there. But that you shift the balance and also you have these incredibly profound visions. Yeah. Yeah. It makes you think like what we have now in terms of our balance and our chemicals must be different than with this fellow must have had. Yes. Chimpanzee thing. Right. And primates before that. As the human, like when you think of human evolution, do you ever stop to think what are we going to be like a million years now if we do survive? What have you ever done this sort of thought experiment? We say, okay, if things keep going the same way, we used to be very strong and very hairy. And we're getting progressively softer as we don't need to use our bodies as much. Our brains are getting larger. Our heads are getting bigger. Do you do that sort of thought experiment to see what we're going to be common? Not in a systematic scientific way because the process is so fraught with incredible detail that I think it's hard for anybody, even experts in evolutionary biology, to really tell us anything that will hold water that's really predictive. But on a general level, yeah. I mean, because you know, people often wonder why is it that we haven't been visited by aliens, right? This is a thing that comes up whenever you're talking about other life inside the universe. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But but the answer to that could be quite straightforward. Nobody out there cares about us because we're so ill developed. We're so young on the cosmic scene that there's nothing interesting for them to find here on planet Earth. So to me, there's a natural explanation for why there can be stuff out of their life out there. And yet they don't hang out around planet Earth. Just like we don't hang around on an anhail to try to have a conversation with you know what's going on inside that particular structure. I buy that argument the least. You do. Because we're interested in butterflies. Butterflies are so boring. We're interested in moles. We're interested in. But interested in in roles. We're interested in them for very specific reasons. Sure. So typically we're interested either because we want to see the evolutionary development that yields this particular life form. Or because there's a general curiosity about how this objects is put together. If these other beings are so far beyond us, those kinds of taxonomy questions or no longer of any interest, then hanging around here may not hold anything for them to make the journey and stick around long enough for us to notice. I don't buy that again for two reasons. Okay. Because why would we assume that they're so far beyond us that they wouldn't be interested in these talking monkeys with thermonuclear weapons who dominate an entire planet? Yeah. That would be fascinating. Right. Right. But out some planet somewhere where people are the politicians all lie to themselves. Everyone gets video through the sky. If they fly in metal tubes that hurl over the over the oceans, they pollute the oceans and eat all the fish like these people are fucking crazy. Yeah. We've got to go there and check this out. But imagine that this civilization, the notion of lording over a planet is like us talking about, you know, the ant lording over a grain of sand. So they may be galactic as opposed to planetary in their hegemony. And the notion of some little tiny rock orbiting some nondescript star in the suburbs of this completely ordinary galaxy off there on the side may not have the kind of pole that you imagine that it does. Oh, I disagree. We think it's interesting when we see a chimp use a rock to open up a nut. You know, we think it's interesting that, you know, there's an amazing photograph of an orangutan that spearfishing of your scene it. I have seen that actually. Yeah, yeah, yeah, right. No it is. He learned it from people apparently, but it's still interesting nonetheless. Right. But I don't think a hundred years from now we're going to be as interested in these kind of qualities or a thousand years from now or 10,000 years from now. Well, why don't we assume that these things that come here from another planet are more than 10,000 years. Well, that's a very good question. And I think the answer to that is we look at the history of the cosmos until today. And it's say let's just call it our universe to be concrete, 13.8 billion years. And we look at life on planet earth and it's, you know, a handful of billions of years old. So in a handful of billions of years you can go from some complex molecules to human beings. Like I say it like it's not that long. It's not that long because you know, imagine that life began a few billion years earlier in some other system. You know, stars and galaxies, they were starting up, you know, a billion years after the big bang. So it could be that life in other worlds has a head start on us by a few billion years. And we know what can happen in a few billion years. It can take us from single cell to us. And you can imagine from a few billion years from now into the future it could be radically different. So to say it's 10,000 years ahead of us, that to me would be the unexplained coincidence. How unlikely that they started and we started with them 10,000 years in the span of billions of years. That seems unlikely to me. It does it seem unlikely when you're talking about the infinite size of the universe. And there's perhaps an infinite number of Brian Greenstone out there talking to an infinite numbers of me. Good point. Good point. So you're absolutely right. We're almost guaranteed if the spatial expansive universe is infinite. Yeah. There are going to be places where it's within 10,000 years. Sure. But those are going to be a very small number compared to the places where it's not 10,000 years. Is that true or would it be an infinite number of them? Well, it'd be infinite number of them. But there are different kinds of infinity. So you mean in the space of the exact scope of the universe itself, a small number relatively speaking to where we are. Yes. Well, I would say it's slightly different. I'd say look at a finite size ball in this large spatial. So everything's finite now. Let's get a 5 billion light year ball. Right. And within that ball, the number that are differing from us by 10,000 years would be very, very small compared to the number differing from us by, say, a billion years or a couple of billion years. So then simply by the law of numbers, if we imagine that there are random processes that are generally, now there could be some physical principle that prevents life from emerging before, say, 4 billion years ago. And if that's the case and we're not aware of that principle, then you'd be absolutely right. That we'd all be roughly at the same starting point. And there's no reason to suspect that they would be so far ahead of us. But I don't know of any such principle. But you almost have a reductionist view of this, right? Like, you'd, so if you had a guess, if you had $100 to bet, has alien life ever observed us, you would say no. Well, by observed, you mean could it just turn a big telescope in our direction and gather some radio waves? But yes, I would take that bet. Because frankly, we've only been generating radio waves for the last 70 years. So it's only a 70 light year ball around us. And within that small radius, very unlikely that there's been some alien world that's examining us. So it would have to be something that would be able to recognize our signal and visit us. Right. But don't we look at observable planets and solar systems and discover Goldilocks planets? We examine those planets from vast distances away. Yes. And wouldn't you assume that a life form that is perhaps thousands of years more advanced than us with the exponential increase in technology? I mean, if they ever got to the point where we are, that they would see these Goldilocks planets as well and recognize... Thousands of years more advanced than us with the exponential increase in technology. I mean if they ever got to the point where we are That they would see these Goldilocks planets as well and recognize that Earth is one of them Yes, however if they are so far away They're going to be examining Earth as it was hundreds of thousands or millions or billions of years ago So if you truly want them to be examining us in the sense of human presence on planet Earth Then it's a much more difficult proposition to imagine that they've actually been doing is it possible? There's another way to examine things where you're not hampered by the speed of light Huh not not not that I know of I mean any signal in the world that we're aware of is restricted by Specials are powered by the speed of travel which is now look there's quantum entanglement Mm-hmm Which is a strange property of the quantum world in which distant objects can behave as if they are one Yes, and in some sense respond instantaneously to an influence in one location at a distant location no matter how far apart They are but that isn't really Observing that more that's more realizing correlations between physical properties at widely separated locations But I'm not aware of a means of leveraging that to actually observe what's happening in some distant location even if you do have Quantum entangled particles for a long time my operating theory on aliens was when I see something that's Interesting that I'm gonna pay attention to it right because it just it's too attractive And it's part of the thing of whether it's rampthah or any of these Womky things there's something about Woo-woo stuff whether it's psychics or channelers that's really attractive to people Yeah, some sort of a weird way and so is so our aliens the idea that if we were visited by something from another world Some far advanced space daddy or whatever it is that comes down here and right is gonna show us the way That's that's so attractive. Yeah, that it it I think it messes with your ordinary ability to observe and to objectively analyze what's real and what's not yeah, I totally agree with that and I think it's an unfortunate feature of the human mind that we tend to look outward for Weirdness that will inject into the world more than the everyday that we experience through through coming every day encounters We want there to be more we don't want it to be that we're just on this rock around this planet and we live for a while and then we're gone We want it to be more than that and so we imagine that there's some answer Floating out there in the cosmos that maybe that will be brought down to earth through our space daddy as you refer to it and My view of that is it's much more noble To recognize that there is no answer floating out there in space There's no space that it is gonna come here and say this is what it's all about The answer is you and I and everybody else we manufacture our own meaning We manufacture our own purpose and how much better is it that we come up with the our own meaning then having it bestowed or forced upon us by some external entity I don't think that diminishes things. I think it aggrandizes them because it's coming ultimately from ourselves That makes a lot of sense I think the hope is that space daddy's gonna prevent nuclear war and figure out how to fix the ocean Yeah, sure no, I mean and that I could that I could certainly imagine happen So there's knowledge out there in the world that you can imagine that that we haven't yet encountered that we could make use of so Fantastic but the other thing that's worth keeping in mind and this I think is Surprising to some people you can do a calculation as to whether consciousness can itself persist indefinitely in The universe you can ask yourself sure earth may go away you and I we're gonna go away We recognize all this but is it possible that some kind of conscious being can continue to Congetate indefinitely far into the future or its progeny continue to Congetate and you can pretty much establish that thought itself will come to an end in this universe Thought itself is a limited lifetime phenomenon in the cosmos So when at least our universe right yes, so I'm gonna focus just on our So different breakdown of protons when we get to that point. There's no room for thought No, I mean that's part of it, but I'm willing to go for that I'm willing to imagine that even with the breakdown of protons that there's some way that the particles that it spawns Electrons neutrinos photons whatever somehow through some configuration of widely separated particles is able to have signals going back and forth that Allows this group of particles to think I'm willing to posit that in order to be as general as possible and with that assumption You can still prove that the relentless rise in entropy that we were talking about before ensures that any Congetating being that happens to still be able to persist in this unusual realm of particles will ultimately Burn up in the entropic waste generated by its own process of thinking So the process of thought itself in the far future will generate too much heat for that being to be able to release that heat to the environment and To avoid burning up in its own waste when you think you will fry Always been interesting to me when I've really stepped back and looked at it that our Ideas of the importance of thought are so egocentric when we take into consideration The the vast scope of the universe and how majestic so much that we see in the cosmos that there's no thought at least as far as we know What so ever like like hyponovas like like you know? Star nurseries all these different things that we see in the cosmos that are infinitely larger than us and responsible for life itself Yeah that these Processes create the very elements that are needed to create life But we're so concerned with this one animal's ability to think and ponder and create and emotions and right stories and that to us it's so egocentric how we're directly self-centered When you think of a little infinite new universe. Yeah, I mean we are too finite beings sitting in the valley. Yeah, you know Incredible wouldn't desk. Yeah, you know, it's really weird that we think about it's so important. It's everything does it is it is and It's hard to not think in those terms, but I Encourage people in the part of the point of this book is to encourage people to think in a cosmic way and recognize the point That you're making. Yeah, which are with these little tying tiny finite beings crawling around on this planet We're here for a brief moment of cosmic time, and that's all there is to it and Some will feel like oh my god. That's disturbing. That's distressing. Yeah, my point is hey Extol celebrate the fact that you were here for this brief I mean think about the collection of quantum events Stretching back from the big bang until today that had to turn out exactly as they did for you and for me to actually exist Each one of these quantum events and there are nearly infinitely many of them could have turned out that way instead of this Yielding in universe which neither you nor I nor anybody else would be here and yet against those astounding odds Astounding odds. We're here That is cause for celebration and you can go further not only over here We can figure out how we got here We can create art we can write the stories that you are referring to we can create comedy. We can build Monuments we can create films we can do things that inanimate objects can't so this to me is Where the value and purpose and meaning comes from as opposed to Trying to look out and hope space daddy comes with the answer of you know flashing in neon signs saying aha That's what it's all about that's never gonna happen. It isn't what it might You might have to yours, but I Mint that it's possible I so every time I say it's not gonna happen I mean and likely that it's gonna vary unlucky. Yeah, I agree with that But yeah, it's it's interesting to me that that's the thing that we look forward to the most to the average person If they think about they think about space they think about intelligent life. Yeah, that that is far more interesting to them than the fact that there's Black holes out there that are devouring planets. Yeah, they're sucking stars into its event horizon Yeah, this infinite point of density that we can't even really begin to imagine with our own little brains. Yeah Yeah, and and the fact that all this arose without a guiding intelligence Yeah, you know that there are black holes and there are active galactic nuclei and there are black hole slamming into each other Creating gravitational waves that we can actually detect. I mean it is a wonderfully rich Reality that we are fortunate to be part of do you experience much pushback or much Conflict from religious people who don't like the fact that you describe things in that way that that didn't need an intelligent Force intelligent creator to What's it? It's an interesting question because the biological community people like Richard Dawkins and the like I think have really born the brunt of The religious pushback because they're dealing directly with phenomena of life and that's the precious commodity that somehow we want to be sacred and therefore our religious sensibility will push back on it just being the mindless laws of physics and evolution Yielding, you know life on planet earth They haven't pushed as hard on the quantum physicists and the cosmologists as they have on the biologists But I have had conversations many of them are respectful as opposed to antagonistic Where the view is that I am wrong headed that I am missing the point and some of these religious folks are Fantastically accomplished scientists. That's weird. Yeah. I mean I went to a gathering I think I can talk about now as closed-door gathering you weren't meant to describe You know, it's too much. Yeah. Oh, sorry. I'm really open myself here up and and I thought it was it was science was called science in the spiritual quest and It was a bunch of scientists that were being brought together And I thought it was going to be an interesting but ultimately one note meeting I thought everybody's going to basically say the same thing. There could be a God There's no evidence for a God. We've got the laws of physics and we're going to just press forward under the assumption that physics is all There is until the clouds part and God reveals him herself or itself to us and at that point we may change our tune It was not one note. I was the only person who had that perspective in the room Everybody else was coming out religion from a very different way of thinking about the world In fact, there's one Nobel laureate in the room who got up and sang Psalms as part of his presentation and I was sitting there and I was like What is happening here? This is so unexpected to me and what it really meant was I was so close-minded into the varieties of religious engagement that happened in the world and it opened my eyes and there's one Nobel laureate in particular I did say to him at the end I said when you look at me and you hear my view What do you think? Any kind of put his arm around me in a fun killer way and said, you know, you're real smart guy and You don't understand the true reality and I think ultimately you will because you're open-minded and You're on a journey and I hope that your journey will finally take it to the place where I have been for for many years That was so unexpected That does no by a Lord who I respected for his his concrete mathematical and experimental work Saw the world completely differently now was the respect of belief. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, absolutely But I was the one who was far out one I was the one who was untethered. Yeah I mean I came in there. I was like whoa, you know and and and and and and and and clearly they arranged the meeting to have a spectrum of Perspectives I mean this is not something that was randomly designed and it just so happened But it was in our opener and I and from that I went to read You know William James's book of varieties of religious experience. No, yeah So it's a book that William James Great psychologist wrote in 1902 And it was based on a series of lectures. I think he gave in Scotland and it is the most heartfelt and rational Approach to religion and science that I think has ever been written and yet most people don't know much about it Because what he does is he goes through and he documents through his own research and through reading biographies and interviewing individuals the vastly different ways that people think about religion and why they think about religion and the value that religion has in their lives and And and and when you read that book it doesn't convert me I haven't changed my views on whether or not there is a God But it has changed my views on the value of a religious sensibility The role that it plays in people's lives now look it can be you know you talk to people like Sam Harris and and you know It's it's a destructive force in the world and it has been a destructive force in some ways But that's not the full story a full of story is that for some individuals It gives a connection to a historical lineage that's deeply valued for some individuals It puts their life in a larger setting that allows them to be in the world in a more productive way So there are a whole range of roles that religious engagement can play the problem is when you start to pit it against scientific Insight then you run into trouble But religion was never developed to give us factual information about the world Religion will never give us the electron magnetic moment to nine decimal places That's the purview of scientific investigation and if you can keep these straight in your mind There's a definite and powerful role for a Religious sensibility in the world. Yeah, I feel like it gives people in a lot of ways of scaffolding for ethics and morality and Allows them some alleviation of anxiety. Yeah, exactly a feeling of purpose But like you said as long as it's not conflicting with rigid scientific reality Yeah, right scientific provable scientific reality. Yeah, and I got to tell you there's if anything You know Richard Dawkins. I know you had him on the program. Yeah, so so so you know that his His MO in the world is very anti-religious. I think he would agree with me on that I don't want to put words into his mouth But I did a event with him in New York The Beacon Theater I don't know it was maybe a year ago or something like that and it was very interesting because in a one-on-one conversation His views were very similar to mine I I felt look we don't agree in totality But I was saying to him there are times I go around the world and I will do things that are utterly irrational I'll knock on wood for good luck. I'll speak to my dead father I know that he's not really there. I'll pray to God on occasion if I think that I could use that backup Not because I think there's some bearded individual in the sky It's just a behavioral tendency that I find to be comforting and useful And I said this to Richard and he said I totally get it. I was like what he was like a totally get it He said he said in fact he said I don't like to sleep in a house that has a reputation as being haunted You know, you know and and for me it was such a beautiful human moment It was such a beautiful human moment where we were just like being human being right and he said and he said we're both sinners And I agree we are both sinners in that sense because we know how the world works We know this doesn't make any sense and yes It's still part of somehow how we behave in the world and I think there's a value to recognizing that that is what it means to be human You will engage in the world in ways that are not necessarily strictly adhering to some rational perspective of how the scientific world operates I would love to see Richard Dawkins outside of a haunted house Yeah, not going in there exactly exactly, you know Yeah, so you know, um, it's all just to say yeah that I kind of feel like There are many pathways toward insight in the world there many ways to live a life There are many ways to come to terms with our own impermanence and it's not as though something is right or something is wrong It's a question of isn't useful to you and I think that we have to be very open-minded in the kinds of behaviors that That we allow to happen in the world, you know, you know, you know even romped it. It's nutty stuff Yeah, but if some of those individuals who go there find that it allows them to live in the world in a more productive way alleviating anxiety feeling like they're on a spiritual quest So be it yeah, that's the thing that's something I mean it's hard for people to understand if you're not in that space that headspace it there You don't need this structure But for some people even Scientology or something along those lines. It seems loopy on paper can provide them legitimate structure and benefit their lives. Yeah in a tangible way they can describe to you. Yeah exactly and my feeling is that um If there was an I don't know this to the case and maybe some biologists will push back on this But if there was a a race of Want of a better word, you know, Vulcan-like individuals who approach the world in a completely rational manner Evaluating the data figuring out the most sensible course of action competing against a crazy group of individuals like us Who will come up with wild fictional ideas gods in the heavens, you know demons haunting the world I think it's the latter group that ultimately would triumph because with that kind of freedom of thought You get novelty. Yeah, you get ingenuity you get creativity And so I feel as though this is part and parcel of who we are and why we have survived and to sort of come at the world with a Scientific club that's meant to smash away anything that disagrees with the scientific worldview is an unfortunate way of looking at the world Yeah, there's something about creativity that it doesn't necessarily have to abide by any laws of logic and it can still be beneficial Yeah, and and and and that's why yeah, it's so stunning right when somebody comes up with something It's like where did that come from it didn't come from a rational Approach to working out, you know, Brahms third symphony It emerged from the turning emotions of an individual who happens to be made up of trillions of particles guided by physical law Responding to the environment which is impinging his senses with an incredible array of influences And through that world emerges this spectacular piece of music That's breathtaking. Yeah, utterly breathtaking. Yeah, and it's amazing what that music can inspire as it reaches out to you know x amount of people and then causes different thoughts in their mind And then that causes in turn another branch of creativity another another new line of thinking that they might have never Never pursued before yeah, and that to me establishes That the notion that language is the only way that we can know about the world You know, Vickenstein had this perspective that the limits of my language limits of my world That seems to me utterly wrong I mean the experience of music or the experience of Congetating about the world but not trying to overlay a narrative upon it just feeling your way in To reality Reveals things about the world that I think are are beyond linguistic Do you ever listen to music when you're you're pondering an equation or whether you're going over a problem It's an interesting question when I was in college I couldn't have any sound on when I was trying to say learn quantum mechanics or relativity I would find that it would capture my brain too fully And I couldn't focus on the equations that I was trying to understand But the funny thing is in writing this book for the very first time I found that there were passages that I couldn't write if it was quiet I needed to have music playing because in some sense by focusing Too directly on what I was trying to say I couldn't say it I only found that I can make progress in certain kinds of descriptions by allowing my brain to Fly off through whatever musical experience. I was playing and allowing the Freedom of thought to then emerge within that unusual for me environment. What kind of music? Well, it varied incredibly a lot of slayer No, but so some of it was classical Remember there's one vital passage when I was writing words. Do you know pentatonics? The they are a spectacular acapella group who are able to take songs that you have heard and transform them into sort of Transcendent performances. So you should check these guys out But other times, you know, it would just be loud rock Loud beetles loud rolling stones The soundtrack from the greatest showmen, you know, just blaring that thing and somehow it just allowed me a certain kind of Linguistic freedom that I could not acquire in my normal way of being in the world Which is everyone's quiet. Let me just work out my equations and I need total focus and no distraction So is this something that you sort of evolved over the course of your career? Absolutely absolutely was not there early on and And in you know, there's this phenomenon. I don't know if this is anything more than a metaphor or an analogy But whatever you know there's certain things in the night sky that you can't see if you look at them directly But by looking off axis you're able to invoke other Qualities of the eye that are able to sense those features of the night sky I kind of feel like it's the same thing Sometimes by focusing directly on what you want to do you can't do it and you've got to look Obliquely you got to look off axis Metaphorically and that's the only way that you can accomplish what you set out to do and certainly music is one of the ways to take one's attention and Shifted in a different direction to get that oblique view of what it is that you're trying to do and I have found That it allows for progress that otherwise is unattainable and is that the case also when you were writing this book? It absolutely was a case writing this book, you know, there, you know, I have a very A wife is very Understanding so we have a house up I mean we live in Manhattan, you know in that Columbia But she would let me go up to our house upstate with the dogs and by myself and I would disappear for weeks on end and I Hold myself up in this cabin in the woods and I would sometimes write deep into the night and There were no neighbors around so I could turn on the music I would ever volume I found Useful and I would do it and I would find you know that it freed up a certain kind of Creative thought process that to me was striking because I had never Approached work in that way before and it was really deeply interesting So how did you come to this idea of doing it that way? I was struggling on certain things and I felt as though I am approaching this in a very flat-footed way. I want to write about this You know say want about write about human creativity or want to write about religious engagement And I am just doing what I've always done which is I have this equation and I want to solve it So I'm going to bring the tools of mathematics to bear to solve it now It was approaching this writing project in exactly the same Mind frame and as it wasn't working. I said let me smack my brain around a little bit and And so one way of you know it could be psychedelics. I didn't go that direction But I smacked it around by forcing myself to be subject to a great deal of Distraction in the environment around me and it really made a difference. It's interesting. You did it in a calculated manner Yeah, right. Yeah, so so sorry I can't break free fully from my my my physicist training, you know, but it's wise I mean that that way of doing it It's also a time-tested, you know from right right for throw to you know Yeah, and the funny thing is it never worked for me in the past because the focus I think when I'm doing mathematics it does need at least for me personally to be that kind of Non-distracted total focus on what's going on as a right writer. It's a very romantic notion too Yeah, go to the woods in a cabin. That's what's up. Right. That's what everybody wants to do. Yeah, right exactly You know, and missing is whiskey Supposed to get drunk out there I didn't I had the dogs and it's just like I said, I hardly ever drink, you know but it was an unusual creative experience which to me Opened up a different way of going about trying to to create things in the world as you write more and more books You find it to be more and more difficult or do you find it to be easier? Well my early books were all focused on trying to bring scientific ideas out to the general public You know the Elkin universe was about string theory fact by the cosmo space and time hidden reality is about multiple universes and so in that role I'm basically trying to translate from the cutting edge research into ordinary Human language so that people who don't want to go to graduate school can get the basic idea of what's going on In this book is a very different proposition I feel like I've moved in a in a in a Significantly different direction through this book because yes, they're science You know entropy evolution the history of the universe in the beginning to the end but the focus on Why we humans do what we do? Why we tell stories the emergence of language? Why we tell myths why we engage in religious experience? Why creative expression is so important to us? This felt like it was drawing upon things I've been thinking about for decades But never put into to writing so it was a harder exercise than anything that I did before because it was a different Exercise but in the end one that I felt was even more gratifying because it was Making clear why these ideas matter as opposed to just trying to tickle the brain of the reader I'm trying to actually if you will touch the heart and soul of the reader and that's something which if it's successful feels very gratifying I would imagine that would be very hard to end to feel how like to put the cover on it and to go That's it. Yeah, right. It is and I but that's true almost with with all books You know the famous adage is that you never finish a book you abandoned them That's all that ever happens and that was true in spades in this particular case because The subject was so big. Yeah, and you can always imagine going further in this direction or enhancing that description But at some point you recognize that you know life is an ongoing process and a book is ultimately a snapshot of where the author was at the moment that the book was written and that to me is really what happens here This is a a snapshot of my view of the human conditions set against the cosmological unfolding and how much of your perceptions of these things has evolved You know as an educator and as a scientist and as a person who's in the public guy How much of how much of your perceptions on these ideas have changed over the course of your career huge huge? I? think I was a very Hard-nose science thinker when I started I think part of this may have been I became a professor at a relatively young age I think it was 27 when I got my first faculty job so many of the graduate students were the same ages may so I think I felt the need to have a very Rigid scientific outlook on the world peak because of that and you know as I've gotten older that has changed and my willingness to entertain a broader range of thought and experience and ways of being has as Absolutely grown the other thing that's had a vast and vital impact on mere students You know for 30 years the only thing I really taught was technical physics courses Quantum mechanics or relativity, you know thermodynamics and what do you do there? You're at the blackboard you're putting equations up there You're trying to get the kids to be able to solve problems and understand what the mathematics is all about So the only thing that you're really ever doing is touching The cognitive part of their brain for the last few years. I've been teaching a course The students didn't know it. That's actually based on this book So I wanted to try out the ideas with young minds So I taught a course at Columbia called origins and meaning And in that course I had students from across the campus not just the physics students at the neuro students the anthropologist So I taught a course at Columbia called Origins and Meaning. And in that course I had students from across the campus, not just the physics students, at the neurosuitants, the anthropology students, the linguistic students, the theological learning, so it was a whole range of students. And to see how their understanding of how their major or subject fits in to the cosmological unfolding changed many of their perspectives on what it is that they're studying and what they're doing. And to have students come to my office and feel shook enough, shaken up at every the right form of that verb is. Where they're saying, you know, I've lived my life in such a way, but now when I think about religion as perhaps an evolutionarily interesting and useful development as opposed to something from on high, or when I think about creative expression as something that might seed ingenuity and innovation as opposed to something that is just pure inspiration coming from the outer world, I'm thinking about my life differently. And some of them, frankly, would be upset. I had students come in tears. And I'd never had them when I teach quantum mechanics. You know, more than one. More than one, really. Because they'd say this course is kind of shaking my sense of who I am and what I am in the world. What was the key aspect of it that was shaking them? Well for some students, it was the notion of religion because many of them, or at least some of them, had a traditional religious upbringing and their academic life and their religious life were completely separate. And now when you have a chorus in which you're focusing upon how it would be that this institution of religion might naturally evolve on planet earth based upon what we know about humans and human brains and the evolutionary pressures that we've been under, some of them began to think about religion as a very different proposition than the one that they had when they were growing up. And I was in a position that I'd never been before of basically counseling a student and saying, hey, it's okay to have your world shake a little bit. It's okay to think about things that you may come back to exactly where you were before this course. But if a collection of ideas can make you rethink your life, at least it'll cast it in a different light. It'll illuminate it differently. Go with it, see what happens. And I never had a conversation like that when teaching Schrodinger's equation. And for me, it was the most gratifying pedagogical experience that I've ever had because you're reaching the whole person as opposed to just reaching this cognitive technique of solving equations. If you can talk religion with a really intelligent person who's objective, who has a belief, that it's such an interesting subject because it requires suspension of disbelief in order to absorb some of the stories. But there's clearly a history behind this of thousands of years of translations. And you're trying to get to the, what did they mean when they wrote this down? How much did they know? And what were they trying to do? Were they just trying to get everybody to calm down and stay in line? Or were they trying to find some means of gluing the group together by a shared belief? Or, you know, there are folks who basically say that there are qualities of the human brain that naturally leave it open to a religious sensibility. I mean, for instance, we have agency detection systems in our brain where we look around the world and we tend to assign agency to things that happen. That's useful, right? Because, you know, if you mistake a windblown branch for a Jaguar, yeah, it's fine. We thought it was Jaguar, but it was just a branch. But if the reverse happens, you think it was a Jaguar and you think it's a windblown branch, you're going to get eaten. So we tend to over-end out agency into the world. There is evolutionary value to that. So when the wind blows, we tend to think there's a mind up there. When the river gurgles, we tend to think that there's a mind in there. And this is sort of the seed for the kinds of perspectives that you'll find in many of the world's religions. So there's natural course of events that can lead to the arising of the institution, or at least the ideas behind the institution of religion. And for students that have never encountered that idea before, it can really shake things up. And I think in a very valuable way, you know? So I think we're absolutely right. Having a conversation with somebody who has a religious perspective is deeply interesting to understand where that mind came to the place that it got to. And from a personal sensibility, I'll give you one little anecdote. My dad died. I was 23 years old. And unexpectedly, I'd been visiting home. I was at Harvard at the time. I was visiting from Cambridge and we had a nice weekend. And by the time I got back to Cambridge on the bus, my mom called me and said, Dad's dead. It was so shocking. It was so sudden. It was so complete. And I remember I went back home and my dad was not a religious man, but we knew that he would want to have a religious ceremony. And we did it. And we had a minion of Jews coming to the house to recite the cottage prayer. Because we weren't religious. We didn't know what we were doing. And I had no idea what these men were saying. But it was deeply comforting. In fact, I didn't want to know what they were saying. To me, it was just a collection of ancient sounds. But this sounds connected me across the generations to a culture that had been extended back 5,000 years. And in a moment of crisis, that was a very comforting and useful connection to have. Yeah. That is where I find people get the most out of religion. And the fact that it brings communities together in this sort of cohesive ritual. Everybody acts together. And everybody, you feel like there's completion to it. Like you're putting someone into perspective and you're doing so with this religious ceremony. And when large groups of people get together and engage in a ritual behavior, something magical happens. I've spoken to evolutionary psychologists like Steve Pinker. He's a wonderful thinker. You're not a man here, too. And you know, Steve is skeptical that this kind of ritual behavior can yield the kind of cohesive bonding that some people suggest that it does. But you probably have... I have the on occasion engaged in these ritual behaviors, you know, mass drumming and movements. And I got to tell you, you are quickly... I find transported to a place where you are now part of a collective. When you feel yourself melting into the group and you are one. And if you've never had that experience, I think it's something that you should have, because I think it's a vital part of our heritage. It is part of how we got to be who we are. Yeah, there's something about group acceptance and a group of people acting and doing something together that does create this very strange bond. Yeah. It doesn't necessarily exist amongst individuals. It's a weird bond. It is a very weird bond. It has nothing to do with the individuals. Nothing to do with the personality of Jim or Mary. It's irrelevant at that point. It's somehow joining you together into this massive humanity that's all engaged in the same practice and somehow you feel as though your identity melts into the larger hole. I don't know why it happens. There's negative aspects to that sort of thing. Of course. For that mob mentality. Of course. I give you've ever been in a situation where things got chaotic and you really had this feeling like anything can happen in the moment. I've seen it happen. I've never been part of it. Very weird. There's a feeling in the air. Yeah. I have an analogous one which is my brother is a Harry Krishna. Whoa. He is 13 years old in the May and left college in the 60s, which was a tumultuous time and went to Europe and ultimately joined into what many people think of as some kind of cultish activity. But he's not a cult thinker. He's an original thinker. He's a brilliant thinker. Yet within this group mentality, you can imagine a certain kind of group think can take over at least people imagine that this happens. Yes, it has positive aspects and it can have negative aspects. In the end, I think there is a long lineage in which those of our forebears who survive were the ones who could join together into these more potent. These more powerful groups and that way were able to triumph over other groups in the ancestral environment. There are different readings of the archaeological record whether it was a dangerous place and the hunter-gatherer pastor was sort of a placid place. One reading says it was a very dangerous place and therefore those groups that survived were the ones who were able to establish this kind of allegiance to the whole. And certainly I think this kind of ritual behavior may have been part of that. One together through shared experience. And belief. And if you're all believing in the same supernatural entity, that's a powerful and principle, powerful glue. Do you find that there's, I mean, I don't want to say an arrogance in some academics, maybe it's not the right word, but this being too quick to dismiss any positive benefit at all about religion. Yes. It's the knee-jerk reaction among a certain group of academics. And it feels deeply unfortunate to me. It almost feels like a religion of its own sort when it's just the response as opposed to a careful, thoughtful, heartfelt analysis of the situation. I frankly wish that more people would read William James's book because I do think that it's the kind of, here's a scientist, a deeply thoughtful scientist who knows how to analyze data, knows how to rationally engage with the world, who was plumbing the depths of religion in a very, very meaningful and sensitive way. And by the end of these lectures, I think it was lecture number 20 or something, he describes as religion as this, as something that helps the journey toward the terror and the beauty of phenomena. He describes it as the voice of the thunder, the gentleness of the summer rain. He described it in terms of the subliminative of the stars and this kind of transcendent approach to the religious experience. I think brings it out of the academic guise that is often thrown upon it, which is something that is contravening everything we know about the world. It's causing people to think in ways that are irrational. I mean this whole trope that you hear is not that there isn't some truth to that, but it's an incomplete truth. And if you're willing to approach religion in a way where you discard the pieces that offend you, throw away the parts that you think are utter nonsense, only keep those aspects that are useful to you in your life, then there is a place for it. I think therein lies the problem with a lot of people. They're not willing to do that. This need for suspension of disbelief troubles them so much that they feel like fools if they buy into something. And we're also dealing with all religions except the ones that are super questionable like Scientology or Mormonism that are very old. And the idea of maybe it would be better if we came up with something that we could all agree on in 2020. Maybe it would be wonderful if we have something that maybe has science in it, maybe something that has our genuine understanding of how human beings react and what the benefits of community and having these environments were loving conscious people communicate with each other in a very positive way, that this could be a new form of this thing that we seem to desire so greatly. And I agree. And I have to say I make this point in the book because the point that I make there is that to truly engage with the world, you have to use a variety of stories where fundamentally storytellers. That's what human beings are. Now there's the reduction of story that physicists are well equipped to talk about with particles and laws of physics. On top of that, you've got the chemistory, the complex molecules, you've got the biology story that begins to talk about cells and life. You've got the psychological story, the neurophysiological story that brings in mind and consciousness. And within that, you then have all of the activities that conscious beings undertake, which includes religion and includes telling other kinds of stories and includes creative expression. You need them all. And to sort of say that the scientific account is the only account by which you're ever going to gain true qualities of the world as a very, in my view, limited description of what truth is. There is objective truth in the world that we can measure, that we can describe the equations of self-worth, but there's also internal truth, spiritual truth, that you get to by self-examination. It's real in the sense that you're understanding how you respond to the world. And that is something which is deeply personal, but utterly real. And whether it's through psychedelics, whether it's through ayahuasca, whether it's through a spiritual journey, whether it's through religion, regardless all of this adds color to the story of what it means to be a human being. Do you spend any time meditating? I do. I'm not particularly effective at it. So most people are that way. Yeah. You know, years ago. Years ago. Well, years ago, a friend of mine bought me one of these transcendental meditation courses. And I was like, okay, I'll just try it. See, he spent the money. I'm going to actually go and do it. And it was kind of eye opening. There was a lot of what you might call wu-wu stuff that was happening in the lectures. And in fact, the fun thing is the guy giving the lecture, he did recognize me. And I could tell how uncomfortable he was, giving his normal description, because he kept looking at me sheepishly. He would invoke quantum physics and things of that sort. of, you know, but I was like, I told him, I've do whatever you do. I'm not here to judge you. I'm just here to sort of see what's going on. But the idea of allowing the mind to be in a different mode of operation, which is sort of how I summarize the experience. You know, if you're reciting the mantra in your mind and allowing that to be a sort of pedal point, a driver of how your mind is behaving at that moment, that's a very different way of being in the world from thinking about grocery shopping or solving Einstein's equations. And I think that to me is the value of it. It's a systematic way to put your mind in a different mode of operation. And at times I find it very useful to move into that place. Hmm. What, when you started doing transatlantic meditation, what about it was weird? Well, what was weird, number one was doing this in this, in this group setting, which is how you start on this course. And moreover, it being framed in a manner that I had trouble aligning with my understanding of how the world works by virtue of the lectures that were given to us for what it is what we're doing. But through the practice, I sort of found, I'm sure I'm just translating from what they were saying in the lecture into a language that I'm more comfortable with. And that made it less weird for me because what you were talking about, religion just kind of cutting out the thing. Cutting out the thing that didn't make any sense to me and saying, hey, what is this really about? What this really is about is breaking the usual chain of thought that is 99.9% of the time of how I live in the world and allowing my brain to have a chain of thought that is artificial, because I'm sitting here forcing myself to recite this mantra inside my mind. But that's a very useful way of being because it's unfamiliar and it's novel and allows my brain to operate in a different way. So when I translated into that language, it all of a sudden made a lot more sense to me and became not weird at all. It became an interesting practice. And do you still do it? I do it when I feel I need it. So either friends of mine who say, I cannot live in the world if I don't do my 20 minutes in the morning. That's part of my routine. I don't feel that way. But there are moments when I say, whoa, I need to do it. And based on circumstance, based on what's happening in a given moment, it allows a kind of mental reset if that's a language that makes sense. And that reset I consider it to be a valuable thing to do. Now, do you do this? I do. I don't do TM, but I do meditate. Regular basis. Regular basis. And I also have a float tank here. Oh, you do? Really? Like a deprivation? Yeah. Yeah. In this building? Yeah, it's right over there. I'll show it to you after we're done. Wow. Yeah. Can I do it? Sure. You could. You want to shit. Have you done it before? I never did it before. I find it a little bit terrifying. Do you have my name? I do. Yeah, there's plenty of them. There's a bunch of different float places. It's not terrifying at all. Really? Yeah. He just float. Relax. Oh, yeah. Because I have some claustrophobia. Yeah. And that's like, for instance, I can't go into an MRI machine. Yeah. Totally. Yeah. And that's a smart. Why don't you get that out of your head? I tried. I got to tell you, I trained. So I have a desk in my office where it's only about like one foot high. And I slide my body underneath the desk, lock the door, because it's too weird. And I stay under there as long as I possibly could. How long is that? Like 1520. But I get into the real machine. Really? Yeah. My wife's mom was like that. Yeah. Like she did an MRI and she was like, it was the worst experience of my wife. I did two of them last week. I thought it was. I totally understand her. I totally. I totally. Really? Yeah. I don't understand why someone as smart as you would not recognize. Well, there's just things around me. I do. I do. But it's like the irrational part of the thing. I get in there. My heart starts to pound. What do you think that comes from? I don't know because it wasn't always there. And it has gotten worse in certain. There was a time against him. I'm going to come across like a nutcase. Maybe it was that trip to Amsterdam. Yeah. But there's actually times when I couldn't even go in a tunnel in a car. The claustrophobia was that bad. Really? Yeah. I was in a taxi cab. I had to go to New Jersey. You know, I'm in Hatton. So I had to take a Lincoln tunnel. And as the taxi is approaching the tunnel, I said to the guy, I can't do it. I can't do it. And the guy says, well, I can't let you out. It's illegal to let you out. I said, you got to let me out. I can't do it. And I just opened the door and I got out. Oh my god. That's so crazy. But now I'm fine with tunnels. I don't know what it is that maybe you're too smart. It's centuated it there. Maybe you're too smart. Maybe you're too smart. Maybe you're too smart. Maybe you're too smart. Maybe it's playing tricks with you and giving you anxiety to sort of shake it up the world. Yeah. Maybe. Maybe. Constantly contemplating the gigantic picture of the actual scope of the universe. Yeah. But now I'm pretty stable about these things. So it's just the MRI machine. So it's really close into your face. Well, you've got to just do a lot of MRIs. Get over that. Yeah, exactly. I'm sure that would do it. That would have to be do it. Probably, right? I'm sure you get used to it. But I just do a real simple type of meditation. When I probably eventually going to take a TM course because my friend Tom Papa, he's really into TM and he raves about it. Yeah. But I just sit down and I breathe. I just concentrate only on my breath. And it comes and goes. But I concentrate only on my breath. And I find really good relief from that yoga is the same thing. I do yoga. I try to do it at least twice a week when I do. I do. Yeah. There's a lot of benefit in that in the same way in that it's so difficult and in the poses, if you can only concentrate on your breath, just balance and concentrate on your breath, you'll be filled with activity enough, with things to concentrate on, with the balancing of the posture and then the breath that it acts as a brain scouring. It cleanses the mind of unnecessary anxieties and a lot of other... But you've been doing that for a long time, right? Yeah. I've been pretty steady for the last four years. Right. Right. And my wife does a lot of yoga. She keeps telling me that I need to do it. It's great. It's great for the body as well. And I think the more comfortable your body is, the better your, at least for me, the better my mind. God, I have a little doubt. I have a little doubt about that. You know, last year, the last year I've been doing Peloton bike. That's good. That's good. But then I herniated a disc in my back. And for the last two months, I've basically been unable to move. How did you do that? Well, you know, I think it was throwing out the Christmas tree. Oh, you know, the bending end date. And you know, my 92-year-old mother has used this opportunity to say, because we're Jewish, right? We weren't allowed to have a Christmas tree going up. Yeah, this is meaningful right here. Oh, yeah, you know, but my Christian wife is all too happy that I'm flexible on that count for sure. What is going on with your back now? Yeah, well, it's bad. Yeah, did you get an MRI? I did get an MRI. You want to take a shot and see it? Yeah, so I'm pushing it's the nerves. Pushing it's an nerve. Yeah. Have you heard of something called Regenikin? Do you know what that is? No, I don't. Regenikin is something that I used for a bulging desk. Oh, incredibly beneficial. It was created by a doctor in Germany, and it was illegal in the United States until a few years back. They moved the process of years, not covered by insurance, but it's very, very beneficial for that. And what they do is it's essentially a more advanced version of platelet-rich plasma. So they take your blood out, they do this process. It takes about 12 hours, and then they re-inject the serum. They take the serum out of the blood. It looks like this yellow serum, and they inject it directly into the areas. And it's right into the spine. Right into the area where the spine is bulging. So it allows it to relax. It's the most potent anti-inflammation drug that they can use. It's like instead of cortisone, which is what they've been talking about. Well, cortisone can help you as well. At least provide temporary relief, but what this does is actually heals the area. Really? Yeah, it's very beneficial. I had a real bad bulging disk in my neck that was making my hands go numb. So my toes are numb. Yeah. Yeah. But they can give you relief. And it's in Santa Monica. There's a place called Lifestyle Medicine. I'll connect you to the stock. Yeah, I'm so curious about what they do. I just saw a friend of mine there. He had a real problem with his neck within two weeks. It was better. He got hit by a car when he was on his motorcycle. Yeah. My friend, Dean Dale Ray, and he was really fucked up. His back was so bad that we were at the commestorm. People came near him and he tensed up. But what's mad? He was, dude, my neck is so messed up. If somebody bumps into me, I'm in sharp pain. Yeah. And I'm like, really? And then he started describing to me. So I said, I've got the thing for you. And I said, I'm in this place. Regentikines amazing. I've had it done several times. Can I get a check that? Yeah. I've had it done on my lower. Well, a lot of athletes like Peyton Manning and Kobe Bryant, they flew to Germany to get this procedure done because it was the last place to just legal to it. Including the UFC president, Dana White, which is where I found out about it. And then I found out that they were opening offices in America and Dallas, they have one. They have one in Santa Monica. I think somewhere else. Maybe New York. I think. Maybe. Yeah. But it's an amazing procedure. Super beneficial, particularly for that kind of nature. Yeah. Because it's been tough. I mean, for instance, I can't sleep because there's no position. Yeah. Now, the value of that is I have done so much reading over the last two months because I'm like up half the night and I only can't count when it's like utter utter exhaustion. Yeah. But can you spinal decompression? Have you ever done any of that? I did. I went to this physical therapy place where they put me up on pulleys and it kind of pulled the feet, I guess, away from the back. It wasn't like being stretched fully, but your own weight was causing the vertebrae to separate. Did that help you? Huge relief. Yeah. You can get a small inversion table. Yeah. You're thinking about that. Yeah. Well, I have one out here. You can try to. Yeah. I love Jima here. Yeah. There's another thing called the reverse hyper machine. And the reverse hyper machine was created by this. He's a very famous power lifter named Louis Simmons. And Louis had this idea. He's a very brilliant guy. He had this idea that they were trying to fuse his discs. He had a bulging disc. Yeah. He's like, well, a disc is compressed. Like how do you get it to decompress? And he developed this machine that strengthens the back when you lift up the legs, but then in the lowering of the legs, it provides active decompression. And it alleviated his problem. Do you wear this? No, no, I'll show it to you. I'll show it to you afterwards. It's a machine that you get. But this is what we are. Physical beings, right? We have a mind that can sort of the edge of the cosmos, man, but you got a bulging disc. It doesn't matter. Oh, yeah. It is real. I mean, you have to deal with it. And you have to be really careful. Yeah. And for me, what's really critical is physical maintenance. And I'm very dedicated to physical maintenance, even if there's nothing wrong. So if I was building the core, yeah, I hear the lot of chin ups, sit ups, a lot of lower back exercises, hyper like back extensions, anything to keep things strong squats, making sure that the more tissue you have, the more strength you have in that tissue around, particularly protecting your joints and your spine, the healthier you're going to be. Yeah. It's absolutely vital because the last few months have been held, I have to say, man. I'll show you. Listen, we've very talked for two and a half hours. So I'll take you to the background now. Yeah, let's show you. Brian, thank you very much for being here. I really appreciate you. You appreciate all your work and tell people your book, one more time is the title. Until the end of time, it's out today. A mind matter and our search for meaning in and evolving universe. Yeah. Thank you for being here. Thank you. Thank you. Bye, everybody. Thank you. Bye.