Go run by the Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day What's up, yeah, I want you good to see you good to see you again? First time I saw you was the first time I saw you documentary which is fucking excellent Thank you, bro The age of disclosure really good can't recommend it enough if you're a UFO dork like myself and you're in and out Like sometimes like this is bullshit. Maybe it's real. This is bullshit. Maybe I'm wasting my time Maybe it's real. Maybe it's go see the age of disclosure and then you'll be Fully in the I don't fucking know but who it's something's going on. That's where I am right now I don't know but something's going on definitely something going on. It's a real situation Yeah, it's a real weird one when you see all these like high-level government employees talking about Secret access programs and back-engineering Programs that have been going on for decades and decades and secrecy and you're like Your documentary did a fantastic job of highlighting a couple of reasons Why I always when people are skeptical and they go if there was a program like this. Why wouldn't they just tell us? You you have to really understand The consequences of what they've done because what they've done is lied to Congress for a long time. It's a misappropriation of funds clear felonies lie to the public yeah Getting presidents just the money stuff and also let's just be really Let's be just honest about human nature if you have Complete access to enormous amounts of money. That's not under any oversight at all. Yeah, fully sure Some of it went in the pockets of people that probably should have got it 100% I think it's a second 100% Everyone I've talked to who's aware of the details of the deeply hidden legacy program says that it's at least over a trillion dollar spent since the 40s Oh, my god amount of money. Oh, my god. It's a much bigger program than people Would suspect you're just thousands of people full-time jobs Then go and home to their families the guy sitting next to your kids a little league baseball game You know normal people on the outside are involved in this deeply hidden program. It's bonkers and the idea This is nothing to trust me nuts. The idea that people can't keep secrets Shut the fuck up. Yes, they can if you're told your own people Yeah, some people can't keep secrets But by the time you get to be a high-level operative in the United States government I'm guessing you can keep a fucking secret. Yeah, and if you're told yeah, hey you could disappear one day or You can have your reputation ruined right you're gonna get blackmailed about this for that you're just gonna keep quiet Yeah, people can keep secrets and by the way not everybody does The Bob Lazar story to this day is like that that document earned by Jeremy Corbel was the reason Why I went all the way back in with UFOs. I'm like alright god damn it. I believe Bob. That's a great time. It's a great time It's a great time and that one's available. It's a area 50 Bob Lazar area 51 and flying saucers Is that the name of it the title of it something almost fantastic document for me like I look my childhood was the 80s and early 90s So I go home movies like ET and Close Encounters and TV shows like X files and yeah, he's like firing the sky I remember that movie. Oh, yeah, I had Travis in here. Yeah, you did. I love that interview fantastic movie that movie gave me 9 years crazy because kept me up as a kid all those kids took a couple of those guys on that crew hated him Like one of them he got in a fist fight with that day Yeah, and that guy had the exact same story that everybody else had he got hit by a beam of light it went back to get him He was gone then five days later. He shows up. Yeah, he's not malnourished He's not like he's not has been sleeping in the woods. It's crazy And he's got this fucking insane story about being repaired on a UFO. Yeah, and all those guys pass light detectors Yeah, all of them did the you know like movies like that I'm sure for millions of people around the world same thing. It just made me curious about this. You know Yeah, my whole life. I'm like Are we alone in the universe? Does the US government know more about this than then we do right? And I always wish that there was a documentary that only interviewed people who have direct knowledge of the topic as Results to work for the government and that was that was the real drive of making this film everybody fits that criteria Here's the fear that everyone has including myself and it is the way this is the main fear that I have whenever I sit down with any whistleblower How many of them are On purpose that they're directive that they're objective is to spread misinformation on purpose on behalf of the government They're they're there to just bullshit you yeah, of course. I had that I had that thought but for me I stopped worrying about that when I met One in tells and special government official military official after another who had completely different ideological views Different political beliefs. They weren't associated with each other and they were all saying the same thing Mm-hmm and so I just don't the alternative to everything these people are saying my film being true is that 34 people of different political parties different government groups Different aspirations all got together four years ago and decided to tell this elaborate lie randomly with me in a movie And for what end Well, it doesn't make any sense. There is a couple ends right one of them could be there being told to do this because This is a real thing But it's different than what they're saying and they're trying to get one narrative out there Well right look at let's imagine that there's a current coordinated effort with the United States government and some sort of alien intelligence Wouldn't it behoove you to make it more of a mystery like we've been trying We've been that we have found things, but we don't know what they are and we're back engineering But we don't know much when we mean while they know way more Well, yeah, look that's just one scenario that could be a scenario But in this case you have the people who like like Ruby who found out what's going on right who think it is very urgent that the public Get caught up and find out the base facts his biggest fear Clearly is we are in a high stakes Technology race a cold war race with adversarial nations like China to reverse engineer technology of non-human origin and his fear He literally says in the film is that if we don't get our act together and take this more seriously the country We're gonna wake up one day. We're gonna find out the hard way that China got there We won't know when or how but to quote him we will be screwed and he you can feel it like I did all the interviews myself I'm like this close to him. It's chin buckled when he said it. He was dead serious He was super concerned and you could feel it and that was the vibe with Senator rounds Senator Gillibrand Jim clapper guys never Tucked about this topic in his life. He's in his 80s. He was the head of Air Force intelligence He was the director of national intelligence Never publicly spoken about UAP He goes on comes out and does the interview and he told me It's gonna be told me that he was doing it because it was important to do and that the people needed to know And he drops the bomb in the film that that UAP activity over air 51 is real It's in fact real And he goes on the record saying that the Air Force has had a program to investigate this stuff Whereas the Air Force is saying they haven't had a program since Project Blue Book So I think the people that I interviewed Really felt like a weight on their shoulders to get this off their chest and to give you more context on clapper The get the poor guy's wife was in the hospital dying He left the hospital to come to the interview And I actually said to him I was like, he sure you want to do this today And he's like, not want to do it. It's important Wow, so Like I think I really felt it These people all felt like the public needed to know that base facts that they could lawfully disclose And to me the more wild thing is if this is if what they reveal in this film The fact that there's been an 80 year cover up of non-heman intelligent life That we're in a secret high stakes race with adversarial nations If that's what they can lawfully disclose Dude, what's on the other side of that line? Right What's the stuff they can't disclose? Right Yeah When you're talking to these people How many of them have had Personal experiences that they either can or cannot talk about Or how many of them has anyone had some sort of personal experience with either a craft or seen something Yeah, yeah, so that they couldn't talk about That they there were some scenarios that they couldn't talk about and then there were some scenarios they could talk about But yes, Jay Stratton for example who ran the US government's UEP task force he was the director of Task Force he co-founded a sap with Jim Wokatski which grew into a tip He has seen with his own eyes not human craft and not human beings Some situations that he can't talk about some situations that he he can and I know he intends to talk about those in the very new future Yeah, I've talked to him So is that the only one that saw a non-human being that you talked to? No, it's talked to some couple people who have and were they similar stories? They were similar stories they they They described the beings looking The reference point they gave me was Very similar to the beings depicted in close encounters That is the description they used. Yeah, the um in terms of crafts One of the interviews in the film that I'm really proud of An Air Force security guard who worked at Vanderbilt Air Force Base Who's never gone public Witness with his own eyes along with five other security forces members a giant UEP the size of a football field That came over Vanderbilt Air Force Base Hovered over them and then shot off at thousands miles an hour And he went on the record on camera He's never talked about it publicly. He's never pursued press or you know Try to do anything with this experience And he broke his silence in this film because he thought it was really important that the world know the truth Did you ask him if there's any footage? I would imagine Vanderburger some pretty tight security Yeah, he thinks that there is a security camera footage of this But he's never seen it. He's never seen it. Good Lord. I mean five it was him Five other guys saw with their own eyes. They all reported it. There's official Air Force police blogger reports of it. I got a hold of the police report Put it on screen in the film. That's what drives me crazy. All this could be cleared up if they released the whatever high resolution Security camera footage. They have I would imagine they have top-notch security camera footage around Major military facilities. Yeah, right. So that's one of the hurdles we have to get past. We have to these month the fuckers are holding on It's just like if that shouldn't be yours like that should be the United States government Has an obligation to give that to the people of the world. That's what that should be Yeah, you have footage of a fucking UFO or a real one Yeah, and you really have a video that going thousands of miles an hour just disappearing into the sky Yeah, 100% I mean I don't think any government or Organization or religion and anyone's been like gatekeep these fundamental facts, you know I know but the problem is until you see it. It's just talk You know if you saw it and you know the You know the Like the chain of command like where it came from or a chain of custody rather where it came from it's has a bit molested Have analyst tested. It's not AI. It's not bullshit. It's not edited Okay, what is it? Yeah, and then we can talk but until then like what do we have? We have the go fast footage We have the gimbal footage and we have the very Kind of grainy weird TikTok footage. It's hard to tell what it is because you're looking at it from The instrumentation of the fighter jets. Yeah, but there is also other There is also other Data on the tiktik incident that's classified that shows this is a real object that was really there Jamie show me something. What do you show me? Jimmy? This is Ryan Graves talking about the big red UFO that hovered over Van and Burger 2003 Yeah, so that happened in the afternoon and then that night this giant craft came over the base That is revealed in my film So it says right here the executive director of the graves who's been on the podcast for Ryan Graves off citing occurred around 845 a.m. followed by a second sighting only hours later He said witnesses provided him with information about the mysterious incidents as they held onto official Documentation records from the event over the years. Yeah, and so later that night There was a year later in the evening post sunset the reports of other sightings on base including some aggressive behaviors These objects were approaching some of the security guards at rapid speeds before darting off Like close encounters like literally like the movie. Yeah, I'm just wonder how much Steven Spielberg I love to talk to him about that. How much he dove into it before he made that film because you know He had the jock filet character that French scientist. I think he learned a lot in the 70s people forget he also wrote poultry guys right Yeah, I knew was going on early on But put yourself in the shoes of those security guards at Vanderberg He imagined just being a normal guy you work in your security shift You look up and there's something size of a football field over you hovering map silent no windows It's all-interrifying and it's crazy and it's a chase. He says you know, we did a New York City premiere Couple nights ago Tuesday night. We did it on the intrepid aircraft carrier. Oh wow. It was awesome and favor and graze cam Which great to be on an aircraft carrier with you know, favor and graze. That's awesome Forever love that he's like I'm back kind of carrier baby classic but The witness from Vanderberg cam and he We did a little talk after for the audience and he said it changed his life He just completely looks at everything differently. Oh, how could it not? Yeah, how could it not? Yeah, I mean if you see something like that Totally humbling and also You know eye opening There's several people in the film military Military guys who talk about what they experienced and saw on military bases especially nuclear bases which is which is back to one of the biggest concerns The leaders in my film have Almost all the activities over on nuclear weapon sites and military bases are defense capabilities and our Nuclear progress essentially are being monitored and why is that? Because it's dangerous as fuck yeah because as Terrence McKenna described us were territorial Aps were violent nuclear weapons. Yeah, yeah And so we're taking this position. Yeah, and so that's clear to me too and Then you think about okay. Well, where does all this go like comes to a crossroads, right? Like they've been here a long time. They've been monitoring us a long time But now we've evolved to be dangerous and we're either at through secret programs their level or we're about to be and then That's when you get to a crossroad. So I think that's one of the things driving officials like Rubio and rounds and Sheila brand and Jay Stratton To come out and say what they legally can because it's a set of circumstances that the human population really needs to know about And then he's become a humanitarian issue. How do we deal with this right and what is it? Right. What is their purpose if they are real are they here to help us? Are they monitoring us one of the creepiest things that Bob Bazzar said is that They look at us like containers Yeah, I mean and I was like what does that mean? Can like containers of souls is what I interpreted from it, but that's just me. But like what does that mean? Containers like It seems like human beings have an insatiable desire to innovate and create better technology and that seems to be leading us into AI and seems to be leading us into probably what connects us with the rest of the universe the rest the intelligence of the universe But the stuff that got us here is being these territorial apes You know, that's why we developed cities and that's why we developed agriculture That's why we we had enough free time to innovate. We had enough free time to invent things and change things But our nature is really what holds us back because we're still constantly worrying that we could hasn't changed at all It's crazy that we're still threatening nuclear war 80 years after you know dropping the bomb on Japan We're still invading sovereign nations. We're involved in a proxy war. We're you know, we're helping Israel That it's like there's so much chaos and death going on in the world because of human beings and the decisions that they're making that If I was an intelligent life species from somewhere else, I'd be very concerned. Yeah, I'd be like here's these this group of monkeys on a You know trajectory about to make a digital god they're real close to having super Intelligence in digital form and these idiots are still blowing themselves up from the sky. Yeah, which also is Why one of the current dilemmas exists right so this this technology exist? Private defense contractors have this technology elements of the government have this technology you're convinced beyond beyond Convinced and what do you think that technology consists of? I have been completely convinced by multiple members of the intelligence community the military senior leaders in government people who are running the Senate Armed Services Committee the Senate's own committee Someone who sits on the White House National Security Council that our country has recovered dozens dozens of crashed craft of non-human origin and done so since the 40s and There has been success forverse engineering elements of this technology and the same thing has been happening in China and Russia And it's a very real situation. It's a high-stakes situation. It is referred to as the atomic race on steroids and I am completely convinced of that And the contractors that the defense contractors that people like Jay Stratton and the Wellzondo and people on the Senate Intel Committee have told me are Evolved are Lockheed Martin Northrop Grumman Raytheon Patel big companies that Have a lot of resources and Are advancing this technology? But it's all so classified and so deeply hidden that it hinders progress and The fear that if this technology got out it would be used By bad actors to create weapons of mass destruction Has sort of prevented the scientific progress that could be better for mankind that could be good for mankind like this This could this technology to quote how put off in the film set He says this this is the key to interstellar travel This is the key to exploring the galaxy This is the key to you know things that sound like science fiction like teleportation All these things that could just revolutionize Humanity and like the trajectory of our species are being held back out of the fear That the technology will be used for evil right and so you know I love how put off. I got him very close with him and you know he makes a really Fastening guys the most interesting person I've ever met in my life Um He makes a great point in the film of saying He believes despite the risks this technology could be used for bad. He believes we should Make it known and make it a humanitarian issue of how we all collectively go about Safely using this technology to change the world for the better and avoid Destruction and we've done that we have a blueprint for that with with nuclear technology right like there are nuclear weapons That's less classified. We wish they didn't exist, but it does exist and then we also use nuclear energy for good Yeah, um the question would be If we're holding back because we're worried that bad actors are going to get it Is China taking the same approach because I would imagine they're not they're not I would imagine they're full bore Full steam ahead. Yeah, and that's that's that's one of the problems like that's the same thing with a lot of other technology Yeah, yeah, yeah Rubio and rounds and Gillibrand three of the most senior leaders in our government Talk very openly about their concern About China and then getting ahead of us on reverse-endryness technology Rubio says it keeps them up at night rounds very adamantly said animatedly says in the film Do you think for one second That they wouldn't use this technology for their Domination If they didn't think we Had access to the same technology How was everybody getting these crashed UFOs? What's the story behind that? So here's an interesting thing One of the one of the unexpected things I learned in talking to sources like real credible people is that Some of the crap some of the crashes were actual crashes were just You know crashes happen just like they do for you. You could drive as safe as possible fly. So it's possible crashes are gonna happen but some of them were actually caused by Elements of our military and salons community and elements of foreign military and salons community community people so like one of the realizations early on was that Atomic weapon test nuclear weapon testing atomic weapon testing Crete has a ripple effect that Can down these things especially high altitude Nuclear testing which is one of the things that they did in the 1950s in particular Yeah, and so they started doing it. Yeah, till like shoot fish in a barrel basically they did it on purpose Yeah, and so that's why they were doing it. Yeah, and then Russia Russia started doing it Yeah, and then What it's like throwing dynamite into the river. It's like fishing a dynamite. Yeah, yeah, fishing with dynamite Oh my god, and then so crazy on multiple levels A you could accidentally provoke a nuclear conflict with another party that doesn't know what you're doing be You know you're picking a fight with a more intelligent superior species Right, which is probably not gonna work out great for anybody They probably couldn't believe we were using nukes in the sky these fucking idiots nuked some of our spaceships and the ocean Yeah, we nuked the ocean at Ton of and there's a ton of you a activity in the ocean right Which is something that timbrechete recently talked about just see that yeah, yeah Yeah, I mean I've talked off the record with admirals and sub commanders and been told that These giant football size crafts that were seen over Vandenberg for example Have been seen under the ocean. Whoa moving at crazy speeds tracked by our subs. Yeah, they did said there was one story of one That was the size of a football field that was going 500 knots. Yeah underwater with no ripples. Yeah So it makes such a Mickey thing like not only with Spielberg tipped off early on but maybe James Cameron was too Maybe the abyss is a lot closer to reality than right then then we ever there's always stories about things coming from the ocean And there was always stories of people that lived in like the Pacific like on the coast Yeah of seeing things come out of the ocean particularly somewhere around San Diego. There's there's always stories of us in the area Congressman Carson Andre Carson who's on the house in Telsons committee and On the house committee for the CIA he goes on the record in the film saying that These UAP that come out of the ocean are otherworldly things he says they are not made aircraft. They're not Rockets these are otherworldly things he says and that's a significant that was a significant moment for me when he went on the record and said that and I think I think it's going back to the the the nuclear stuff It's scary to think that any one thought it was a good idea to intentionally take down The aircraft of a more intelligent species. Yeah, it seems like a very foolish decision That's true. Yeah, I know that there was a lot of high altitude nuclear bomb testing for whatever reason and there was that operation midnight prime Is that what it was? No Starfish prime where they were Blowing holes through the Van Allen radiation belt they were just launching a nuclear bombs into space Well, I'll tell you something that I don't I don't think people know about but um The UAP task force which Jay Stratton ran They put in place a based on that data of You know the connection with nukes. Mm-hmm. They put together a plan to lower in UAP with Nuclear elements so nuclear aircraft carrier With some nuclear weapons on it and they had all these data collection systems in place and and it worked Whoa, so they like Without causing without doing a test Just the fact that they had In a place it attracted and they caught a lot of data on it Whoa, and you know we shouldn't think that that was the only time they did well I would imagine you know they probably saw the testing the stupid shit. We did in the ocean The fact that like we were talking about this last night John Wayne did a terrible movie called Genghis Khan on a fear of saw Yeah, it's one of the worst movies of all time and that's what killed him that movie killed him He got cancer from that movie and so did almost like I think it was like close to a hundred people on the set Some very large number of people on the set got cancer because they did dissolve downwind from where the government was detonating nuclear bomb They filmed it all in Nevada in the desert Harble horrible so like they blew up So yeah, I'm sure you've seen the video of the it where it shows like a time lapse of all the nuclear tests over the years And you just go yo, what are you doing? Yeah, what are you doing in Nevada? Nevada just boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom and If I was from another planet and we like that's when I would start going oh my god These idiots not only do they have it, but they're just blowing them up in the ocean Yeah, no consideration for the fish the whales the dolphins whatever the fuck happens to be there When they drop that thing down like they're out they're clearly irresponsible. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's concerning an analogy that multiple people actually use with me They said put yourself in the shoes of advance not human intelligence species. Here's the analogy. Imagine you're a zookeeper And you see this gorilla in a cage and it you love this gorilla It's sweet. You watch you watch it evolve over the years. You see it communicate it waves to you, you know You have no issue with this gorilla. You don't wish at any harm But what happens if one day come in and the other security guard say hey last night the gorilla got out of his cage Walked around the park was playing with the gun cabinet and they went back in his cage You're like all right, that's concerning when we keep an eye on this right And then and then what happens if you know a month later you come in and they're like hey the gorilla This time he got in the gun cage He was playing with the gun and then he went back in his cage with the gun What do we do here right? So what's even worse than that so it's like we'll take the gun out of his hand we'll put it back We'll change the lock on stuff right But then what happens if it evolves to a place where sometime later You come out of your house on a Sunday and I even go to work You got your daughters hand in your hand and the gorilla standing in front of the shotgun Then you got to make a choice really quick right like do I just take this thing out or do I try to communicate with it and risk my daughter getting shot and This analogy has been used with me multiple times to describe The dynamic we have with non human intelligent life and the situation we're barreling towards Yeah, it would almost be like you went to the cage and the grill was welding The grill is caught inside Making a bore he's put together a shotgun he's figuring out dynamite us cleanings Yeah, that would be the real issue. Oh my god. They figured out guns Think as we figured it out. It's not what somebody gave it to us You know look what one of the a couple of people in the film reveal that some of the way peekivity we see Is non human intelligent life, but some of it is reverse engineered craft from our program The legacy program and some from adversaries so I personally think we have cracked This technology a lot more than people realize I don't think you spend over a trillion dollars and half thousands of people working on a deeply hidden program Every year for 80 years and not make progress Hmm Yeah, God I would love to know what it is that they've done and whether the tiktak is one of ours I don't think it is no no I talked to everybody who ran actually ran the investigation of tiktak from various agencies and To the pilots No one no one thinks it's a man made and also if it was man made that would mean that some one cracked a new energy source that far back which is like 20 years at this point and and Has never used it to Our country or another country To solve the energy crisis to make a superior craft that we've seen used It's just it's just hard to believe that no one would use that to like fuel their economy I mean it'd be it'd be like a total You know, right start of everything if you had that technology right Yeah, that's interesting right? I mean the craft with that that tiktak was going from sea level to 80,000 feet Which is space and Hovering at space going back down hovering at sea level and doing this for hours We we don't have anything the one of the scientists who was involved in one of the UAP programs for the government in my film Does the math and says the Energy required to do that Is the electrical output of the entire United States for he said a week some stupid amount of energy required I think it's even more than a week, but yeah, I remember him saying that It's bonkers and that's just the trip up Yeah, yeah, and they were doing that all day all day. Yeah, that's crazy Crazy, you know, right if they had that in 2004, which is the tiktak incident You would think there'd be some just insane progress. Yeah. Yeah, so if it's not ours. Yeah, what what is the predominant theory? Or which is the tiktok incident, you would think there would be some just insane progress. Yeah. Yeah. So if it's not ours, what is the predominant theory of what they are? The predominant theory is that they is multiple species. And there's no one answer. Everyone I talk to who has real visibility to the crash fuel program says the nonhuman bodies that have been recovered in some of these crafts all look different. There are multiple species. The universe is full of life. How many different species I've heard of at least four body types that were recovered. So all I've heard of is the graze, which is like the closing counters of the third con ones, the Nordics, which is the also known as like the tall whites, right? The same thing for people. Okay. And then there is the reptilians. People talk about reptilians being the scariest one. No one's ever used that word with me to be honest. Really? Yeah. And then there's Mantis. There's ones that are like insect like. I've heard people say that. I haven't heard of any more than that. Yeah. Well, I've also heard multiple military people talk about little beings that almost look like ET little little bots that don't don't seem sentient that seem like they're almost like a robot. Yeah, like a robot almost. Yeah. Some artificial creation. Maybe. Yeah. Maybe. You could imagine if you get to genetic engineering and when there's cyborgs and integrate technology with this genetic engineer, you're going to be able to create like workers. Yeah. Like little, that's what many people have thought the graze are. Like there's small graze that are, they're more in a like a workforce capacity. I've heard that. They just do the bidding of the taller graze, which seemed to be more intelligent. Just heard that. You know, one of the one of the, one of the, um, one of the really interesting things is that there's no one answer. Right. Some, some non-human told your life that's here might might have benign intentions and some might have bad intentions. Right. We don't know. Um, the, the other, the other reason I am extremely convinced that this situation is entirely real is the axis I got when making the film was really an unprecedented level. Like I, I got very close with the leadership of the Senate, it tells me committee and the Senate Armed Services Committee. They were introducing me to people. They were opening doors for me. And some of the people that I met through them were actually involved in recovery programs and we're going to do interviews and then ultimately decided not to in that they thought they thought it would cost in their lives. Two people used the same words with me actually was very interesting. Two people used the words after careful consideration. I've decided I would be forfeiting my life if I participated on camera in your film. The word for fitting, which I had never heard anyone use in that kind of a context. Right. So pretty self my shoes. Like I'm a normal guy from Jersey making a, making a movie about something I'm interested in. The last thing I want to hear is something like that. You know, so, uh, that's the most sure way to get people to keep secrets. Oh, yeah. So I of course was like that that's shocking at this point of hear. Obviously we should stop talking. I don't want you in this movie. Do not want that on my conscious, but it also was another, another sign that how real all this is without naming any names. Is there anything that you couldn't talk about in the film that you could tell us without like quoting anybody or pinning it on anybody? Yeah. I mean, there's a lot of stuff I learned off the record. Hopefully it all comes out and people can legally talk about it at some point, but, um, can you talk about it without I know there's been I know there's been multiple contact events. Like straight up, yeah, like straight up contact events. One of them is revealed in the film, actually, but there are more. Um, there was this several people, people might film talk about an event that happened to Hellman Air Force Base where two nonhuman crafts approach the base one landed being walked out and interacted with Air Force officials and CIA officials and a couple people on the record talking about that in the film. But there have been other events I've been told. How are those beings described? They were described as tall, slender humanoid and the, um, another thing that I heard that gave me chills was that, uh, someone involved with a, uh, a recovery, um, interacted with a nonhuman being that was dying and heard thoughts in his head that said, you humans don't know your full potential. And that was said to me by a very senior older guy from the intelligence community. And, um, I thought that was pretty, pretty incredible. Um, also just the extent to which the legacy program is real. It's not, this isn't like 50 guys, you know, sitting in a quiet dark room. You're talking about a massive program with thousands of people going to work every day and dealing with this. And to me, that is mind blowing, you know, you know, the, the, the guy, the, you know, the guy next to you at the pizza place, you know, on a Saturday night might be working on the store in the day, you know, the guy who, you know, the other father, your kids like, you know, literally game. Yeah. This is what he deals with, right? The fact that that is a thing and, you know, we had, we had a similar dynamic for the Manhattan project. There were all these people working on it and they kept the secret, right? And their neighbors and friends didn't know, but this is that on steroids. So, you know, after the Manhattan project, which was built, had a budget in the billions, this situation arose and it had to be even more secret than the Manhattan project. Because the Manhattan project we found out in hindsight leaked, right? There were moles. Right. So we needed to make this even more secret and give it more money and more resources and more, you know, counter intel and more threats, which is counter intel. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, threats, if you reveal those secrets, but it's like more, the more this stuff gets discussed, the more I go back to what Lazar said, because Lazar is describing from the 1980s is exactly what these people are saying now. They've had these things. They've been trying to figure them out. They've been working on them, at least in the 1980s, they hadn't totally cracked it yet. But they did know how to operate them and that they would do these tests. But everything was so compartmentalized. He said he wasn't allowed to talk to the metallurgists. That he was the, there was different people that were assigned to it. Yeah. What they were assigned to do was to try to figure out how the propulsion system worked. Yeah. And then there was other people that were assigned to try to figure out how the metallurgy was formed. Yeah. Because whatever it was seemed like it was 3D printed. It didn't know how he seems. Yeah. And when he talks about it, it sounds exactly like what people are talking about today, which is really bananas. Yeah. Because this is late 1980s. And he's the first guy to crack through with this stuff. Everything is so in that secret program, everything is so siloed out where you could have one team of defense contractors who are working on one thing. They're not even told from an alien spacecraft. They're just told, here's the thing. It might be Russia. It might be China. Tell us how it works. Right. And they're just kept in a little bubble. And one of the issues now is that everything has become so over classified and so siloed that it's actually hurting progress. And that's a lot of the scientists in my film are voicing that. And one of the other things I learned recently that isn't in the film. Jay Stratton, who ran the U.S. Task Force, he told me that during that time, he had started a talk with one of the senior scientists at Lockheed, who was frustrated by how over classified everything was. It made them, it even made it hard for the defense contractors to get the right manpower and brains on it. Because not everyone can be cleared to do the work. Right. There's all these like red tape hurdles to progress. Right. And so they had made a plan to move one of the crafts that had been recovered that was in Lockheed's possession into the possession of the UAP task force. And then the task force was going to be able to put more brain power towards it. And then the head of science and technology at the CIA shut it down in the middle of the transfer. They had actually secured a hanger on a military base and prepped it to be a classified hangar that would hold this craft and they were stopped. So the issue of what would clap to do you know what happened after that? Yeah, the CIA just shut the CIA shut the whole transaction down and the craft state and Lockheed's possession. And then that particular leader within Lockheed died about two years later. So the effort kind of stopped. The cancer, the overclassification is definitely a hurdle for this. And our competitors don't necessarily have that. Like there's no free will in China. She can just be like, hey, you're the smartest guy graduating your class. You're going to go work for the nation on this, you know. Right. And here the problem is no one knows it's real. One of the things I hope the film changes is it makes the scientific community know that this is a valid area of inquiry. This is real. It's a real situation. And there's a ton of problems for the next generation of engineers and scientists to solve, you know, it's hopefully inspires them. And helps us make progress because there's a lot of progress it could be made here. But it certainly seems like it. But it's like how one of the things that you guys propose in the film that I think maybe the only way forward is some sort of a mass amnesty to all these people that did a lot of Congress and probably misappropriated funds and maybe I just stole a little bit here and there. Like if that doesn't happen, no one is going to push to make this public. No one's going to push for like actual full disclosure because it leaves them to exposed. And if they do have the kind of power that they must have to be running an organization of thousands of people working on something with unbelievable amounts of money being transferred to these programs, they don't want to let that go. Yeah. Like this is like it's a honey pot that they're drawing from, right? And they're probably still taking too much or it's there's no oversight. It's still you're still lying to Congress. You'd have to you'd have to have some national security amnesty program saying, in the interest of national security, it's critically important that we get all of our best people working on this. The only way we're ever going to really do that is to completely reveal that this is actual really, this is actually really happening. This is real crafts from somewhere or something. We have them. We'll tell you where we have them. And let's I think right now people wouldn't even freak out because I would think that people would would freak out if there was some sort of official narrative of disclosure. But that's sort of been breached, right? The New York Times breached that in 2007. I think this film is that. I mean, there's this film is a critical people putting the reputation in the name on the line, which I honestly show. I think it's more it's stronger evidence than any video or photo these days. You could put a 4k video of a giant craft over Vanneburg and half the human population will say it's AI, we're creating some visual effects program. But someone of of of note putting their name of reputation on the line, their career on the line, the rest of their lives on the line to say this is what I know to be true. To me, that's the greatest evidence that that exists. But I do think to your point, amnesty is something that's going to have to be figured out because while it's hard for anyone to accept letting people off the hook for wrongdoings, right? It is, it does seem like it's in the best interest of the bigger picture. 100% because these people just aren't, they have no incentive to come forward with what they've learned. And so to quote Ruby on the film, he says, look, this is not a endeavor to go and punish anyone, but we need to know what they learned. Right. And I think he's totally dead on. And you know, is he in favor of some sort of an amnesty? Yeah, he says he says on camera the film. He's like, I'm not, I'm not trying to punish anyone. I need to know what they learned because taxpayers paid for this. And it's in our, our interest to know what's going on. But the other thing that's needed is real whistleblower protection, not, not the whistleblower protection that's been passed so far, like much, much stronger legal protections so that people like, you know, like the folks I talked to, the special forces guys I talked to, we're going to come forward and then decided they thought to be forfeiting their lives. You've got to change that set of circumstances. You got to make those people feel like that's not going to happen to them. Right. And, and, and what I think ultimately is going to have to happen and I wouldn't be surprised, man, if it happens soon after the film comes out, I think a sitting president has to step to the microphone and say definitively humanity's not alone in the universe. We have recovered technology of non human origin. So have other nations, there is a high stakes secret cold war race to reverse engine this technology. We need to win this race and the US intends to lead in this new chapter. I think that needs to happen like a level set of basic facts. And I really, I really do think it will happen. Well, that is going to happen. I think Trump might be the only guy that's willing to do something. I think I think it's very likely that he does that. I know that I know that he is aware of the film. I know he's aware of what people in his administration say has watched it, you know that he is not watched the film. But I know he's very aware of it. And I know that they are discussing internally how they're going to react to the film publicly. And I also know that he has recently very recently tasked Tulsi Gabbard with getting to the bottom of the situation and finding out for him what he needs to know that he doesn't know. Really. Yeah. And as Rubio said in the film, Rubio says on camera on the record on the film that this has been kept from sitting presidents and he goes into detail on how that's been done and how it's the career bureaucrats at certain, in certain elements of the government that control this information and just wait presidents out and don't feel like they have a need to know. Right. Well, there were some people that tried to find information out in the beginning of the Trump administration. Who was it? There was some of the talk about it on record and said he was told that every turn that you don't have the clearance. Yeah. Yeah. But here's the thing, Trump actually found out about the base facts in his last presidency and was contemplating stepping to the microphone then. What base facts? So Jay Stratton, who, you know, ran the task force, he says on camera in my film that he he briefed that Mnuchin, the Secretary of Treasury, asked for a briefing on the lay of the land because Trump asked him to get the briefing and Trump had already known that the base facts that that were not a living universe that that there's been recovery of crash craft. Right. He knew those base facts and he told Mnuchin that he was thinking about going public and so Mnuchin reached out to Stratton to get a briefing and he told the told Stratton that the reason he wanted the briefings is because he needed to be able to evaluate what the impact of the economy, if the the president decided step to the mic and tell the world we're not allowed Stratton tells the story on camera in the film and I've heard a lot more about it off camera. So we know Trump contemplated doing this already. Now I think the release of this film and Ruby has involved meant puts enough on the table that it makes it easier for him to do. I think they would have to have some sort of a plan in place if they were going to say that, right? Like the amnesty plan, the idea behind it would have to be in place or some sort of lease grab, grab control situation and say that we're going to be, this is real in the US and tensile the way because the other the other factor that the way has has to keep in mind is you don't want she or Putin being the guy to do that. Right. Don't, you don't want them to have that. Right. Right. Right. You know, something I was thinking about when it guards with regards to that moment of a president stepping to the mic, when we entered the space race, Kennedy gave that big famous speech, right? He was like, we're going to lead in space technology, like, you know, space technology, like nuclear technology has no conscious of its own. It's up to man to use it for good or bad. And we're going to make sure it's used for the betterment of all mankind. And we're going to lead the way that was his whole rallying speech, right? And it made the whole scientific community be like, we're going to help the US win like, you know, Ra Ra Ra, right? I think that's needed in this race. Like we need all the support of the scientific community of academia, the kids coming out of MIT, we need them putting their brain power towards this. And I think the White House knows that. And it's also the greatest, that's the greatest TV moment a leader could have in the history of humanity. Step on my microphone. Do you think Elon knows? Look, I've seen him obviously talk to you about it. I think he knows a lot. Yeah, me too. I don't think you get the contracts and the clearances you need to operate in space without some horse trading. Yeah. When I went to SpaceX, I'm like, motherfucker, you know everything. There's no way you're launching these fucking things into space without them. Can you add on exactly what's going on? He's just sly about it. Like, we all aliens are certainly all subtle. That's what he says. Like, are they really? I don't know, man. I think it's a possible operating space like he does and not be aware of everything. And also at the level he operates clearance wise. I held a secret screening at the National Space Symposium earlier this year, which is the Super Bowl of the Space Industry. It's like 60 people, heavy hitters from the space industry. They didn't promote it or publicize it at all. But there were a dozen guys from SpaceX there. And they all seem very aware of everything revealed in the middle. Yeah. Positive. Yeah. He's my friend. And he won't tell me. He's a legend. He's a legend. He's a legend. But how did he not know if it is, and you know, some people have told me, you know, that that know he knows some things. So whatever. But the point is, people are good at keeping secrets. That's real. 100%. Even people that aren't notoriously good at keeping secrets. They're good at keeping secrets when they have to show you. So you think, do you think if you put yourself, you've interviewed Trump, do you see him doing that? Stepping to the mic and telling us the truth. Someone talks to him about it and convinces him. It's a great idea. Like if I had an hour with him, I mean, it's literally the single single, in my opinion, the single greatest moment a leader could have. Well, in the history of the world, if he could be the guy that blows the lid off of it, that would definitely help with his legacy, too, which I think would be a good way to convince him. You know, and also that the people would be excited about it. Yeah. You know, it's just, I think there's probably a lot of forces that we're not totally aware of that would fight very hard to keep this from being revealed. You know, there's a lot of people whose reputations would probably be in jeopardy. A lot of people that may never get trusted again, even if they get amnesty, we if there's any evidence of impropriety, any evidence of embezzlement, any which I can't imagine. There's not some fucking funny money flying around here and there. And it just no oversight. Come on, guys. Like, oh, you're a butt board totally with no oversight at all. And a trillion dollars. Fuck off. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I do think I've come to understand that he is borderline enraged at how much has been hidden from the White House. So that alone might motivate him to just step up and and and say the truth. It's also the most bipartisan issue of our time. So I'll talk to him about it. Have support. Yeah. You can give it a correct. I'll talk to him about it. She's just so many other things to talk about. Get a Nobel Peace Prize for that. No, no, no. I'll never show up. Give it to me. Get out of an empty stage. You know, I think I really, I'm excited to see what happens on the other side of this release. Cause I think it's gonna, I think it's gonna wake in the public. I do think they're going to make a ton of demand on on elected leaders and representatives to go take this more seriously. And it's gonna put pressure on the White House. People have never seen someone like Rubio step up and say what he says in the film, you know, the only about Rubio, you remember he's also the national security advisor. And that's never happened in the history of the United States other than Henry Kissinger for two years. It's guys in a very powerful position, very influential position and aware of a lot more than he was even when he was on the Senate Tillens Command. He's a senator. Interesting. And also motivated and fascinated by it. Yeah. He's engaged in the information. Totally. What do you find? Like what do you think if you could choose what happens after a movie that this comes out, what would you like to say? Some mask congressional hearings and a real conversation about amnesty because I think it's the only way to get to the bottom of things. Because otherwise I think you're going to have every fucking possible legal and a hierarchical hierarchical, whatever the word is, hurdle. Like get every step. Everyone's gonna block your access to information. They're gonna lie. They're gonna burn records. They're gonna hide things. They're not gonna tell you where anything is. People get assassinated. They'll be whistleblower. They'll be in grave danger. I think there's too much money involved. And you got to think about it like a criminal organization because if you turn them into criminals, they're gonna act like criminals. If you say, hey, you might go to jail for the rest of your fucking life because you lied to Congress and now we know you did. And you know, there's $250 million that your company got and $300 million this company got over the course of X amount of years. And we know, we know that you got you're in trouble. Like we're gonna put you in jail. And then if that, if you make them criminals, they're gonna act like criminals. I think you're dealing with people that have enormous amounts of money and probably they make weapons. They're probably not the most respectful life. It's, you know, if there's a real discussion where it makes it look like it's their idea as well that they have this obligation to the American people. They were held under secrecy for so long. But now through this administration and through this openness that we've all decided through the scientific community, we're gonna release this. Yeah. I think I agree to you. And that could change the world. The other thing you remember is these aren't villains. They're not like, this is something like dark group of evil people. They're, they're normal people that were given a job to do and then did it. Right. And they weren't the decision makers. And they're navigating a situation that is unprecedented. There's no playbook for. Right. So they think they're doing the right thing. Right. And I think that's important to remember. You know, you know, the put-off thing, it's in your documentary with the Bush Street Bush senior. He talked about it on the podcast. Yeah. That is such a fascinating story. It's amazing. Back then early, right after 9-11. Yeah. Herbert Walker Bush. No, it was Herbert Walker. I believe. You know, the panel was the panel was uh, George Bush. Yeah. It was W. Yeah. Oh, I thought it was Bush senior. Yeah. No, it was right after, right after 9-11. Okay. So during that time, so I'm confused. So, but imagine, so let's imagine 2001, where would we be 24 years later if we had real disclosure from the White House? So for people that didn't see the documentary yet or watch the podcast with me and how put off, what he said was it was him and a bunch of other thought leaders. And they were all brought together with a numerical value for pros and cons related to disclosure. So basically they said to them, we have, we have acquired crafts that are not of this world and we have biological entities entities that are not of this world. These are real. We want to know if we disclose to the general public that alien life is real, what would be the negative impacts on our society, on our government, on our religion, economy, every, every thing. And they put a numerical value to everything. And overwhelmingly, all the people asked had way more con than pro. And they determined it was a a bad idea. Yeah, which is so wild. Well, the greatest thing to hang bandaid off over a couple days where a bunch of people got together and decided the fate of humanity. Isn't that fascinating? It's crazy. It was a fate. Well, at least, I don't think really the fate. I think what it did was just retard everything. It just slowed the growth of access to this. And I really give New York Times a lot of credit because I think publishing in 2017 that that piece that they did on the front page was so huge because the New York Times is arguably the most respected newspaper in the world. And for them to address it, like it's a real issue. And that these pilots are seeing these things. They're behaving in ways that don't make any sense with propulsion that we do not understand. And these are real. Yeah. And this is New York Times. Like that that was so many people texted me after that and called me after that because they know that I'm a UFO nut. And they're like, hey, man, this might be real like serious people that my friends with. And I'm like, I think it's real. There's something there. Yeah. And it's helped us get us where we are now. Yeah. I don't think the mainstream media sport I'm getting from for this film right now. I don't think it would have happened if it wasn't for that. No. I think the Times article was the that that burst the membrane and allowed more data to come to get just more rational discourse about it because I think before that it was just so dismissed and so ridiculed. And you just didn't want to be attached to it because you were a fool. You have to be a fool to be considering it. But the Times still is one of those legacy media outlets that still hedges their bets. Like that article, you know, the original headline I think was we're not alone in the universe. And they changed it to, you know, I think it was like black projects and hidden money or something like that. Yeah. You know, they had to dial it down. Well, because they don't know, right? We might not be alone in the universe. These things might be China's. Well, it's not likely. Well, that's the other thing. If it if we open ourselves to the possibility that these advanced aircraft penetrating our nuclear weapons sites and our military bases are China, that's fucking terrifying. And that should be the biggest issue of our time hands down because we know the intention of the Chinese Communist Party is not good, right? They're not friends. They're adversaries. And, you know, she has made public statements about wanting to replace the United States at the top of the world order. Like it's a stated goal, right? So if it is China, even the possibility that they have some of these crafts alongside nonhuman crafts existing, right? Yeah. Even that possibility it it requires the US government to take this so much more serious. Here's an analogy that General Jim Clapper made to me, you know, he was the director of national intelligence in the film. He's like before 911, we didn't put the right amount of money towards counter terrorism. And we weren't properly sharing information in intelligence community. Then this horrible thing happened. And the public was outraged and said, we got to throw money in resources at counter terrorism. Every representative, elected representative was beaten that drum. We started the director of national intelligence position so that the agencies would all share information and you you would minimize the chance of intelligence gaps, right? And we threw tons of appropriated funds towards counter terrorism. We now spend more money on counter terrorism than we even need to. And his point was he hopes it doesn't take something bad happening on this front, like China cracking this technology in a way we haven't and then using it against us or nonhuman intelligence life taking an action that isn't favorable to us before we then throw resources towards it. And it's essentially the same thing Rubio said, they think we need to get ahead of this problem. Not wait for it to happen and then react to it. Well, of course, I mean, it would be a horrible loss both in terms of our national pride of being the innovators and being at the head of technology. If China came out and said, we've cracked this, we have UFOs that we back engineered and now we can fly them around and we can go visit other solar systems. We've created new energy source. We're the same the planet. Yeah. We would be we would look like fools. We realized. And if we realized that there would have been a bunch of people that were working on this stuff the whole time, but they had been handcuffed by all the secrecy and that this has all been done with defense contractors and lying to Congress. It'd be a fucking national disaster. We would look completely incompetent. I really legitimately think a lot of the people my fellow have stepped up because they don't want to be left on the back and have people saying why didn't you say something soon? Right. I really think this is because it's the cover of your butt because it's that close. So when people talk about the successful back engineering of these things, what are they saying? Are they saying that they can fly around earth? Are they saying they can go outside of earth's atmosphere and go into deep space with these things? Like what what have they said we are currently able to do with these back engineered crafts that we've supposedly people that I may attribute the statement to that we're very credible sources told me that some of the UAP activity in space specifically is reverse engineer technology. Okay. This told me that some of the UAP activity in space specifically is reverse engineer technology. Okay. Does that mean in space in low earth orbit or does that mean traveling through the solar system? The what was implied to me was traveling through the solar system. So are these here's another that same person said to me by the way. Yeah. So I forget that their belief is that the technology we have would not be pulled out even to stop a world war. It would not those cards would not be shown until moments before like a nuclear war situation. So they wouldn't pull it out to stop like any of the wars we've experienced in the last since World War two. They wouldn't you know forgot how many it has to get to nine. It has to get to a level where there's no yeah there's no other option. Wow. Could it show your cards? Now when they say that they've traveled through the solar system, is this biological human beings or are these drone crafts? Like what are they saying? I never got any of that. I never got any of that. All I've told is there's some of the some of the UAPs that are seen that have been seen by our astronauts on space missions are not human intelligent life and some are reverse engineer craft. That's what I was told. But we don't know whether there's a person inside of them. I don't know if they are reverse engineer and they are ours and we figured out how to make our own. Dad, I don't know. Yeah, I need to know that. Yeah. It's good on the part. Yeah, there's a lot. Is there fucking some dude named Bob applied through space? Some top gun guy. Given the task of traveling to Venus real quick. Wouldn't surprise me. You know, one of the other things that you know, we were talking about clapper and Ruby and what they said about China. Something else that they both said, despite these guys being completely ideologically opposed, right? Like they have nothing else in common. They both spoke to how we as a species, not just our country, but the entire human species is held back by this. There's something in the fact that there's something in the human psyche that says I can't prepare for or wrap my head around something I haven't experienced yet. Right. And how that leads to strategic because you're not preparing for something that can ultimately end up happening. And Ruby makes great examples. He says, you know, we didn't think the Japanese could torpedo us at Pearl Harbor till they figured it out and they did. Right. We didn't think that terrorists were going to come here and learn how to fly commercial airplanes and use them in a terror attack until they did. And with this, he's like, we don't want strategic surprise to lead to a disaster on this front. We need to be ahead of it. And you very powerfully says that, you know, often strategic surprise changes the course of human history. So this is the question. If we have craft that we can travel through the source, we mean someone in the United States of America, does China, do they have the same ability right now? Is there an understanding of where they're at in the race versus us? Everyone who talked about the race with China was extremely concerned about how close they were. And multiple people talked about how these incursions over our sensitive bases and nukes could in fact be reverse engineer Chinese craft. So it is, it is a scary situation. I mean, look, you can ask the average person to comment some question. Knowing what you know about the dynamic between China and the United States, would you be okay if they were the only country that had a nuclear weapon? The answer is no, right? Right. So would you want them to be the only country that has technology more powerful than a nuclear weapon that could be weaponized in a way that's more destructive than a nuclear weapon? No. But what technology do they have other than the ability to travel? What other observed technology do they have? Well, if you weaponize this technology, like let's just take something like the tick-tack. Imagine you could imagine you could travel take something like that anywhere in the world and put a nuclear weapon in there. Right. You would instant you would have a nuclear weapon that goes off in less than a second on the other side of the world. It's completely undetectable. Yeah. To any sensor system, you can't react to it. Yeah. You know, bad news. Also these vehicles display the ability to be transmedia. So you could put a nuke through any environment. It's very scary. Well, still transmedia. Does that mean I know that it can go in the air and in the water, but does that mean you can go through actual physical objects? Yeah. Yeah. This is one of the things in one of the crazier Jacques Valet stories that I've read a few of his books. And one of the more bizarre ones, this woman found this object in on her property and some large property. Oh, I want to say it's Nevada. I forget where it was. California, Nevada. But anyway, this egg-shaped large object and that as it took off, it flew through the trees. She said it didn't disturb the trees. It just went right through them. Yeah. So that's I mean, look, one of those, one of those, one of those, if you remember in the film, there's this great scene where Hal Poudoff and Eric Davis were to the senior science that's involved with the government UAP programs, they break down how they figured out how these craft work and how they are warping space time in a localized area. And they're basically creating a bubble that the craft operates in. And the bubble separates the craft from the environment around it. The environment becomes irrelevant. So you can move through physical space, could move from air to space to the water, frictionless, there's no splash. But the environment outside the bubble is irrelevant. They're creating their own space time essentially, they're warping space time and creating a bubble around the craft. And when you start to think about how that could be weaponized, it's really terrifying. And what is he saying that they're using? Like how are they? He's saying that they're creating an immense amount of energy in this localized area to create the bubble. And there's two prevailing thoughts on how the energy's created. One is they're tapping into so-called zero point energy, which has only been theorized at this point by humans, right? Or they're using quantum entanglement to pull energy from a far off source to the local area, the bubble. And that's what they figured out. Did they have any knowledge of these generators or how they're acquiring this amount of power? What they're using to- Well, do you think zero point energy? No. No. No. But if we've got one, we back engineered it successfully, clearly someone must know. Yeah. So someone knows. Look, how on Eric got very close with the scientist in the legacy program. And we're sharing information and that got shut down by the CIA. So before it got shut down, they learned a lot about what we've been doing secretly and what we've been figuring out. Jeez. So it's the fucking CIA. Well, the film, the film reveals that the, uh, the legacy program, the craft retrieval, reversing the program, it has several elements, the elements of the Air Force, its elements of the Department of Energy, its elements of the CIA, and its defense contractors. And the CIA is the quarterback of the whole fine. The Air Force is used for recovery, like field work, essentially. They have the teams that can, you know, react fast and go to a site and collect materials and classify it. And they have the aircraft to bring it back to a base. The defense contractors have the technology know how the engineering skills to do the reverse engineering. The Department of Energy has laws that can be used to classify the material outside of, you know, the president's reach and Congress's reach. They also have, you know, people who are experts at anything that gives off a lot of radiation and energy. And then the, um, the CIA quarterbacks, the thing, think of them as like operational control. And this is revealed by a number of people in the film and, um, every single source I talk to. There were a lot of people that I talked to in very senior positions that thought the film was important and the only way to bring the truth out to the public. But they couldn't be on camera. And they guided me, you know, filled in gaps for me, help me understand the lay of the land. There were some people that told me not to interview. There was a couple of, there was a couple of people that were sent to me. I was, people wanted to trick me and including them in the film because they were crazy people. And I didn't, I didn't include them. I got tipped off by people don't stay clear that. That's someone's agenda trying to sink your ship. But, uh, yeah, had a lot of folks helping the Senate Intelligence Committee and the Senate Armed Services Committee work extremely supportive. And, you know, I really don't think I would have been able to pull off making the film I did if not for their help. And Rubio, when I started my process, was the vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee. And he had already learned a lot about what has been hidden from Congress and thought that what I was doing was really the only way to bring it out. Because none of these, none of these people on their own would go out on a limb by themselves and become subject to ridicule. They didn't want to be the one guy out there saying all this extraordinary stuff, right? Not only because there's this antiquated cultural stigma where they can be made fun of or the reputation be damaged, but there's also this security system around the deeply hidden crash-resheel program that for years has just targeted anyone who speaks up. And so what I basically put together was a way for them to safely do it and have strength in numbers and be arm and arm with, you know, several delves in other people. And once Rubio leaned into that, I just started getting tremendous support from the Armed Services Committee and the Intelligence Committee and then Senator Rounds became very helpful behind the scenes. Intelligence officials who worked this topic like Jay Stratton and Luell Zondo and Hal Poudoff were extremely helpful behind the scenes, opening doors, introducing me to people. And yeah, I think that, I think this is really the only way this is, this, we were going to, we were going to get this level of information out by giving people that safety in numbers. And then after this, it's going to require the kind of amnesty we talked about. Because this is only what they can lawfully disclose. There's so much more. So when it comes to underground, or excuse me, underwater stuff, this is what Tim Bershet was talking about when that person was famously interviewing him and everybody was like, what? You're just walking across the street casually talking about bases. Yeah. Whether they're coming out of the ocean. Yeah. What do they think that is? Is that different from what's going on in the sky? No, I think it's the same, they think it's the same crafts. They think so they have a base. It's more simply put, if you were here with advanced aircraft and you wanted to hide from humanity, the most logical places, the ocean. It's the majority of our planet. We've barely studied it. One of the admirals in my film says, we've scanned the surface of the moon in more detail than we have the bottom of our oceans. Yeah. It's crazy how much is unexplored, right? And so it's the most obvious place to hide. There's a lot of activity that happens in the oceans. One of the, one of the, one of the people I talked to thought they would be in the film and then decided it was too risky for them was a special forces guy who was involved in a recovery of a craft that was in the ocean. And when they were recovering it, a giant craft came up next to them like a function in craft and the helicopter pulled out and they dropped the line and the helicopter took off and the seal was in the water and watched this thing take off and then he had to be recovered out of the water. And that's crazy. And the craft that they were trying to recover went down and did the big ship take it or anything? Or they said actually, they actually literally said that. They said it took it and went back down. Yeah. How big was the big one? They said it was big. Just big. That's the only way they used to be honest. Yeah. And the guy was rattled because the guy was in the sea. The seal was in the water hooking a line to this craft. And then when the helicopter pulled out, he said he was in the water just shitting his pants and taking in this extraordinary experience. And then was he wearing a vest? I'm sure I'm sure he's wearing his like fucking doggy paddling. I'm just gonna leave him there in the fucking water. These guys panic and pull out. Maybe you have fun with it. You take it. All these, all these situations are really bonkers. I wonder what would have happened if they were like, fuck you, we're taking it. No. I would I often wonder if any of the guys on that chopper snap snap video of this thing. You know, there's a lot of video that exists that is either classified at a crazy high level or people are just terrified to share. And that's when they look like once we need, we need a declassification process that's real and sincere and you know, rigorously goes through what's there and what can be showed that won't hurt our national security. Right. And just start being transparent with with the public. This this encounter of the seal reminded me of another thing that I think is really important and speaks to the accountability issue. There's a number of military personnel and scientists that have worked for defense contractors who have had and in terms of officials who have had encounters and then end up with biological effects like real issues, cancer, immunity, autoimmune issues. Number people died of cancer after being around these things. And that's a whole other level of accountability. You know, there's there's people who's medical bills should have been paid for. They shouldn't have been putting those situations. You know, there's families growing up without a dad because dad encountered a UFO on behalf of the US government and died Jesus. So that's that's a whole. So was this side of this, them getting cancer from being around the object or being around biologics or both the object because these objects because once you understand that these craft or warping space time to localize area and creating immense amount of energy, getting close to it's like getting close to a you know, a huge electrical system or you know, it's just bad. Right. Yeah. That's the Travis Walton story. It's a lot of stories. Yeah. Well, that Travis Walton in particular, that's what you know, he said happened. He got close to the object and something zapped him and you know, whether it was an actual like targeted attack or whether it was just something a reaction to him being so close to this energy that he was thrown back, knocked unconscious, gravely hurt. Yeah. And then they took off. Yeah, I've spoken, I've spoken off the record to some intelligence officials who have managed to actually get the government to take accountability and give them anonymous health injury status, H.I. status, which is only gone to victims of quote unquote, Havana syndrome. And it's a real situation, but not everyone has the relationships or the ability to get escalated to the secretary defense and get that H.I. status. The secretary defense has to give you the H.I. status. This is going to sound crazy, but is there a particular protocol for dealing with the kind of cancer that you get from getting in contact with the UFO? The only thing that I know of, I wouldn't call it a protocol, but I do know that there is a couple specific people, doctors who have become a part of the intelligence communities looking into this and they become the go to doctors for people having biological effects and they, if you have a relationship with them, if you can get to them, they show up pretty quickly and do the appropriate tests and documentation of it and have the right doctors to send you to Gary Nolan, who you interviewed is one of those people. Yeah, Gary Nolan, who's done some groundbreaking research on cancer. Yeah. Gary, the other guy, I shouldn't say his name, but he used to work for, he used to work for one of the big intelligence agencies that's deeply involved in this. The other thing Gary has that's really fascinating is the research on materials. Like some of the, some of the allegedly retrieved materials from crash sites and how bizarre they are. Yeah, from studying the isotopes. But the stuff that Gary's got into that I find the most behind the list, he has real classified documentation of encounters that military and intelligence officials have had with UAP and biological effects, it's caused and some of them are crazy. Like a Department of Defense official who had a UAP above his house and went out in his backyard and looked up at it and then the things zapped them with the directed energy weapon. And he has all of the medical signs of a directed energy attack and this is a super senior credible guy who had recently been made aware of the UAP issue and then he has this experience. Wow. Yeah. It's pretty wild. So what are the effects of a direct energy weapon? Like what's the, what are the consequences cancer? That's what it's getting cancer. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. Do you know about the vargina Brazil story? Do you know about the James Bond stuff and James? I'm excited to see James is um, yeah. He's got a new one. Yeah. Yeah. He's got a follow up with I think it's the actual doctor. Yeah. That worked with the patient. So he was at the hospital that night and interacted with with the being. Yeah. I'm excited to see that. So the story is that this police officer that they found this crash and the documentary is excellent. If you haven't seen that folks, it's called Moment of Contact. It's really good. And one of the things is really good about it is the eyewitnesses. When the eyewitnesses returned to the scene of the crime, I'm like, excuse me, the scene of the crash. I was like, either that guy is an amazing actor. Not great. Or he's really crying because he's remembering this insane moment in his life. Yeah. And there was eyewitnesses that saw alive. One of these things and this police officer found one that was injured, carried it, put it in the car, physically carried it. They brought it to hospital. That hospital told them, we don't know what to do with this. You got to take it somewhere else. It took you to a second hospital and the second hospital. This is the doctor allegedly that examined it. Yeah. That police officer had a horrific bacterial infection that they could not cure and he died within weeks. Tarvel. Yeah. Tarvel. There's so many examples of these interactions going bad. But it's also like, you know, imagine you didn't know what a fighter jet was and there was this you know, flame coming out of the back of it and you walk behind it, you're going to be toast. Right. It's not, I don't think it's an intentional thing. I think it's we're interacting with the technology we don't understand. And then you're getting too close to it. Now we're going to close to it. Don't go walk up to it. Yeah. It's floating in the air. Totally. Everybody's just got insane amount of power that's carrying this fucking totally. 2000 ton thing. The other crazy story that was in. So James Fox is moving the phenomenon, which you know, he directed it. Yeah. He's totally responsible for making that movie. I was a producer on it with him. But it's all James James 100% made that movie. One of the coolest stories in that film was the aerial school phenomenon story at the end. These kids in Zimbabwe had a school and like I think it was 89 or 90 90 ones like that. It was 94 around that time. These kids like between the ages of like seven and 13 or something like they all saw this, this craft come down during their recess. And they all say they experienced the same thing. They all saw these beings that looked like they were moving in slow motion around the craft. And they saw this craft take off at thousands of miles an hour after years later, they're all staying the same thing. The stories didn't change. They didn't try to like, you know, make money off this at all. It's a wild story. But now when you look back at that story through what guys like Callan Eric are revealing about the war bubble, you know, it would make someone look like they're moving slow. If they were inside of a war bubble next to the craft where time and space is moving differently, then outside the craft. That's literally what it would do for the same reasons why the craft in the bubble could just be cruising along. But to us, it looks like it's going at these impossible speeds. You're in a different space time environment. So all these things that people saw at Ariel, you know, in Brazil, they get explained by these reveals that they're starting to come out now. And that's to me, that's wild seeing how these things all connect, you know? Yeah, it is crazy. And it's essentially this description of the way these propulsion systems work is essentially the exact same way. Lazar was describing it, which is really nuts that in 1989 he was proposing that there's some sort of a gravity-defying device. And that it was using element 115 and then it was radiated. And somehow another is creating this gravity drive that just sends it to wherever it wants to be rather than propels it. Yeah. The way he described it was like if you took a bowling ball and you put it in a very soft cushion, it would just push through. And then that's what these things do. It just pushes through to wherever it's supposed to be. Yeah. Similar to the other explanation is like a ball rolling downhill, like a surfboard pointed down riding away. When did they first start to become aware of underwater activity? And when did they first start to suspect that these things were in fact having at least some sort of a base underneath the ocean? I don't know the exact first, but I do know from people I've talked to that as far back as the 80s. Wow. Yeah. Which is incredible. Well the crazy thing is that they've really been studying this stuff and retrieving things like back from Roswell, which was 47, they've really been doing this stuff for that long. It's kind of crazy that they were able to actually keep a lid on it for so long. I mean it's not that crazy when your life's being threatened. You know, and it's kind of got a lid on it. Right? Kind of, but not really. I mean there's been people know about Roswell. Yeah, there's been people leaking over the years information, but I think now we're at a tipping point where like I really believe the release of this film is the singular tipping point where you have this many credible high level people saying yes, this is real. I mean even clapper talking going on the record saying that UAP activity over air 51 is real. The biggest conspiracy globally that's as UFO is over air 51 that 90% of humanity has written off as bullshit, right? Here's the guy who was director of national intelligence and head of Air Force intelligence saying no, that's real. Like it's like so I think this tipping point and Rubio going on the record second most powerful guy in the world arguably saying that the presidents are kept out of loop on this and that defense contractors have taken this over and that even he even says that every now and then advancements made get slipped into commercialized product that some defense contractors make a bunch of money on for their own best interest not for the benefit of the nation and national security. Like these are bombs dropped at the most credible level possible. And I think that because we've had all the leaks over the years, it's going to resonate with people people are like oh shit, all those things that have been slipping out over the years, it's real. And these guys are validating it and it'll be really interesting to see what's you know what's on the other side of that. And the other wild thing Joe is when you go down the rabbit hole of the UAP topic with people in the tell me it's military, you start learning about Jason things, you know, that are equally bonkers like remote viewing, which you've talked a lot about. Right. You know, I mean, I don't think it's a coincidence that how food off, you know, was the guy who created Stargate and ran Stargate backed by the DoD in the CIA and also it was deeply involved in the UAP topic for decades, you know, there's a lot of overlap and the remote viewing topic is fascinating. It's another one of those things where you more you learn about it. You're like, there is a there there. It's a real situation and it's extraordinary. Yeah. Makes you think how much more is, you know, hidden from us that we have. I definitely want to talk about that. But I want to ask you were there specifics when they talk about technology that was acquired that was then rolled into no one no one said it on the record. I was shocked when when Rubio said that on camera when he he went there like clearly clearly stating that I mean, I think to word for word if he says and every now and then an advance ticket's made and gets commercialized and some companies making a ton of money on it for their own interest. But does there any suspicions when you you know, I've heard I've heard I've heard suspicions. Like what like, you know, how it could have impacted, uh, uh, hypersonic missiles. I've heard things about, you know, early days of fiber optic, I've heard things about night vision. Um, but you know, no one, no one would go on the record and say something definitive. The thing people were comfortable saying in Rubio said is that defense contractors have been in control of this over the decades congressional oversight as you know, Congress has lost congressional oversight and essentially these programs are just moving moving along. Yeah, keeping it to themselves. And when you keep something yourself, it's easy to slip a win into your commercialized side of your business, you know, right. I would like to know what that is though. Me too. Me too. Really interesting. Do you know the, who knows by the way, if it's even public, it might be something that they made right that isn't public that they're using to get bigger contracts, right. Right. In exchange for shutting up with that. Right. Of course. Why wouldn't you? Let's go deep put that fucking chin pull chin foil hat on currently. Um, do you know about the conspiracy about Bell laboratory? Yeah, I've heard, I've heard a lot about that. You got the, the 10th, well, I think is a good reminder that has been that, that one of the things I learned is that the stigma around this was created by the people covering this up. So oh yeah, in the early 50s, late 40s, the CIA when they took control of this, they were like, we got to make sure people don't ask about this. How do we do that? It's just cycloc, psychological operation, like make people think they're crazy. Make people think they're wacko, make 10th foil hat jokes. And then that gets, you know, built into our culture and different generations grow up thinking, oh, you're not. If you talk about this, it'd be embarrassing. You have your career ruined. Yeah. And now here we are where like, you know, people giggle when you bring up this serious issue, right? And until yeah, and it's been used against people inside a government. Here's, here's a good story. This is, uh, yeah, I'll just tell you. So J, J Stratton told me about an event that happened on the military base that is top gun, the top gun base where a craft came down. I don't know the exact how high, exactly how high it was, whether it was in the air or in space, but came down from very high, dropped to above the tarmac in front of the base commander and his number two. And they documented it with video recording. And this was when Jay was running to UAP task force and they reached out to him saying they wanted to report this. And Jay went, Jay went and talked to them in person. And they were going to do a fit, these are super, super senior guys that were going to do an official on the record, um, testimony about what they saw with their own eyes. And Jay told a senior guy, Naval intelligence, who he thought was on the right side of history. And before these guys could come in and testify, the Naval intelligence official who was actually part of the cover up sent these guys 10 file hats and told them that's what they'd be wearing the rest of their lives if they spoke up. And the guys reached out to Jay and said, we're not providing the evidence. We're not going to talk about this. Let's pretend it happened. So, you know, that kind of stuff really holds back because it's very easy to deter our military. So we just put their devoted their whole life to them to climbing the ladder in the military. Yeah. And you're going to tell them that you could just end career path in an instant. Why would they keep coming forward? Yeah. Why would they make some sense? I wouldn't. I'd shut my fucking mouth and maybe tell Jesse Michaels 10 years later. That's what a lot of these guys wind up doing. They retire and then they start talking. I do think that we're going to see more people come out. I really, I've already started, I've started receiving since the trailers have been out there. I've started receiving incoming DM's on social media sites from Super senior people where like I look up who they are on my holy shit. You know? I know like, hey, we should talk in person sometime. There's some things I want to share. Whoa. And I don't know what's going to come out of that. I haven't done those meetings yet. But I imagine people are going to come out of the woodwork because this stuff is real and it's been hidden so much. And I know there's some big people coming out next year. Stratton's book is going to be a big thing too. I've actually been working with him on a developing his book. And it's going to come out in the spring. Harper Collins is publishing it. And it's it's fucking bombshell. It's bonkers. Wow. So much detail. One of the other things that I didn't include in the film, Joe, that's I mean, it's it's bonkers to think about all of the intelligence officials who actually investigated this for the government. Like the people involved in all staff and A-tip and UAP task force, they all started having activity at their homes when they were investigating. for the government. Like the people involved in AWESAP and ATIP and UAP task force, they all started having activity at their homes when they were investigating nonhuman intelligent life. And the kind of activity. Orbs in their houses, orbs interacting with their family, causing medical issues for family members, ending up in the hospital due to orb activity. Like what issues due to orb activity? One of the senior intelligence officials that I spoke to and I'll let him tell his own story when he's ready. But son got extremely impacted by an orb. Black and blue over his whole body had to go to the hospital. Looked like someone took a bat to his chest. I didn't include this in the film. This section because I feel like when you get into the stuff happening people's houses, I think it's a bridge too far for a lot of people. And you got to like set the table with the base facts first, which is what my film does. And then they can open their minds to these other things. But what I found really interesting is when I would do these interviews with people and they would all talk about this activity to start having at their houses. That in some cases cause medical issues. It was all after they started looking into nonhuman intelligent life. And their takeaway was that nonhuman intelligent life was looking into them because they were looking into nonhuman intelligent life. And they made the the analogy of if a Russian spy comes to the DC to spy on Congress, R&T tells them to be spies on the Russian spy. And so that was their outlook. And I thought that was really interesting and almost implies like a human level of thinking. Right. Or maybe some attempt to make contact. Yeah. You know, there was a guy that I interviewed at Skinwalker Ranch who lived outside of the ranch, who had an orb experience. And I talked to a few people there that were clearly out of their fucking mind and maybe on meth. But a few people that seemed pretty credible and this guy was the most just a regular guy with a regular job. Interesting guy. Cool to talk to. He said that he's had a few weird sightings. But the weirdest one was one day in his home, this orb that was like a larger than a softball. He said, but came flying into his house and was in the living room with him and it was interacting with him. And then it flew down the hallway and flew right through the walls. Yeah. But he said it interacted with him. Yeah. Like it was in front of him, like letting him know that it's there. Almost some people say almost in a playful way. Yeah. And I heard about this orb activity in Intel and special houses. Like more times than I can remember Calistimes. And the journey of this movie, I not only got to know a lot of these Intel and special is very well, but like, wouldn't spend time with their wives, with their kids, with them together. And when you see like a wife completing a husband's sentence, like they're telling you what they experience together, it's bonkers, man. It's wild. It's like, holy shit, this happened. You know? And then we when you hear their kids talk about it separately. And you're like, that's literally word-forward. What like you guys are all experience the same thing. You have these different POVs. It's not like the family got together with a coordinated lie. Doesn't feel like the kids into doing it. That seems a little over the top because like to what end, right? I didn't even, I saw like I put it in the movie, you know? Um, yeah, but it's, it's, it's really fascinating. And the orb activity, um, who knows what it is, man. It could be, it could be another form of the warping space time to look as area. Like once you do that, time and space is different in that bubble. So that could be a much bigger craft inside of an energy ball that we see. We might just, that's what might be what we see as the orb, right? It might be a transportation device. There might be a being in there. And this is just what we're seeing is what's on the outside of this warping of space time. Well, that's another thing that one of the eyewitnesses described that was very weird was a craft that was small. But then when they got inside of it, it was a size of a football field. Yeah. So that, that also goes with the warping of space time. Yeah. So that was says in the film. This was something that was shocked at how said I was really shocked. He says the warping of space time and the bubble explains a lot of things that at this point haven't made sense to us. And he says, like for example, when a military serviceman goes on to a craft that looks like it's, you know, 40 feet. And then when he goes inside, it looks like it's a size of a football field. That makes sense now because from outside the bubble, it's one thing and inside the bubble, it's something else. Right. And, um, that's wild. Yeah. And I've heard that story a number of times from people who have never talked to each other. Yeah. It's like we have this very simple understanding of objects and of space and the ability to move around and them. And this kind of spectacular technology, I think we kind of have to think about it just like all other spectacular technology. Like if you, if you were around in the 1400, you couldn't possibly imagine the concept of a nuclear bomb. It would be impossible or nuclear energy or even a cell phone. Yeah. Now imagine new breakthroughs happen. And now this bubble gets created. And when we start to figure out how to send things to places through these bubbles. And then we realize that what's happening in these bubbles is not what you see on the outside that it's completely warping, which is also one of the weird questions like why are you a faux so blurry? Well, that answers that question. Yeah. You know, how says it, how says it. And I, and I loved when you revealed this because like, oh, it checks the box makes sense. People have trouble taking photos of you AP because they're literally taking a photo through a space, a space time bubble base, clear, the warping of space time. So the analogy would be like, you know, if you go under the ocean, you take a picture of a fish, you're going to get better visibility. You're in their domain, right? You're in their environment, right? But if you go above the ocean, right, you're now in a different environment. And you try taking a photo from above the water, it's going to be all distorted and wacky looking because you're taking a photo through a barrier, another environment, right? It's the same basic logic, like try taking a picture of Koi fish from above the water. You can't do it, right? And so that's just the simplest answer. Like that's what they're doing. They are warping space time and look like they're creating a barrier between our environment and their environment. And when you try to take a photo through it, it's not great. It's also the reason why radar has trouble getting these things because the radar detector, a radar detector works is radar is emitted towards an object. It bounces back to the radar detector and that's how you track where it is, right? But the radar is just going around the bubble and it's not going back to the radar detector because it's just going around the bubble. Yeah. It's a different environment, right? And supposedly we can do that now. Well, the interview subjects clearly imply that some of the you're not in plot. They state that some of the UAP we're seeing might be our reverse engineer technology might be. And is there is there any theories about other potential methods of propulsion rather than just this bubble? Is anything done in a more traditional way? Is there levels of these things? Like when it comes to the technological ability? Not the user. Everyone I interviewed that was willing to talk about the technology was convinced this is what they were doing. And it was a unifying theory explains everything we've ever observed. Like all the performance characteristics we've observed UAP is buying. And so the theory is that all of these advanced beings from wherever they're from, the various different species of them that all of them have this particular type of technology. Yeah. Which if it's the key to interstellar travel, then it kind of makes sense. But it's like, are they all figuring out this? Are they getting it from each other? Like is this just a natural pathway to curious intelligent, innovative creatures that they ultimately eventually stumble upon this technology? Well, one of the one of the things shared that I found fascinating was this idea that some of the craft that we've recovered and adversarial nations have recovered weren't crash crafts and weren't crafts that they caused a crash. They were crafts that just peered outside a military base. Almost like a gift. Yeah. And I had a besolka discusses them as donations. So gifts donations. But yeah. The thought, if you try to explain that, why would I even do that? Maybe some more advanced species is trying to help advance us. And try to put a carrot on a stick. Yeah. Maybe it's, you know, survival of the fittest for the nations of Earth. You know, maybe it's a a big IQ test. Who knows what it is. But that's an interesting scenario and seems intentional from whoever put it there. Well, it would make sense if they were trying to help the doubt people like the least intrusive way instead of like coming down, hello, let me show you how to do this. Instead of doing that, just like, hey, figure this out stupid, get all your brightest people. And at the very least, you'll figure something out. Yeah. And maybe that's what they're saying that these things have gone into some sort of a commercial application. I just wanted to what those things are because this was the thing that I was getting at with Bell Laboratory. So Bell Labs was, this is the conspiracy theory is that some of the material that was retrieved from Roswell was then transported to Bell Labs for some sort of a back engineering program. And that there's a reason why there was a military base right outside of Bell Labs. And the idea was that military base supposed to be guarding New York City. But the New York City was like kind of far away. Like, you'd want to be a little closer if you're guarding New York City. And it's much more likely that it was actually just guarding this laboratory. And that there was a company called the American Computer Company. And the American Computer Company, are they still around? They see if they still have this page. So very wacky page. So they would just made, they made made to order computers. Like you would call it up. I want to, you know, whatever five gigahertz Intel processor, blah, blah, blah. And they would do it all for you. I want to two terabyte hard drive. They would, they would set it all up for you and send it to you. And then they had a whole section of their website that was dedicated to back engineering technology from Bell Labs and how it all happened. And they were talking about the invention of fiber optics and also the transistor that these things had come specifically from the discoveries that they had made from the back engineering of a craft that was down at Roswell. Yeah. Which was also, by the way, Roswell was a site of a lot of nuclear testing. Yeah. I was told that, you know, people saying the film that Roswell did in fact happen. There was a crash. Four non human bodies were in the craft and recovered. And the technology, the craft materials and the bodies were sent to right-pat Air Force Base. Right. In Ohio, which is very close to Patel. Right. And, and then maybe that's the reason why Bell Labs is near military base. Maybe it's more about proximity to a base that can have recovery teams quickly deployed, come back with materials and then get them to a facility close by without the need for, you know, moving them across the country. And that would also, if it was true, would also be one of the first examples of this coordination between government and defense contractors, government and scientists that were commercially working. Yeah. And that they somehow or another arranged to get these brightest minds to, hey, what's this? How's this work? Is that computer companies still around? I'm not reading that. Another story about the Bell Labs story. I just found it as you asked the question trying to see why this was relevant. This was like back. Oh, I'm saying it might have been like the 90s, late 90s or early 2000s when I first started going online. And I found out about them because, you know, I used to make my own computers back then. So go and get a motherboard and hard drive and up dual. That's cool. It was fun. For gaming, it was really fun because you could like set it up with like powerful video cards and everything like that. But there was a bunch of companies that would sell like really high-end put together computers so you didn't have to go through all that work. And so I was just looking at companies that make computers. It made to order Windows computers and I found them and I was like, what? What the fuck is this? Do they still have that out? That's wild. I, that I don't know. I started to try to find it. I thought I found it. What about the way back machine? Well, this article that I found that says it's extracted from Nexus magazine, 1999. You know, the thing about when you think about when he says everything you're talking about. What is this? This is everything you talked about. It's a very long story. It's all written, but it talks about their alien craft. Yeah. Okay. So it said, so now not only do we have a picture of the alleged alien craft on our website talking about alien technology is being transferred to AT&T. But we're also in possession of a very high level level five top secret security clearance military faxes describing something called sky station. We try to be cute. We try to put a picture if you go to our website still there. Here's our website. Bottom of the page is the nav bar pointer. Is that website still up? Click on it. Let's see what we got here. Nope. Nope. That's gone son. Yeah, but that's a bullshit website. That's not the American computer company website. Is it? No. That's just like American priority payment systems. What is this? Who bought them? Do you know? Probably the fucking government man. But if this is talking about everything you just said, although that's what I was trying to figure out where the what this is, it's a website's picture. I don't know. Reverse engineering or Osmo UFO technology. Look at this. It says here, the symbol for the transistors made up of three pieces, positive, positive and negative or negative, negative and positive. Silicon dioxide doped with arsenic and boron in 1947. Now 1947 doping things with boron was not easy. It required the sort of equipment that even Bell Labs in 1946 did not possess. They had this type of equipment at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories, but it would have taken thousands and thousands and thousands of man hours to invent the transistor. If you look back at it historically, what AT&T was claiming was that one day is genius. William Shockley working with a rectifier, he looked at it and noticed that it had unusual propensities and there Bingo, he invented the transistor. He figured it out right there. And to verify that the two other geniuses that they got to help work with him on the transistor, Dr. Barton and Dr. Bratton, Bretton, Brettain, Brettain, both said, oh yeah, I remember the guy by his name, by the name of the case, was allegedly talking about transistors in 1931 and I knew back then we were going to have them. He said that that is the history of the transistor at AT&T prior to 1948. Other than claiming it was invented in December of 1947 by Dr. Shockley. Anybody believe that story? Me neither. And I knew because the administrative head of the transistor project was Jack Morton, the man at whose house I was staying to go to school and whose sons I was friends with. And he often commented on the fact that it was really a shame that those three idiots got responsibility for the transistor and he didn't. And I always wondered because he too didn't possess the scientific ability to develop the transistor. He was a brilliant man who had invented the radio broadcast vacuum tube, the closed space triode, but it appeared that he was brought in to head up the project to try to draw back the transistor in time to radio tubes and the image that Shockley talked about. And it was as if the whole thing was just a ploy and he might as easily have been given responsibility and gotten the Nobel Prize as Bill Shockley. Professional jealousy, it says question mark. Wow. So there's questions about the invention of the transistor according to these guys. But it's also fiber optics and it's the things that what they're saying is that these things kind of came out of nowhere. Yeah. Yeah. It's hard not to line it up. Yeah. And what certainly lines up time-wise with the Roswell crash and the labs working on these things being close proximity to bases known for recoveries and reverse engineering. Around Roswell, the Army Air Corps engineers that were based at Wright Pat were literally the expert reverse engineers of the Army Air Corps. That's who was based there. That's so crazy. Yeah. And people forget at the time it was the Army Air Corps as well. Yeah. And the dots all line up. The other thing to think about with what technology has been cracked is just because we haven't seen it yet doesn't mean they didn't crack it. Typically, if you just look at aerospace fighters and stuff, our black projects are 30 years out. They might have come up with something truly extraordinary. Is it 30 years out? What do you think about it in 1990 and 2000 times? Or is it 30 years out now? Because technology is obviously moving in an exponential pace. I mean, is it really still because 30 years from now I feel like we have a digital god. Yeah. Now it's 30 years out. It's 30 for sure. Yeah. Yeah. And multiple intelligence officials have told me. Even the people who are not doing the UAP, they're just working at like defensive intelligence agency. They're like aerospace experts. They're looking at they have to be aware of our black projects that are 30 years out and adversary's projects that are 30 years out. And I mean, that stuff's wild. I talked to a very senior intelligence official who is in his 80s who in the 70s, mid 70s was working on quantum entanglement for the CIA. Yeah. So I was worried about quantum entanglement. I think like 15 years ago. Yeah. So how was he working on quantum entanglement? Didn't get in didn't get into the details. That was that was the headline I got and it's a super serious guy. But that was the headline I got. He was doing he was doing fringe, fringe science work dealing with quantum entanglement in CIA and the DOD in the mid 70s. And quantum entanglement as for what under what end as a method of distribution of information. Unclear. I wouldn't want to, you know, I wouldn't want to assume. But just that was the headline. And that's the it was said to me in the context of when the public hears about something existing, it's it's a long after it's existed in terms of black problem science. Yeah. And so it just makes you think like, you know, if things have come off the back of this technology and some of it has been commercialized actually like put into like what hypersonic missiles or whatever it is transistor radio, whatever, what hasn't, you know, what's just been kept in a box. Right. Um, that's pretty well to think about. But the reality is I mean, all that leads me to just I really feel like if we get into this air of transparency and everyone knows it's real and all scientists know it's a valid area of inquiry. And all the bright young minds out there that are in high school or college right now know this is something that can put their brain power towards. It's so much amazing stuff to come out of it. Yeah. Like I think about the space race 35,000 inventions they say came out of the space race no crow and I think the fear would be that the openness would also lead to espionage. You know, because we already have a problem with that we already have a problem with agents of the CCP that infiltrate technology companies and get busted and it happens at universities. It's an issue, you know, and if it was open transparency and they were just bringing in all the brightest minds like, you know, maybe but maybe it's like the amnesty thing maybe it just needs to happen for the for the greater good. Yeah, that's the question. Like if they're both if both the United States and China are literally on the brink, maybe it's a conversation needs to be had for the greater good of humanity. Yeah. You know, that this this notion that we are the only intelligent life that we've so far observed in the universe is a lie and that whether where they come from, whether they're interdimensional or whether they're interstellar or whatever they are, there's something other than us that's more advanced than us that can do things that we can't do and that we've learned from them. Yeah. And spider differences, we have a lot of common association and that we're all in it together. That's the Reagan speech. Yeah. Yeah. That famous Reagan speech at the UN, the two famous president's speeches that I now look through, you know, I look at it in a completely different ways. Reagan speech at the United Nations, where he says, I often think, you know, spider differences, what will unite us is a threat from outside this planet. Yeah. Yeah. That brought us all together and remind us of our common bonds as humans, you know, put the other speech. Um, well, first of all, that one, why do you often think that wrong? Reagan, right? Right. Why is Reagan saying that they're the president? Why are you often thinking this gave so many people hope so it dorks like me? Yeah, maybe really. Well, the other one is the Eisenhower speech about the military industrial complex where he warned us. Uh-huh. And he warned us at a time where we now know the legacy program was already getting very powerful and empowering defense contractors to reverse engineist technology. And he warns he says very, very, very clearly that the ability exists and will persist for unchecked power and that would threaten our democratic process and get us basically saying, well, get us a pleasure. The contractors are going to have more power than Congress. And here we are in 2025 with leaders in Congress and our secretary state saying that's literally what happened. That's literally the situation right now. The president is out of the mix. Congress is out of the mix. The people are the mix and military contractors, the military industrial complex is in control, has unchecked power, and just waits out sitting president. Yeah. It's wild to listen to his, his full speech through that context. I know that that's what he was talking about. And it came to fruit. Yeah. Yeah. And it's 80 years later. We're like, oh, he was right. And the thing is, that speech was, he did that live on the air to the world. And people did really get a chance to watch it until the internet. Because most people you'd have to read about it or you'd have to go somewhere and find some 35 millimeter footage and strap it on to a, you know, projector go watch him say that most people never saw it. You didn't see it until the internet came around and then people had encoded it and turned it into YouTube videos. Super powerful speech. There's a third way I look through different lens now, which is not long before he was killed. Kennedy gave a speech about how secrecy is repundant. Yeah. He's secret societies. Yes. And he said are repundant in a free society and they challenged our democratic way of life. And we shouldn't allow it. Yeah. You know, look where they're got him. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. He was literally taking on secret societies. Yeah. I mean, he wanted to disband the CIA. He wanted, there was, he had a lot of ideas. Yeah. Yeah. I look, I hope that people involved this at like the CIA or at these defense contractors realize like you said, they have a moment here to be the heroes of the story. Yes. And to spin it and just say, hey, we were taking on a job that no one else knew existed. We were doing the best we could. We thought we made good decisions like any war. There's casualties of war, right? But our intention was to do the best for the United States. And we want to come out and tell everyone what we've learned in a safe way where we can share some information, educate the base, you know, the public with the base facts and then keep the rest classified for national security reasons. They would, these people would all just be, you know, heroes heroes. Yeah. They go down in history. We would be stunned though. I mean, the United States, we, we, I think if the full extent of these people are telling the truth, the full extent of this cover up was ever revealed, we would probably be baffled like, wow, as they had lied for so long. It covered up so much. And then there would be the anger that the misappropriation of funds and a lot of finger pointing. And then there would be the very real problem of defense contractors getting access to back-engineered equipment where other defense contractors were not. So they would have an unfair advantage. Yeah, competitively. Yeah. I mean, look, a bunch of defense contractors went out of business over the years. You'd also have to, you know, look back at some of the older defense contractors that were given materials in the 40s and 50s and then got acquired by a lucky or a North rip, a lucky North rip bought all of the smaller defense contractors that have been involved with this over the years. Really? Yeah. Yeah. A bunch of them. So those are the big ones. Yeah. Lucky in North rip, North rip, Raytheon. And, um, so dink, they all have access. Yeah. Elements of them. I mean, you can't look at, just like you can't look at the government as all one big entity. You can't look at like, it's like everybody at Lucky Martin knows about around human technology, right? Um, um, but there are people that are in control of that situation. And this comes from multiple people I interviewed in my film. They all said the exact same names. Yeah. No, it's fascinating. The, um, how much did you ever go down? How much of a rabbit hole have you gone down on the rope viewing stuff? I've gone down from a few rabbit holes. Yeah, it's fascinating what they have actually been able to do with it. Um, the how put off story, but the crashed, uh, Soviet craft that they found that this remote viewer guy found like within a three mile radius, located at exactly Jimmy Carter put a statement out about it. Yeah. This audio Jimmy Carter telling that story. See if we can find that it's wild, man. Yeah. We'll try to find that because that that is pretty crazy. The other, oh, the thing that I find the most fascinating aside from just the, it's real, uh, is the connection with UAP and there are people who have had UAP encounters and then end up with these abilities for remote view. And that is, that as well. It's like, so it's a biological effect of an encounter. Yeah. There's a big book that, uh, um, I've been a part of developing that's going to come out next year. Um, it's a memoir. It's been publicized a little bit under a pseudonym. It's Scott Andrews is the name, but that's not his real name. Um, he was a, uh, intelligence official who, um, as a kid had a UAP encounter and then, um, late in life, um, had a, had a, had a, had a medical issue that no could explain and then they found that he had these like amebas in his body that should have killed him. Like there was no reason why he should be alive. And he had a immediate brain surgery and after he had the brain surgery when he was healing, certain memories started to come back. And all of a sudden he was able to remote view. And he didn't understand what he was doing. He talked to some other intelligence officials who told him what you're doing. He's called remote viewing. People are trained to do that, but he was doing it like he had done it before. Like Jason Bourne, like, you know, these skills are coming back, right? And, um, around that time, he found, uh, when he was healing his out of the hospital, he found, uh, a locked file cabinet in his father's office, his father passed away in the cabin. It was a bunch of files about his life organized by the year and amongst the files were his in-wisping paperwork in the US Air Force as a child, like 12 or 13 years old, which is not weak. And then his honorable discharge at 18 and the service code was space intelligence communications. And the base was the old space force base, like straight up real documents. And then he went to his mother who was still alive and said, do you know anything about this? And she said, I don't know anything about it, but she's like, do you remember when you were kid and it saw that UFO? And he didn't really remember if he starts jogging his memory, she said, you saw this UFO come out of this, this lake, I don't know the lake or pond. And, um, he's like, I do, now I do remember she's remember you ran home and you told me and dad and, and, and she said, all I know is the next day, like those men from the Air Force came to talk to you with your dad. And then I never heard anything else about it. And so where the story goes is unpacking this connection between UAP encounters and, you know, whether some biological effects are bad, there are some that are also like, if you call it a gift, I don't know if you'd call it a gift or a curse, but like unlocking your potentials of great way to put it. And, um, and then the Air Force being the story also unveils how in on top of it, the Air Force is. So they went and recruited this young kid and his father to become part of a secret program where we still don't know exactly what he did, but he was used for this ability and the service code was space intelligence communications. And it's a wild story. There's a lot more to that I could talk to you about it for like four hours, but it's one of the most mind-blowing stories ever, this specific person is extremely high ranking. Like his resume reads like a movie character. It's like, it's, it's bonkers. He's like, yeah, at one point he was running like a... extremely high ranking like his resume reads like a movie character. It's like It's bonkers. He's like, yeah one point he was running like I remember the exact title but essentially he was like running counter-terrorism for North America. It's like a really high-level dude and He ended up getting Because of his stature in the intelligence community. He ended up getting help from People in the department of fence to piece together this hidden past he has and he actually is in the process of getting approved for anonymous Health-injury status from the secretary of defense So this program that he was involved in as a child does he have any recollection? No recollection His his wife is was like a gumshoe detective about it. She starts calling They see in the in the files. There was um Records of days of school he missed excuse absence is for huge periods of time I don't remember exactly whether it was weeks or months, but it was a huge period of time So his wife calls the school and started digging and asks Um You know what was your policy back then like would someone have had to repeat a grade if they missed this much time and that they said absolutely unless you had Um a really good reason or some sort of like met like serious medical excuse Like you would have been held back. He was never held back He has no memory of missing all these days of school His friends that he grew up with don't remember it, but there's all this documentation His friends don't remember him not being in school. No, that's a day inquire. Yeah totally weird totally word totally word Um So has he undergone hypnotic regression? He hasn't done that. He's been dealing with a lot of serious medical issues like very serious like almost almost dying multiple times from a lot of these Um the record word by the way is parasites. I think I said amoebas parasites He has parrot hid parasites in his body that almost killed him multiple times. What kind of parasites? There were seven different parasites that He and his doctors said his doctors told him would have killed him within a month that I remember these exact names I wouldn't pretend to be a you know medical scientist right now. Does he have any suspicions as to how he acquired these parasites Yeah, he thinks that whatever program he was involved with did Did bizarre experiments. That's what he thinks and he thinks that he was supposed to not remember any of this and when The parasite issues caused brain surgery the memories came back Yeah, and he ended up there's a lot more of the story after he after he started socializing what he was experiencing Um There were multiple attempts on his life That have been documented and investigated by real intelligence agencies He's like a serious dude and he's he's doing his tell all memoir Um It's a it's a really great book. It's almost done and Simon Shushar is gonna publish it next year So there's multiple attempts on his life because of which ass does he have an understanding like was he threatened? He thinks it's because what he was involved with was supposed to stay in the past He wasn't supposed to remember when he was a child. Yeah, no one went so they wanted to kill him I'm not making it even more suspicious. Well depends on how you yeah, no probably not probably not because they could just get away with it Yeah, what kind of attempts on his life Um directed energy weapons. What? Yeah Yeah, but how the guy was having the actual symptoms of a directed energy weapon attack and he New with those circumstances were from his you know from his career you knew these were symptoms of that and A proper investigation was done by real authorities and they found evidence of it like etching in the windows and Etching in the window. I draw turns what goes through glass causes etching in the windows So they'll literally physically targeting him. Yeah, something from a drone from space Who knows who knows I mean that's these are like the list of questions that the story So the idea is like let's just give this guy cancer or just nuke him and Take him out. That's what it seems. Yeah because he's talking too much about this program. That's what it seems That if it comes out we're fucked Yeah, that's what it seems. It's probably what they did is highly illegal Especially if they did it to a child. Well, I don't think you can legally enlist in the military when you're right Yeah, also 13 he probably wasn't the only one. Yeah, yeah, and so if they do have someone told the ability to erase memory That's what it would seem which also lines up with you know I talked to one of the stories left out of the film. I talked to the base commander from Rendlesham The US joint US UK base in the UK where there was a huge UAP event in the 80s And the base commander told me on the record on camera that the day after the event an airplane landed People from the CIA and Air Force intelligence showed up with authority and demanded to speak to the witnesses and The base commander was told to leave the room He didn't know until years later That all those servicemen that experienced this they were all told to Share the details and they were given a drug. I think it was called is this correct sodium panty all is that nice? Pen of all yeah, so that's the truth theorem. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and they were given that to to Share what they what they experienced and then they were all asked to fade after been hypnotized and someone was there who hypnotized them as crazy as that sounds Wow, this is the base commander telling me this on camera to my face He also said they took away something and crates the next day on this airplane and he never got cleared On what it was he and the third thing that he revealed that I don't think anyone's ever talked about with Rendlesham He revealed that the day after the bay the event he went and talked to the people in the communications room You know the old school like wires in the mall stuff and The head of the communications on the base told him that the entire night of the event while he was out in the woods dealing with the event The whole base was on Communication locked down all lines were shut down except the direct line between the base and the White House Which it's called I believe I believe I don't want to mess this up And I believe it's called flash override which is only used for Nuclear war or imminent threat of nuclear war So like the most extreme circumstances where you need a direct line between the base and the president Whoa, yeah So one of the unfortunate things I had to cut for time Hard to see what making this movie man was my director's cup was like four hours and I get this down I get this down is something was like consumable Did you ever think about making it like a seat like a Netflix thing or my two piece? I did I did think about it What about a director's cut would you ever do that probably I'll think about doing that or maybe let's do a sequel Maybe let's do a follow-up and put some of the stuff that like is like a bridge too far into the next thing What's the tables that sounds good? You know this was the question I was gonna get to with that. Yeah, you've worked on legitimate films. Yeah, like not that this isn't legitimate But you worked on some like big blockbuster Hollywood films ready for player one amazing film. I love the movie Um Are you locked into this kind of shit now because here's the problem that happens when people start going down this rabbit hole It kind of consumes them look it's definitely it's definitely been a consuming endeavor this movie I mean this thing is consumed my life for four years and I had to you know It's a whole nother conversation But I had to make this movie in secrecy because at the at the offset when I started getting real and telling specials to lean in They told me to my face. They're like You it's not in your best interest to promote the fact you're doing this don't announce people doing it Don't let the world know about it until you put a trailer out, you know There's gonna be people who are gonna try to cause prom for you. So I had to make this in secrecy. I ended up doing post out of my house Which my fiance is a saint Ali fine seen as a saint Did you have a crew yeah, yeah, it was so you had to do it on the snake all consuming and And yes, it this this topic is a rabbit hole you become consumed with I look I'm still gonna do movies and TV shows that have nothing to do with UAP for sure and I'm developing some and I and I think I'll probably make some next year but at the same time I want to do more in this space and these adjacent spaces like I'm doing Like I mentioned J Stratton's book. I'm working really hard on I'm also gonna develop a series based on J Stratton's life Which is this remarkable 16 year rabbit hole investigating non human intelligent life and UAP for the US government I'm working with some other people that are in my film on their life stories and then the book I just told you about that crazy remote viewing story. Yeah, I'm developing a movie about that Like a fiction like a Dromatization yeah like picture like the vibe of the insider the Russell Crowe whole movie But with that story. Oh like that kind of vibe. I want to play that guy. Do you guys? Some in mind I have a few people in mind Don't want to say too soon is a few people wrong Russell Crowe be amazing for it and he's really into topic. Oh, yeah Yeah, he really love it. Yeah, and he's only interested in doing interesting things now Yeah, you know, yeah, he's got all the money in the world. He's yeah, he'd be amazing for it There's a lot of good ideas for that one But I do want to I do want to still do you know stuff outside this topic for sure I'm really fascinated with the remote viewing topic I think I have a desire to do in the same way that the age of disclosures the definitive doc on what we now know that can be Laughterly disclosed about UAP and not human intelligent life. I really want to try to endeavor to do that version of the remote viewing story That would be like the super credible Yeah, non sensational It's got I mean it's got the coolest setup for here. Here's the setup for this thing So help food offs working for the CIA and the DoD in the mid-seventies. He's doing some spooky stuff fringe science work his CIA handler Who he says best friend and was in his wedding party Comes in with his office knocks on the door and says we've got a problem we need to help with He says what is it? He says our operatives have found out that the rock Russians have a program that they're 10 years into where they have rounded up the best psychics In Russia and they've trained them to use their psychic abilities to spy on American bases and our most secure facilities and they're getting actionable intel House of course like holy shit. That's crazy saying I've heard right and The CIA guy says yes, you've got a blank checkbook from the CIA in the DoD You've got X amount of time to catch up on their 10-year program. We've got to beat them He hadn't that has to figure out like how to go about finding people have these abilities because it's not like Russia We just go round up a bunch of people and say you're gonna do this right? So he comes up with a clever system to bake into army basic training Testing that can identify people with these skill sets and then you can pluck them up and have them come work for this program You can help them sharpen their skill sets and you can train them to become remote viewers to me that like that's seeing It's like it's like the Indiana Jones scene where where the CIA comes in and they're Jones Says, you know, what do you know about the arc of the cut? Oh my god, and we've got the situation we need your help with you know It's wild man. It's like a crazy set up of all time and it's fascinating and then the fact that They started getting real actionable intelligence that they were acting on like the CIA was running missions based on his intel One one day when I shot I did so many interviews with how but one day when we finished Talking about the UAP topic. I had I had intentionally scheduled a few extra hours And I was like, I how let's talk about Stargate and I grabbed like three hours of the entire Stargate story And it's fucking mind blowing and all the specific like little stories of action that were taken based on their intel It is so wild and so compelling and then when Stargate at the time target was a deeply hidden program Extremely secret highly classified. There was some leak I think that happened in the 90s where people heard about it and then that's essentially the government said oh It's not real it didn't work. It was the thing we tried, you know and all they did is they just moved it to another agency As far as I've had so many people tell me of their awareness of active remote viewing programs Yeah, wait tried to do it. I have not tried to do it. Why not but I did what I did try was someone remote viewing me in a specific place where I was and They sent me a picture that they sketched out that gave me fucking shells because they described exactly where I was standing when I was talking to them And I don't think they had cameras in my house, which is the obvious question right? Pretty wild and I and there's others there's others to say it for Mattel and officials that I've gotten close with because of the UAP topic People who became aware of the remote viewing situation and would tell me these just like little digital stories like There was a there was a here's like a specific there was a there was a pen drive like a little you know a little drive Or with some data on it that had some UAP data on it that then it tells fish will literally drop while hiking out of their pocket was in their pocket and And dropped it and they used a remote viewer to help them find it told them exactly where it was and went and found it It's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy It's crazy But then you go and you listen to this clip of Jimmy Carter talking about how remote viewers Were used to find this down airplane and you like this guy was present in the United States It's definitely found the transcript in an article, but I think this is all you know I hadn't been able to check there is a documentary Let's try to find a documentary and there's a documentary called Third Ice by the hazard is the opening is the described It's definitely been a change and in explicable event it has been discussed publicly is at one time we had a Small plane go down somewhere in Africa We've needed very much to find out where that plane had crashed and We were not able to find it by surveillance from our satellites So the director of the CIA he was also the director of all the intelligence agencies heard about a woman in California that was a medium and he contacted her and she gave him the latitude and longitude of the planes whereabouts and the next time one of our space satellites went over that area We located the plane where she said it was By the way, that's not even the one I was thinking he says it about a different thing about a plane with that I think was Russia And he specifically says we went to the remote viewing program for the one of the best room of viewers and they found it But that's crazy. That's a sitting president. All right. I can Jimmy Carter talking about it Being used yeah, it's do you think that that is an aspect of human consciousness that we used to be able to do I do and that we've lost it somehow. Yeah. Yeah I think there's just Things we've evolved out of and things we've evolved into and I think that that's you know Is that what they think as well? Yeah, yeah, yeah, someone someone someone very involved in in that topic for the government now told me the analogy they would make is It's like if if you saw a basketball on the ground Anybody can pick the basketball up if there's a hoop there they can throw it at it, right? Right if you sat back and watched a line of 100 people do it someone looked like clowns Someone would someone would be like oh this guy is side of potential and then you know one out of every however many like that Whatever be a Michael Jordan who's just like boom Swish this guy's a fucking natural right? It's interesting so everyone can do it everyone can pick up the ball and throw it at the hoop and some people have a natural I think to do it better and That's what they were trying to identify and that's what they do try to end up the weird one is that people who have had encounters yet so that's that to me is like like it breaks through some barrier that you have in your consciousness When they communicate with you all the sudden now you have this wall that has been downed That allows you to have access to this forgotten aspect of human consciousness or somehow heightens it You know yeah, it's the biological effects are real so we don't you know We know about the bad ones like cancer, but maybe one of the other ones is it heightens this ability somehow Have you ever taken any time into consideration of the possibility that human beings were Were a product of genetic engineering? I mean it's kind of a possible Godness this rabbit hole and not not have thought are we just all a big is this a big experiment? Right, you know in one day the experimental end or not even just an experiment for but an aiding in a process Like they recognize a process where there's bipedal hominids Yeah, of various intelligence and they accentuate that yeah and Multiple different probably multiple different attempts. Yeah, I mean I've I've definitely thought about it and I and it It would explain a lot. Yeah, there's all these missing gaps in our history. Well, that's also the weirdness of the book of Enoch Yeah, the book of Enoch is essentially describing Watchers who come down from the sky and mate with women. Yeah, well that if you told that story for a thousand years and the real story was they came down They got a hold of human babies and human mothers and introduced genetics that were Alien into into these children. That would be like they made it with women. Yeah, it would be kind of the same thing Yeah, you know and created They talk about the nephillium giant to destroy it everything, but that's kind of us. Well, the other thing that makes me think of is a number of the people who have seen crafts and it's Jay Stratton and the world's not of say it in the film that the craft at Roswell had hieroglyphics on it some kind of ancient writing and they they actually I didn't put it in the film, but they talked about how when they learned that to be a fact they spent a ton of time researching ancient texts and trying to find a match and They couldn't find it and the closest thing they could find with some old biblical text But who's hieroglyphics for these what was that from? Yeah It's wild man. Well, how much would you give to see one to look like please? I'll stop making documentaries I won't talk to nobody just show me just take me into the hanger and show me this fucking thing You feel very bored to work says he's you know all these years a guy made close encounters you made ET You know world worlds TV shows about it and Never seen one and you know Have you had anything that you've ever seen that you thought was weird? Yeah, yeah, I have I Actually, I would know hi. I don't know. I my my fiance and I were laying on it on a blanket while I was making this movie looking at stars and Saw what looked like a satellite at first. I thought it was going slow and then this thing just fucking rocketed off Way up there all looked like was a star But it was not as hard it was not a satellite because it moved super fast and it just darted across the sky I don't know where yeah up right above the topotope of mountains in a lie and then I and then I actually the next day We said to the staff we were almost a little golf cart's getting drove across the Sotel property And we told me saw and the guy goes yeah, I'm not gonna lie. We see that stuff a lot out here It's like wow fascinating. Yeah, but that's the only thing I ever saw Other stuff where I'm like witnessing firsthand the craziness of this cover up one of the interview subjects I had at my house in Los Angeles prepping for an interview We're in the middle of percent my living room. I live in the suburbs of Los Angeles and What happens not normal heard very loud helicopter ran outside Had my phone on me look look up and there's a black helicopter right above my house and The guy comes out of the house and looks up and then without missing a beat I always remember this he's like, yeah, that'll happen What the hell does get into you know, so you're essentially letting you know that they know yeah, there's been a bunch of moments like that like yeah Letting you know that's the message. I immediately ask people on the Senate and tell them to committee and Senator services committee about that if I should be worried Maybe they're actually like there's a sudden you know that they're aware what you're doing It's them setting a message they're watching you Trying to cross any lines. They're like that happens to everybody on the intelligence committee I would imagine that those people though kind of want you to succeed You know, we're gonna let you to succeed in a way where you're not crossing lines and look I have great lengths. I no one says anything classified on camera for me. There's none of that I don't want to be any part of that right right? They only share what they lawfully can and I think that you know I assumed after that that every phone call and every email was being observed. Oh, yeah, and not only did I assume that But I was I was told to assume yeah, you know sure yeah, the people on the so there's a guy I get a shout out John Estrich who was on the Senate and tell his committee staff He was a senior staff or for Rubio. He was the guy who Really led the charge on looking into this topic for Rubio and Warner on the Senate and tell his committee staff He was extremely supportive to maybe hide the scenes Helped vet people for me help send introductions my way help validate me with Rubio and rounds extremely helpful He often had that same kind of activity to his house every time you have an important meeting. Yeah, yeah and Oh, God yeah, that'll fuck it put some holes in your sails. Yeah, you know Like slow down, but maybe maybe I need to go back to ready player Fleega this go develop an ocean's 11-time movie. Yeah, I'm not interested fucking helicopters being over house Now there's been there's been look there's a lot of people I don't want to go two into it But as you can imagine there's a lot of people that didn't wish this movie didn't exist I'm sure yeah Wish I never made it course that tried to prevent it from getting released and went out of their way to cause problems There's a lot of people that fit that description and I became aware of a lot of them I became aware of a lot of those those concerns and I just kind of like It's kind of put blonders on and like you know had tunnel vision was like right I'm not doing anything illegal. I'm not gonna do anything. That's bad for the United States I'm not I think it's good for the United States. Yeah, I mean I think what that film is good for just human beings overall It's it's really important man, and I'm glad you did it. It was really excellent. Thank you I'm glad I got to see it itself myself West and I was like man, this is gotta get distributed like how does this get out there? Yeah, you know despite Self-by-weated two screenings 1100 seats at the Paramount Theater standing ovation lines around the block the trailer I put out in January quickly got like 20 million views despite that all the major distributors and major streamers They watched it. They loved it. They said all these great things, but then they didn't end up They didn't end up moving forward and and and you know I don't think it's naive to think that Other parties, you know might discourage people. Yeah, so it would imagine that how can people watch it? So on Friday the 21st Which is tomorrow which is tomorrow or today today when the drops it'll drop today today for people Today February 25th Jesus February today November 21st They've got an amoeba in your brain bro Today November 21st worldwide on prime video you can rent it you can buy it. I made subtitles for every single major language It's available in every single country around the world where prime videos available and you can also see it in the movie theater in New York Los Angeles and DC and I really encourage everyone in the world to watch this thing and make it a conversation with Her friends and family. I think it's the most interesting conversation you can have around Thanksgiving dinner next week You know it is really good then and you should be very proud of it And I hope big hits distributed even wider After the success of the Amazon prime thing because I think it's gonna take off. Thank you Yeah, I I hope that's the case and and then yeah, do you think they'll be a follow-up? Let's do a follow-up baby come back and definitely if you do a remote viewing one too. I want to hear about more Hell yeah, yeah, oh yeah. Thank you very much for being here man. It was awesome And you know documentaries really really awesome