Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Good to see you brother. What's happening? You know, back in the seat, back in the hot seat. You lookin' good dude. Look at you. You had some bastard. What's this box? This is the best supplements on the planet sourced from Japan, America, and Switzerland. North performance, Dr. Massey. Do you know him as a Stanford doc? He started the company. I'm involved. I'm getting heavily involved in the ownership of it. And I'm excited about it. It's a one-you-take-a-day. Like one satchel. It's got all the shit you know. So it's like a pre-pack? It's a pre-pack. Ooh, I like pre-packs. Yeah, one in debt. I don't like to think. Exactly. You need pre-pack. Yep. Yeah, I like the, I take a purest now. I take pure encapsulations. They have those little men's ultra-packs, or whatever it's called. Yep. Those everyday. Yeah. Would a bunch of other shit. I'll try your stuff, though. Okay. Check it out. So what's so special about these vitamins? You know, it's just, it's more for the person who's like wants to excel in training. So it's got all the amino acids, your creatinees, all the men-one supplement. It's big. You'll see. Let's go. Let's go. Let's go. By the way, this is not an ad. I mean, I guess it is for Scott, but it's like, I need to ignore your involvement. I know, but I just want people to know that like, I talk about cool shit regardless of whether or not it's an ad. And if something's going to be an ad, I have to approve it. Ooh, look at you. I need a knife. Yeah, let's bust it out. Montana knife company, son. There you go. Different cut-noke. That's a skinner ball. Okay. Look at that sucker. Shave that dog. Teach it to hunt. The best knives. All right. Supplements. So how long have you been involved in the whole supplement thing? Yeah, you've always taken them. Oh, it's all in powder. Yep. Whoa. Try, drive scooping that. You're going to choke the death. That's a lot of powder. A lot of powder. That I believe. Okay. Now, at least I'm more convinced because there's a lot of volume here. Yep. Obviously, there's a lot of stuff. Like, if you took every vitamin that I take every day and you busted them up and put them into a powder form, it would be like this. Exactly. So it's 70 plus vitamins in there. And that's the biggest thing, right? Like efficacy and quantity. You need the right amount. Did you just mix this with waters? You do it. Yep. Mix it with a big water. And then you just don't have to think about it because I was doing so many a day as you probably are. Yeah. It's like, oh, dude. Yeah. Right under that one. Oh, I'm going to wear that. So you're involved in this company. Did you guys ever send the stuff out for third party testing? Do you ever do that? It's totally a third party test. So my very wealthy buddy started it. He did it essentially for himself. He was like, I want the best of the best. He's like 55. But he's an adventure athlete. And he's like, I want the best of the best. I don't care what it costs. And he's like, wait a sec. I think I can make a business out of this. So that's where you do it. Yeah. Okay. So for people at home, what's the name of the company again? North Performance. North Performance. And there's our website that you can go to. Yep. We're just launching it. It's going to be on subscription based. Come to your house every month. Oh, just think about it. Oh, I'm not thinking. Yep. You got me. Got me hooked already signed all the things. Volume. So I'm believing in it. Yep. When I know if you're a very reputable and ethical guy, you know, if you're involved in something, it's going to be legit. Anyway, so that's cool to know. How long have you been taking supplements? Have you been a vitamin guy forever? Yeah. You know, I cycle in and out. Like anything. I might my non-negotiables typically are fish oil, vitamin D. I take MNN or NAD and then glutathione. My dad was always a massive glutathione guy. There's a lot of real health benefits to glutathione. I think especially liposomal glutathione, which I think more ablyosorbable. Yeah. That's awesome, dude. Good for you. I think and don't listen to your doctor. If you have the doctor like I had, my doctor said, all your needs is a balanced diet. Most of those vitamins are just going to pee out. And I looked at him like, dude, you look like shit. I didn't say it. But if you thought it. You thought it'd be nice. You just had a pop belly. Like this is crazy. You have zero muscle. Yeah. And you're telling me about balanced diet. It's like this has been Nana's dude. And now that I've looked back on it, he was probably how old I am now. You know, and he looked like shit. There's a lot of doctors that don't understand that if you want to optimize your health, it's not about what the 100% of the, you know, F-U-S-D-A or whatever it is, the requirements. Like there's real science on what the right doses are. And you can find it. It's just complicated. You got to go online and you got to go, what's the optimum dose of vitamin D? Are there dangers of going above vitamin D? Are there benefits of having a high level of vitamin D? Sure. And if you really want to do it right, you should work with a wellness clinic and have someone go over your blood. Fortunately, we have ways to well in town. So I do it with them. Yep. They go over your blood, where they'll actually make you a vitamin that's designed specifically for what your body needs. They don't encapsulate at all and pill form, tell you how many you take a day and they'll send you like a bag of vitamins. It's amazing. Yeah, I've been actually, I've been actually thinking about doing that task because there's certain doctors that'll tell you your sort of your blood type will dictate what you should be eating. And I've never really got that done or no and I know certain people just are like, this is a game changer. Wonder how much of that is boo-doo. It might be, you know, it kind of makes sense though, if your ancestors came from a specific part of the world, you know what I mean? Yeah. Like, we know that's the case with alcohol. Like people whose ancestors came from a society. Society, yeah. Well, societies that didn't normally drink alcohol, like particularly native Americans at a really hard time with it. Yeah. Because they just weren't built to metabolize alcohol. They didn't have it as a part of their world. And I guess if you're in a part of the world where your ancestors are to eat mostly meat, I bet your diet should probably be mostly meat. I bet it fits right in there. And it's come from a place where they ate a lot of specific kinds of grains. Like, I would wonder like, how much of that stuff is real? Like blood type versus what food you should eat. Because everybody, whatever it eats proteins, amino acids, vitamins, you know, and all that stuff you get from fruits and vegetables and meat and food and fish and eggs. I mean, if you're looking at the blues on, right? Yeah, they essentially have a variety of a Mediterranean diet. And it's a kind of a variety of everything. They don't just eat red meat, but they eat a lot of fish, but they do eat red meat and they do drink wine. And they sort of have this diet that is kind of a bunch of everything. And, you know, there's a bunch of other factors as well. You know, purpose, physical activity. Physical activity, community. I think a big one with all these blues on people is they're just eating real food. That's the real problem. What people need to truly get into their head is the majority of the American diet as delicious as it tastes is like garbage. It's bad for you. It's actually bad for you. It's not good for you. Real food is good for you. If you go and you have a grilled chicken and some avocado and a nice salad and a glass of sparkling water, that's actually really good for you. Versus if you go and have a fucking jack in the box, double cheeseburger with bacon and whatever sauce and eat the fries, like that's poison. It's delicious, poison. Now I will say, I just got back from Europe. My body there feels so much better. And I eat pretty healthy. Okay, I eat healthy here and I eat pretty healthy there. Yeah, everybody has the same story. So what's going on? It's our food, our food's bad. There's a guy who broke it down. How many of that do with cowboy hat Jamie? Remember that cat is a really good or breaking down nutrition facts. He broke down what the gluten is. What life is say, right? The gross mean. There's a bunch of the compounds, there's a bunch of preservatives. All that stuff is, again, bad for you. And all these people that live in Italy and live in these Mediterranean diet places, what are they eating? They're eating food, actual food, real food. But it's not just that. It's like the way that dairy's processed, right? So, you know, and I actually went to a cheese factory in Italy a couple of times ago in Europe. And I asked, I said, why can my stomach tolerate this and not in America? And they're like, well, first off, we, the process of making this cheese is like four to six hours in the morning, every day. And it gets the lactose out. Whereas we just slap it in and send it out. And it's like that's not what I am. It's also raw cheese. You know, I had this, I bought a house from this guy who was from France. Really cool guy. He was a doctor. Very interesting, dude. I got to know him, got to get in France with him. And he would smuggle cheese back from France because it was literally illegal to have that cheese. This is California, 2003. Oh, really? Illegal to bring that cheese into America because it was raw. It hadn't been, all the biology in it hadn't been killed. Okay. So, like when we're drinking raw milk, what you're getting is all the enzymes, you're getting it. And people could say, oh, you, are you a baby cow? You should be like, it's really good nutrition. Raw milk is good nutrition. There's calcium and protein and fats, milk fat. It's good for you. It tastes good when you drink. If you're drinking a glass of homogenized pasteurized milk, your body's like, what is this? Like this is milk that can just sit on the shelf for months. That's crazy. If you get raw milk, I get it on a Saturday. By Wednesday or Thursday, it's got a little sketch. Oh yeah. It starts thinking. That's the cat. So this dude, listen to the, this guy says. So he's talking to this guy. I think we're in for you. This guy's talking about how he's eating bread over in Europe. I know. America. I need it. That's because in America, what we call bread can't even be considered food in parts of Europe. See here in America, it's not so much the gluten as what we've done to the grain. About 200 years ago, we started stripping the brain in germ or the fiber in nutrients to make flour shelf stable. Also, nutritionally dead because the nutrients were gone, we enriched it with folic acid, which a large majority of the population can't even metabolize. Therefore, many people experience fatigue, anxiety, hyperactivity and inflammation. But then the bread wasn't white enough. So they bleached it with chlorine gas. The bread didn't rise enough. So they added a carcinogen called potassium bromate, which has been in several countries like Europe, the UK and even China. Then we wanted to ramp up production. So we started using glyphosate to dry out the wheat before harvest, causing endocrine disruption and damaging your gut. So now your bloated brain fog tired and blamed gluten, but gluten is just the scapegoat. The real issue is ultra-processed chemically altered bleached bromated fake vitamin filled wheat, so can glyphosate. This isn't bread. This is. I shout out to this guy. His name is Denny Dour. Denny D and Y underscore D-U-R-E on Instagram. Let's go to fuck with the audio there, because that song will. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So what I get from that, and I have seen this actually. Damn it. It's just essentially pure greed. Yeah. Keep bread shelf stable for longer. Well, it's their business model, right? So their business is set up on shelf stable stuff. That in the problem is it was greenlit, right? So the problem is whatever year they started doing that, they built their entire business on doing it that way. So this was the argument when RFPK Jr. came in and said, you have to stop using these dies for children cereals. And they were saying, they were saying, this is going to ruin our business. And he was like, you already make the same kind that we're asking you to make for Canada, because Canada doesn't allow them to use the dies. The same cereal they make in the United States. And it looks not as good, because it doesn't have the juicy, delicious, bright, vibrant dies that give you fucking cancer. But the reality is it's just their business model. They're set up to do it a certain way, and to change would be very expensive. So what do they do? They fucking hire lobbyists. They hire lobbyists. They get their guys into the FDA. They get their guys into this organization, that organization. And they make sure that they're protected. And then we keep eating dog shit, and we keep getting poisoned. And you go to Italy, and you have a spaghetti, and you feel great. You don't feel like you got shot with a tranquilizer dart. You know, it's kind of amazing. And there's dirt in your neck. We've talked about it so many times you go over there and you're like, why am I living the way I live? These people are just hanging out, having a good time, having a cigarette laughing. That shouldn't even be a thing we're arguing about. I don't understand. It's just like that gets lumped into that. It's like, no, that's for the betterment of society. Yeah. What? Like, why is that a thing? Yeah, we live in a weird world, man. A world that doesn't completely make sense. And then on top of it, it gets connected to political ideologies. So it used to be that the people on the left were really concerned about healthy food. Like, when I was a kid, we used to go to the health food store. My parents were hippies. And they would buy like whole wheat bread. And like, they would try to buy like organic food. Like, that was the thing on the left, avoid chemicals, avoid processed foods. And because it's all these movements are connected with Trump and RFK Jr, there's so many people that are rejecting something that's beneficial to everybody. Because somehow or another, they have this connected to some right wing, anti-science position. Like, God, you guys are getting brainwashed. We should all be eating organic food. That should be the only food. We were not doing that. And it's one of the reasons why we're some of the sickest, fatest fucking people on earth while also being the most wealthy country. Yeah, a group think is like a crazy thing. It's like, it's kind of, it's really sad because people aren't really actually thinking critically about each subject. They're just jumping onto something they've been told or is in their echo chamber or whatever. I like to think no matter what issue it is, I'm like, okay, well, let's evaluate that. Let's kind of look at both sides. Maybe there's like, and maybe there's some in between. Let's, both things can be true. Yes, for sure. And that's a problem. If you, if there's something that's accurate that the other side is saying and you're rejecting that because it doesn't align with your political ideology, that's bad for everybody. I think the group think that we have to all really align with is the group think of being open-minded, being like true, actually open-minded and willing to accept different ideas and also recognize that you are not your ideas. Your ideas are just thoughts. Do not connect yourself with them. You are you. And if you really want to have a stable you, you want to be proud of what you are. You should be completely detached to ideas. You should know which ones are accurate and which ones aren't based on information, based on the reality of whatever, whatever we're talking about, whatever subject matter is. But the reality is like you can't be married to your ideas because they'll fuck you. They'll fuck you all for every time. It's like it's not going to work. You have to be flexible and you have to be willing to say, even though I hate this guy, he's right about that. It's very important. It's okay to be wrong. Yeah, even though I think this guy's a piece of shit. It was wrong. When he says he lies about a lot of things. But that thing that he's saying is actually true. Well, here's an even to go even a little more, maybe an unpopular or something people don't talk about is they divide, in my opinion, to control. If you don't have division, that's when the pitchforks come out. If you don't have the illusion of choice and a team, that's when you're like, well, fuck that. They're taking care of money. They're paying all these taxes or doing these things. And we actually don't have a choice, but maybe that's the reason that there's these teams, red and blue. And it's actually just one higher group that are actually making decisions, the big money. Yeah, well, we're sure they benefit from people being out of each other's throats. They benefit from culture war stuff. They benefit from people arguing over whatever it is. Pride, month, or whatever it is. Black Lives Matter. They get that riled people up. And then people are thinking about this and this instead of, hey, like this is actually going on. Yeah. I'm talking about that. Yeah. I mean, look, every time there's, I mean, when Clinton got caught with Monica Lewinsky, they started bombing like right afterwards. Oh my God. That's the real power. That's what they do. It's a good move. It's a good move. It's a good treat. Because otherwise, that shit's gonna stay in the news cycle until something big happens. So you got to make something big happen. Yeah, it's a, we're involved in a game and we don't think it's a game. We think that what we're doing is trying to make the world a better place and vote for people that have similar values. Doesn't the game of their plan? The game they're playing is let's pretend that we care. Let's pretend that we wanna fix the homeless problem. Let's pretend we want you to have health care. Let's pretend. But meanwhile, they're a good percentage of them are demons. They're just sociopaths completely devoid of any feelings of what the consequences of their action are gonna have on people's livelihoods, losing their homes, losing their businesses. They don't give a fuck. They care about their own career and they wanna keep on trucking till they become the king of the country. And that's what they're trying to do. And that's a giant pile of these fucking demons. There's a lot of them out there that think like that. And then there's real good people that get involved in politics as well. Boy, we need them to make us feel better. This episode is brought to you by Blue Choo, the number one brand for better sex. Blue Choo just drops something crazy. Blue Choo Gold. Blue Choo has made it easy for five million men to get hard. But now they've made it easier to get horny too. Blue Choo Gold gets your brain and body on the same page fast. Other options just help blood flow. But gold combines four ingredients into one tablet that works fast. Two ingredients increase blood flow and two boost arousal and intimacy. So for a good time, go to bluechoo.com. And we've got a special deal for our listeners right now. When you buy two months of Blue Choo Gold, you get the third free with promo code Rogan. You'll also receive an additional 10% off plus free overnight shipping on your first order. Visit bluechoo.com for more details and important safety information. Blue Choo is number one for a reason. No, we were actually talking about it. My buddy gave me a lift here today on his plane and he's a very wealthy, successful guy. But he was getting riled up about some trans thing and an issue and I was like, why do you think you get riled up about it? I was like, do you think that maybe that's just a cause for division? And if you get upset about a sound out of someone's mouth, when you think about it, it's kind of like from a 30,000 foot level, it's like, you're getting riled up about an idea about a sound that's coming out of someone's mouth. You're letting that affect you. Right, and it's not affecting your real life, but you're choosing to focus on that. And it is an issue, but it is an issue that's of paramount importance in your life when you're on your own private jet flying. So I know, I was thinking about, I was thinking I was like, you're this special billionaire and you're upset about that. And I go, you're wasting your time thinking about that instead of a million or things we could talk about or think about. Yeah, it was interesting. Well, it's, it's always been a tool. As much as we like to say, no, these are real issues that we face and we really have a real cultural issue that we have to, I get it, that's true. But however, you have to recognize that that tool has always been used by dictators, fighting conquer, art of war. Yeah, I mean, it's the beginning. Yeah, and it's important. And it's one of the beautiful things about our country is that we have two parties. So it's so easy to do because it's just good guys and bad guys. There's no good guys, bad guys in between. Pretty reasonable guys that are pragmatic. We know how to kill folks. I like them. Let's go to the, let's go to the, let's go to the, let's go to the discipline side. But no, it's like you can only be on the right or on the left. And if you're on the right, you get lumped into these crazy people that have these big Jesus rallies and they talk in tongues and you get lumped in with white nationalists, you get wiped in, lumped in with Christian nationalists to think that the 10 command which should be in every school and no one should be able to practice any other religion is a Christian country. There's people that really believe pushing that. That you get lumped in with them too. When you're just like, hey, I think the second amendment's important. You know, like, oh, you must be a far right wing conspiracy theorist. Like, oh, come on. Like, you can't always count on the cops. You know, you should be able to protect yourself because bad people have guns. It's that simple. It doesn't mean you're gonna use them all the time. Like this is crazy. You could kill people with a variety of different methods. You know, you don't, you don't need to lump everything into right and left, but people do. They do because they're being told to. You know, if you're on the left, you have to accept, you know, trans women or women. You have to, there's a whole bunch of, like they're kind of moving away from that now in a big way. They're moving away from the competitive thing. Like with trans women competing in school athletics. And because it's like after a certain amount of fucking championships, you know, you just gotta go, hey, come on guys. That's a guy. That's a guy. Like, like, if I didn't win, be sweet. Those people always exist, but also you're letting them into the women's room. And now you get a pervert to just say their trans. And then go in the women's room too. Like you didn't think about this. The fact that they never factored in the one segment of society that has always been the most hated and the most, like, looked out, like make sure that they don't come near you. Psychopathic perverts. Like psychopathic perverts that prey on men, guys that wanna go in women's bathrooms, guys that wanna, like grab women after bars. Those guys have always been terrifying. And we just gave them a Willie Walker Golden ticket. Just wear a dress. Like imagine you're a fucking old school pervert in your 80 years old. You're like, fuck, I miss the boat. Yeah, you've been in and out of jail for doing all kinds of creepy shit, pretending you're a woman. I think we should just be able to hunt them. Like the real. I would lose zero sleep. Real perverts, yeah. Like the thing is like, child monsters, people like no problem. Just let's go hunt them. Well, they're broken. And I don't know how you could ever think you're gonna fix them. And then there's this weird trend where in some academic circles they're trying to label them as minor attracted persons. Which is just this thing of just empathy falling into chaos. Like you have so much empathy that you're willing to ignore, you know, all kinds of crazy. Like what's going on in the UK with the rape gang? They're willing to ignore it because they don't wanna be seemed deemed as being racist. They don't wanna be deemed as being Islamophobic. Like, okay. Yeah, that breakdown of culture. And because of some very extreme groups is pretty scary. It's scary. It's super scary. It's scary because it can happen anywhere in the world. It can happen in America too. And if you think it can't, you're nuts. And the beautiful thing about America is you're supposed to be able to practice any religion you want. You're supposed to be able to be a Buddhist. You're supposed to be able to be a Baptist. No one should care. And we should all be able to get along. It should be a true melting pot. But there's other organizations that have different plans and their plans are to take over cities. There's plans that are to take over cities and change the laws. And we were talking about with Tim Dylan, what happened with Dearborn Michigan. All these like liberal people, like, yeah, we love Muslims. Everyone's amazing. So they got a Muslim mayor. And the first thing he did is like, no more pride flags. It's a chitz-a-legal. Because what he would like is Sharia law. Like if you asked the majority of practicing Muslims, like worldwide, how many of them would like Sharia law? And it's not a small amount. That's their religion. That's what the problem with that is like, you can't push that on other people. If you want to have your mosque and you want to pray five times a day wonderful, you should be able to do that 100%. Everyone should appreciate the fact there's also a different ways of worshiping God. Great. I don't know who's right. But as soon as a culture starts taking over and putting in values that first of all, Degrove women. Yeah, grossly deteriorate women's rights. Grossly. That's bad. That's when it falls apart. And that's their culture. And you have to understand that they've accepted when they're wearing those traditional headgarbs and body coverings, that's their culture. And they want women to dress like that. And we have to stop that from spreading. Like you should be able to do it if you want to. But the idea that you can take over a town or take over a city, that's a flaw in our system. Because every city should have the same sort of national rights. Every city should have the rights that we have where you can wear whatever you want to wear. Practice whatever religion you want to practice and you shouldn't be persecuted one way or the other. Yeah. But when you get a country like England, it's just let them in. Masks migration. And then you're ignoring the chaos that comes with it. That's not good. And that makes you wonder, are they wanting the society to deteriorate to the point where they can say, hey, we're going to make new laws to protect you. Because you need to protect them. So you have some mass surveillance everywhere, more police on the streets, more people getting arrested. And in England, they're also getting arrested for social media posts. I've asked about that. I've been hearing about that. It's not more than more than Russia. More than Russia and China combined. It seems as if the grab for power is just done in plain sight now. Yeah. And I hate to say this, but they don't have the second amendment. It's part of the problem. Part of the problem is you're not armed. So when shit goes sideways, you don't have a lot of options. And what are you going to do? I'll get together with shovels. What are you going to do? Grandpa's got a bird gun. Let's go grab Grandpa's bird gun. Fuck what we're doing? Get Grandpa's bird again. That's no way to keep the police out of your town. Yeah. It's not good. I think, hopefully, there's enough sensible people where we're going to come out on the other end of this. But it's going to be real hard with this right versus left bullshit. No, well, but not to like, to your own horn here. But voices like yours are really important because you examine a lot of different people. And you've pulled in like almost, I was thinking about the day, like an encyclopedia of different type of people and different types of subject matter where you can type it in a chat sheet between. And I would say, can you tell me about this thing that, and then, oh, would you want to hear to our podcast that Joe did about it with the expert of Suts and Shuts? And that's pretty cool because then it expands people's mind it's much easier than having to go and read about something. You're like, oh, that's an interesting point. Well, I think it's people stimulated. That's great. But the reality is we should be teaching people to think correctly from the time they're young. And I think we're spending way too much time giving them information and not teaching them how to think correctly. And not also giving them something that excites them and giving them something that they can understand why it's important to be interested in something, like why I can benefit you, how can stimulate you, try new things out. Like, oh, this is exciting. I feel better. I feel good. Like, people like tasks. They like that. We should be taught that from the time we're young instead. We're just basically groomed to becoming workers. You know, as interesting as I, so I turned 40 in March. And I decided I was going to take the year off. So essentially 39 to 40, right? Because I've been working head down for 20 years, hadn't looked up. We've been living out of a suitcase, movie to movie to movie to movie, blah, blah, blah, blah. And I thought it would make me, it would give me better perspective. It would maybe whatever, you know, where's the, where am I going in the next 10 years? Kind of my thinking. And I actually got more depressed. So it's like, I want the fun going on. I feel more depressed. And Akana just goes back to just stay busy, get up and do shit. Well, the thing is you're busy, but you're busy doing what you love. And that is a gift. That's a real gift. Yeah. We're both very fortunate in that regard. And anybody who's listening to this that actually does what they love, whatever it is, beaky, being carpentry, you're doing what you love. A gift. That's a real gift. Yeah, we're both very fortunate in that regard and anybody who's listening to this that actually does what they love. Whatever it is, be key being carpentry. You're doing what you love. You're so lucky. Create go out and create. Yeah, take. Yeah, be a creator in anything. Like if you're a plumber, whatever, you know, fix someone's pipes. Yeah, have a purpose and create. Don't take. Oh, there's takers and there's craters. You know, it's like I was actually listening to podcasting. Guys said that and I was like, yep, that's it. If you create your exponentially happier, I think because you're giving societies and benefit to the people that are interacting with you with whatever you're doing. Yeah, and that's good for you for sure. And I think unfortunately, I look, I don't want the responsibility being the guy who gives everybody curious things to think about. I just don't like to do it. No, but you are. You are. I really think that this kind of thinking, the kind of thinking that lets you explore things and gets you interested in things should be in schools. Instead of just forcing fucking history down their throats and math down their throats, give people the tools to be excited about things, show them cool shit. So, so cool shit where they realize that go learning about things is actually really interesting. You know, it just has to be something you're interested in. And then they'll realize like, oh, I can get good at stuff. I can pursue something instead of just being a cog in the wheel. Like most people feel, most people feel like fuck the economy sucks. I just got to get a job. And then then you just get home and you just want to play video games or do something to stimulate yourself because you hate jobs. And then next thing, you know, you're 35 and you don't know what the fuck you're doing and you're stuck. You know, and that's a lot of people, a lot of people listening this right now. It's because they were never instructed how to think about things. They were never instructed to try to find something that you're actually interested in. You're the thing. Get the job. You're curious that curiosity. Whatever it is, man, being a fucking car mechanic, whatever, whatever thing you're interested in, there's got to be a thing. You just got to find that fucking good at anything. Yeah, and that will produce money. It's like the, I also part of the problem is culturally, I think we, we place too much value in like becoming rich and oh, you got to do this. Yeah. And it's like, no, no, hold on. Don't miss the point. Get good at something and you'll, that you love and then that will produce. If you get good enough in anything, you'll make money on it. For sure. But the problem is like with kids, it's everything today. They want it fast, really fast. They want ozempic, right? They don't want to go on a diet. They want get, you know, whatever it is, fill in the blank with whatever thing that they want to get real fast with scams, crypto, anything, they're going to get rich quick. You know, whatever they're going to do to get rich quick because it's like this, this TikTok mind culture where people just want that easy, quick fix in a pill instead of doing the work. When you think about a job or going down a career path like acting for instance, like what you did. First of all, you did it. You would think, oh, great. Clint Eastwood's his dad. He'll help him. No, look at you. I need a worse one. People are like, no, you had to prove that you were a really good actor for a long time for people to go, oh, yeah, this guy's actually really good. Because he's always going to be your Clint Eastwood kid. You know, and then he didn't fucking help you. But like your grind was, I know you. Your grind was years and years and years and years and years and years and years of just fucking hustling and putting in the work. Most people see that and they go, wait, how long is it going to take? What? 40 years? 20 years? What? Like when we talk to comics, that's a big, big thing that comes up in comedy clubs. Like most comedians say a comic is in a really comic till 10 years. 10,000 hour rule, right? I don't know if that's real. There's something to that. There's something to reps for sure. But I think intention as is as important as what the hours are, you know, just the amount of time. Yeah. Like you're just mailing it in in the gym. Yeah. It's not the same as yeah, I'm going to build this or get really good at that. Yeah, 100, especially skills related things. Yeah. Like Jiu Jitsu is a perfect example that Jiu Jitsu. 100% you get better the more you do it. But 1,000% if you drill correctly and you have like mastery of the fundamentals of the texting. It's like you really truly understand like leverage points where you're supposed to be when it's secured, when it's not, when it's a escape, when there's no escape. If you don't understand that, you're just rolling around and just like resisting hard with people and you'll get somewhere. So you won't get nearly as far as you get with focused, really systematic breaking down of techniques. So it's like the 10,000 hour thing is it's there's something to it. The more you do it, the better you'll get. But really it's the intention that you put into each and everything you do. That is as if not more important than the time. Like it's about it's about enthusiasm. It's about enthusiasm and your willingness to like look at it as objectively as possible. And especially if you're like with Jiu Jitsu's a thing, it's like your egos involved because you don't want to get tapped out and you don't want to get humiliated. And so you don't want to try things so you keep a tight game and you never grow. And it's your ego actually holds you back by that. And telling people that it's going to take that long, if you knew how long it would take to get to black belt, you're like, oh, God, it's too much work. Well, also I think the thing you realize as your ego gets stripped from you doing Jiu Jitsu is that you realize like, doesn't matter what level I'm at, there's always going to be a thousand more guys above that level that will still choke me out. And you realize how much how like, you're like, no, I kind of have a pussy. You're like, I'm not, you know, I'm not as tough as I, you know, you know, no, you really know. Why really know because I work for the UFC. Yeah, you know, I'm like, I'm going to always around like every week, a dozens of guys who can kill me. Yeah. And then there's people that can kill them, which is crazy. It's like there's levels to levels, you know, when a guy like, Iliad Taporia knocks out Max Holloway, like, whoa. And then just engage beats up Iliad Taporia, like, whoa. It's like there's so many guys out there. You have to be humble and it's good for you. It's good for you to not be delusional. Yeah. But the, what my point was for young people, they have to get interested in the path. It can't be just the results. And the path is really where you grow and you become something special in life. You have to be on that path for a long ass time and try to keep getting better at it with every, every day, every, every effort you put into it, do it, whatever the fuck you're doing, do it, to try to get better at that thing and eventually successful. Come. You're going to have to manage that success. You're going to have to figure things out. But the most important thing should always be the path. That's true. Yeah. I think that's it in everything and anything you do. If you're making music, if you're writing books, it can't be. I'm going to sell a million copies. It's got to be I need to fucking make this the greatest literature that's ever been read. But I think I also think we need to push because of this whole, like, quick money and, and think the, the morals and codes people have are not taught enough to young people. You know, do the right thing. When you say you're going to do something, be there. When you make a promise, do it, complete it. Don't just, you know, people just are so happy in this culture of, of, you know, whatever fuck them, we can just do whatever we want. It's like, that's fucking terrible behavior to put out to young people. You know, you, you've got to have a code and a value system. That's my dad. I mean, he was so, you know, you make a promise. That's all you have in this life is your word. So it's like, you got to do something. You got to like, it should have been president. Why didn't he run for president? He would have, because he did, because he did politics. He did one, I know he's a mayor of Carmel. Yeah. And then he said, never fucking again. Yeah. It's people like, what? It would have been a fucking president though. I don't know if I would have liked it, though, then it would be my everyone. No, everyone would have come after me for no reason. Bro, you would have been Don, Jr. Jesus. We'd have been in the box, roped up in some crypto scheme. Everybody would hate you. Making billions. Yeah. Jesus, Louise. Yeah. Yeah, politics are dirty. I wouldn't have done it either. I was him. But you know, like when Ronald Reagan ran, a lot of people like, finally, a guy who like is good at acting. I mean, that's kind of what the president is. It's a role. I mean, part of it is a role. Like you're playing a leader and the way you behave, it's like you have, it's very formal. The way you communicate, it's very formal. Yeah. You know, and actors are going to be better at that. You know, like Josh Brolin, that guy could be the president 100%. That dude could kill it as the president. He looks like a president. Did he play a president in the George Bush movie? Yes. That's right. He played Bush. Yeah. He could be president. You know, I know they tried to get the rock to run. Yeah. I think he was thinking about it. Yeah, not much. He told me. For that fog. Or maybe he was just hyping it up. He was kind of, he was telling me he was like, yeah, I'm going to do it. He's very smart with social media. He's a wizard at that stuff. But I think he's too smart to run for president. Yeah. You know, crazy lately. Get that giant ass pro wrestler. Did that guy, he should be our president. At least we know that our president could fuck up all the other presidents. That would be nice. No, that's what I'd like to see. I'd like to see some sort of version. It's like, OK, great. You got to be smart enough. But you also have to maybe do some sort of like fight or some sort of physical like competition because you can't just be, you know, you got to be athletic. You got to be in that would be cool. So we should really show anyways. We should really make them do about seven grams of mushrooms. Anybody wants to be president. I'd be good. You do seven grams of mushrooms. We film it. We're doing in a dark room with infrared cameras or, you know, night vision cameras. For you. Yeah. Yeah. We want to know how well you handle God, but also expand your mind a little bit. Don't be so rigid in your ways, right? Yeah. Well, also I think a lot of those people would benefit from a psychedelic experience because it would just make them realize that like there's a lot more to the world than you can see right in front of your face. And you don't think that until you have it and then you have it and they'll never think any differently again. You're always going to be like, OK, there's a part of this that's not real. Oh, no, I did trust me. I did the, I did five M.E.O. And it was, I mean, I was some life changing stuff. Well, you feel like you're dead when you take that stuff, right? That's the first thing you think like, oh my God, I killed myself. Yeah. Like I'm not around in it. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and I think what was the most powerful thing was when you come back, it's, it felt like seeing the world for the very first time again. Like the first time you saw grass, the first time you saw the sun, the first time you felt the wind. Yeah. I mean, I, I cried, I bald for 45 minutes in my buddy's girlfriend's arms after I did it. Whoa. And I was like, I'm just so good. I'm comfortable after about five seconds of being a gay scout. Like a crime and couch. Why are you hugging my girlfriend, bro? You had some faster. Get off her. But it was powerful. And well, you're, you're, you're all ego is completely shattered after that stuff. You're probably what you're thinking of who you're hugging. You just want to hug a human. Yeah. And it's the, the feeling of it is so like you're a part of everything in the universe. And there is no, there's no, like particular destination. It doesn't exist. You're a part of everything all at once. It's a very strange feeling. And no one ever, has ever done that and go, I didn't think it was a big deal. Like everybody who does this, like wow. Yeah. Like I've known, I know a few, uh, prominent right wing people that have done it. They were completely changed their life. Yeah. A couple of them don't even talk about it. So I don't want to mention any names. Yeah. But then they want to talk to me about it. And they're like, yeah. So I'm, I'm a different person now. Like whoever I used to be, I'm not that guy anymore. Like that's, that's, because once you know, once you know that you really are a part of the whole universe and it's like all the molecules, everything, everywhere is connected. There is no space. There's no space between anything. Everything is filled with something. Yeah. It's all a soup. It's a giant soup of energy and vibration and it kind of made, kind of, actually made me sad for the people who will never try it and are so dealing with so much pain or dealing with such a rigid thinking or whatever it is that it could help them. And I was like, oh man, that, that is sad. The rigid thinking is a big one. It's interesting that it's becoming much more accepted to talk about. You know, I see like grown adults who are very successful, who run businesses and they talk about psychedelics. And when I was young, when people talked about magic mushrooms or anything like that, it was always like you were a fool. You were a crazy person who wanted to like trip and see things that weren't there. It was never like you were trying to expand your consciousness. And you were trying to just enrich your experience in life and have a better perspective and ego death and all those things that people are trying to do and be more connected to God. But now it's commonly discussed. It comes up all the time. So the public's perception on this has really radically shifted it in my lifetime. And I think it's because of the internet. I think it's really, it really started to change where I heard people talking about it in the early 2000s. And it was even before social media because there was a bunch of articles that were written and a bunch of people were talking about positive psychedelic experiences and people were talking about how it helped them quit heroin and people were talking about all these different things that were connected to mushrooms in particular. But then all the parents McKenna stuff that he was talking about DMT and LSD and a bunch of different psychedelics that have helped him. And so all this stuff started getting out there and then YouTube. And with YouTube and with podcasts, then people really started hearing about different people like Michael Pollan. And you're like, wow, Michael Pollan is a very respected journalist. Like what is he talking about? He's running a book about psychedelics called Change Your Mind. Like what? And so it's now where rational, intelligent, educated people are free to talk about it. And they often do. And so that's just a loan gives me hope because I feel like that's a, that's a big change and how people view something. Well, was it? And I don't, I don't exactly know the history of it. But I've heard, was there alcohol lobbyists that we're trying to kind of suppress weed use this? I mean, that's where a lobby has did it also go to psychedelics as well where they haven't yet. No. Well, I'm sure they are leaning in the direction of it not being legalized. But the problem with alcohol and marijuana is that places that do have a legal marijuana, you see a diminished alcohol intake. Sure. The diminished alcohol intakes measurable. It's like they cost the money. Yep. It's real. You also have the darker thing, which is prison lobbies. Yeah. They lobby prison guards unions. They lobby. There's a bunch of people that lobby to make marijuana laws, keep them on the tricks so they can keep locking people up. Sure. Because that's a massive business, right? Yeah. Their businesses, keeping people in cages, which is really fucking crazy. Yeah. That's pretty. It's really crazy that someone who's in the business of locking people up can actually lobby to make sure more people get locked up. And get locked up for something that no violent crime. Yeah. And especially marijuana. Like most Americans don't think that you that it should be illegal. It's a large number. It's like more than 70% I think. Like what was the what's what amount of Americans think that marijuana should be legal? Let's see if there's a poll. Put that into perplexity. See what the the universe says. I would say it's about 67% of Americans think marijuana should be legalized. Legalized. Yeah. What do you think about it? It's all drugs being legal. It's a tough argument because for sure you're going to lose some people. If you make all drugs legal, look, if they may drugs legal right now, I'm not going to go by heroin. I'm not buying fentanyl. All right. I'm not I'm not into meth. I'm not interested. If I could go to the pharmacy and pick up meth, I'm not going to pick it up. But some people will 70%. 70% of Americans say marijuana should be legal in general, according to recent Gallup poll. If you include people who support either medical or recreational legalization, it's 88 to 89%. US Delta marijuana should be legal at least some form with only about 11% wanting it to be completely illegal. And those people need to try it. So look, I'm actually pot never agreed well with me. And I think I have, I always I got a little scared and paranoid sometimes where I was like, maybe I have like a propensity to like some sort of schizophrenia or something. I was like, ooh, I don't this isn't. I was like, I don't like this. This made me kind of go Skype, it was schematic and so did it just make you scared or did it like distort reality for you in a way that was no, I don't I don't know if it to store reality. It's just got my brain, you know, got my brain so freaked out about things that were out of my control. All right. Now I can see why because like, you know, the mushrooms, they make you face some things that you're going on in your life. Yeah. And I think that's healthy. I don't know. Podge is never agreed with me. I think what I like about it is when it wears off. I like, I like that fear. I like, like Joey Diaz says, uh, go meet the devil. I think there's some benefit to freaking out because then it calms down and you have more perspective. But I think what's going on is you really can't think about all the threats of the world and all the problems in the world and all the things you can go wrong in your life. You can't think about those in a regular basis. You got to kind of put your blinders on and keep on trucking. Sure. And then marijuana's like, what's that in the corner of the room that you're scared of? And you're like, oh, but I will say, as you know, important, like before the frontal cortex is like fully developed because it is some danger for young men specifically. Yes. Right. Yes. And schizophrenia and like, you know, some stuff that can come if you're not. I think that's with anything. Right. Yeah. I don't know much alcohol. It's just schizophrenia, but it's really bad for brain development, especially young people that smoke regularly. It's not good for you. It's just not good for you. And I know that's hard for people to hear because they want to get high. Just trust me. If you're getting high all the time when you're 14 years old, it's going to fuck your head up. Yeah. It's not good for you. It's just not good for your brain development. And it's one of the most important things about you as a human being is your ability to think well. It's very important. 100% if you're an operating system. Don't don't screw it up before it has a time to like it. And just for he's in hahas because your board and math class, you want to get high all the time. You know, I mean, people have done it and got away with it. And they're okay, but a lot of people have not. And you don't want to sabotage your whole life just because everybody you know is getting high. It's just not worth it. And that also goes with alcohol. There's young people that are like 14, 15 years old that are getting drunk four, five times a week. Like don't do it, man. I'm telling you, it is fucking bad for the development of your brain. Whatever you're putting. Look, maybe you have a very high potential. Maybe your brain, maybe you're always going to be smart and you're going to be fine. But I guarantee you where if you're getting drunk all the time and getting high all the time, wherever you would be is not where you are. You might be still a very high intellect, still very smart. You would have been smarter. Your brain would have function better. You would have probably had a better perspective. It's not good for you. Yeah. And, you know, we glamorize it for kids. Like the kids at parties drinking, having a good time. It's fucking bad for you. Don't do it. Yeah. We can't. You also can't tell them don't drink because if you tell them, don't drink, they just want to drink. It's more. Yeah. And I kind of think it's all in them. Well, Europe tends to have like a better. It seems as a whole. I'm sure they have their problems too, but it seems better. Yeah. You know, there is into it, right? Have a little, like less is more without like with anything actually less is more. Yeah. It's not forbidden. Yeah. So you can have a glass of wine with your family when you're 11, 12 years old, you know, it's not the big deal. That Protestant culture we have is very rigid. Don't do this or you're going to die and create drug addicts and hoes. People just want to not listen to their parents. There's what to do something that's fucking dead. Like whatever you're doing, I'm doing the opposite because you are fucking annoying. And you've been the bane of my existence. As soon as I get out of this house, I'm smoking crack. You dad. You know what you're talking about. So to get back to your question, um, the problem with legalization is you're going to have a bunch of people that do drugs that wouldn't do drugs normally. Because it's legal. What about when you're of age? Like I don't call it 25. Yeah, but even then you're going to have a bunch of people that don't like their life and just decide to go to the corner store and pick up some heroin. However, what you're not going to do is empower the drug cartels and organize crime. And that's what we're doing now. So in one way or another, people are going to get drugs. So how are they going to get drugs during prohibition? Well, they're going to get drugs from criminals. That's what they've always done. That's what they did during the alcohol prohibition. So what people do and when you've got a multi billion dollar industry, maybe trillion dollar industry right next door to us, which is Mexico. And they just bring it through, bring it through. Like what do we do? Are we empowering them or would you rather have it legal and have a substantial portion of those profits block out everything that comes in illegally, have a substantial amount of those profits put to rehabilitation and treatment. So yeah, I was also thinking from a quality perspective to like you're like, hey, that's cool. We get it. People are going to do this, but we're going to monitor and make sure it is what it says it is. Yeah. Look, alcohol is legal. There's a lot of people that don't drink. They don't like it. They don't like the way it makes them feel. They don't like the way it makes them act. They say stupid things. They feel like shit in the morning. They don't drink. That will be the same with cocaine. That will be the same with heroin. However, there's some people that are alcoholics and alcohol is legal. And it's everywhere. And these people will hit bars and get fucked up every night and their life is going to be a mess. They're going to die of liver poisoning. Yeah. That's normal too. It's very unfortunate, but you can't nerf the world. Yeah. And you're going to like trust a little bit that yeah, it would be really hard to sell to America that cocaine, heroin and meth are now all legal. It would be really hard to sell to them. Yeah. But I think ultimately it probably would be better for us. Yeah. All those other things. Those are less troublesome. You know, not a lot of people are dying from MDMA, but to people definitely abuse it. And they're just addicted to it. They're doing it all the time. Apparently that whole thing about making holes in your brain is bullshit. Oh, right. Yeah. That was a campaign. Well, I think it was probably just some internet or shit. That's what's fine. Now what it does. MDMA does MDMA cause holes in your brain. Put that in there. See what perplexity has to say. Well, they they prove that doesn't get a couple of therapy. Right. That was the impetus of the whole thing. This episode is brought to you by Zippra Cruder when you hire a landscaper to create your perfect outdoor oasis. You want someone who cares. That's true for every role you hire for. And luckily it just got easier to find that thanks to Zippra Cruder. Try it for free at zippracruder.com slash Rogan. Long time listeners, you might already know that Zippra Cruder uses powerful matching technology to find qualified candidates fast. But now they also have a new feature that shows you candidates who are interested in your role first. You can even hear why in their own words. Fine candidates who really want your job on Zippra Cruder. Four out of five employers who post on Zippra Cruder get a quality candidate within the first day. Try it for free at zippracruder.com slash Rogan. That zippracruder.com slash Rogan. Meet your match at Zippra Cruder. Well, I know they do use it for couples therapy, but it's also really good for soldiers with PTSD. And that's what maps has done with their studies. That's the big focus their studies as PTSD with the MDMA. There's something about MDMA's the empathy that it gives you, the compassion that gives you. Let's you drop a lot of things through in your head. No, MDMA does not literally punch holes in the brain that which show up as empty gaps on a scan. But a high or repeated doses can get damaged serotonin neurons and alter brain signaling, especially with heavy use. So the holes where the holes idea come from anti drunk companies popularized dramatic brain scan images that were described as showing holes, but these were actually areas of reduced activity or reduced binding of certain markers, not physical gaps in brain tissue. Still, that sounds bad. Reduced activity, reduced binding of certain markers. That sounds terrible. I chalk up all this. It's like moderation to everything. Yeah. Less of everything. It's like, I disagree with some people that really trust, you know, you know, what's his name? Dr. Paul Saladin. Does it tell the carnivore doctor? Yeah. I really like most of what he says, but he's like, don't drink. And it's like, well, maybe it's also it's maybe a pretty nice type of glass of wine. It's nice to laugh with friends. Yeah. And it's nice. Like that's important to in life. And I think balance. We can you tip the scale one way if you're totally extreme. And then you're just like the social life and you're, you know, I can't, you know, go out and like, you know, really enjoy yourself for a second. Yeah. Moderation. Moderation. And you're absolutely right about social life being. What loneliness kills people quicker than anything else? 100%. Yeah. People that are lonely, they have, they die younger than people who smoke cigarettes. That's not crazy. Wow. That's bad for you. Yeah. It's being lonely is actually bad for you. Feeling bad is bad for you. I mean, it seems like it should be, right? It's bad. Feels bad. Probably bad for you. Feeling good is good for you. So a little tipsy with your friends or your lavender. I love you. I love you too, bro. It's great. It's great. It's great for people. Yeah. You're going to feel like shit. Take your electrolics. Take your, take your electrolytes. Drink a lot of water. Back in the fucking sauna. Yeah. Don't do it every day. Don't do it every day. Get an IV. Dave Chobell taught me that trick. When I was touring with Dave, all he would do is like after shows they would just get IVs. He would get a vitamin IVs in the morning. They would did it all the time to big bags of glutathione to deal with alcohol. Yep. Yep. You'd go into like, Dave would have a room. You go into the room to be like, eight of us there. all hooked up to IV bags, talking shit. It was fun. That sounds good. But it's smart. Like that's how you counteract the fact that, look, he takes a lot. There's a lot of benefit, particularly for his job, right? Like Dave's job is being silly and pointing out ridiculous aspects of our society. What better way to do that than to be talking shit with your friends, with a couple drinks and imagine all the things you would have missed. Yeah. It wouldn't have been in your comedy that wouldn't have been in your life. Yeah. You've just, I gotta go home now. Yeah. It's eight o'clock. I gotta go home. You're like, no, that's boring. Exactly. You become a boring person too. But there's also balance. Sometimes you have to realize like, I've done this dance before. I gotta get up at six. Yeah. See you guys. Yep. There's good to that too. It's like you have to have discipline, but you also have to have the ability to cut loose. And it's hard. It's hard to balance those things out. You know, like you're saying about vitamin, it's like, I'm get off the boat, I'm on the boat, you know, like that. It's like there's some things that should be non-negotiable. And for me, there's two. There's nutrition and exercise. Those are non-negotiable. Yep. All the other things I'll fuck around with in terms of like their old bonus, right? Yeah. Yeah. Bose rounds. You have to get cardio. You have to hit weights. Not a stretch. You got to get good sleep. Yeah. I have to do the workout stuff just for my brain. Like above the body stuff. It's great to keep the body healthy. And I'm very aware of that. And I think about that as well. But for me, it's my brain. When I have a nice, good, hard workout day, I'm so easy going. I'm so free. Do you have ADHD? Oh, yeah, for sure. Okay. Sam, I think everybody does anybody is any good at anything. Has it? Every ADHD guy thinks everyone has it. I think it's I think it's a superpower. No, I do too. I always tell people and you're probably dyslexic. No, no, not dyslexic. Yeah. Okay. Cause that goes. Everyone has it. I think it's I think it's a superpower. No, I do too I always tell people and and you're probably dyslexic. No, no, no, no, no, okay Because that goes hand in hand quite often yeah, and and are you dyslexic? I'm dyslexic and also explaining to me what you see when you like see text I jump oh I jump so you know you need to go left to right. Uh-huh my brain starts and then jumps and then it goes in regardless of the subject matter Like if you think if you're reading about something really interesting does it do the same thing? Yeah, and now it just takes a tense focus for me to read and once I get in a good rhythm I can get going I can train my brain to read better hmm, but When I'm not focused or there's other things going on I jump and then my brain has a really tough time So I get tired very easily and then it's like oh, and I get you know I get a little frustrated tired and then I fall asleep hmm Like that I do fall asleep if I try to read at night But I don't have a hard time reading so I don't have the dyslexic thing But I've had friends that have it. I don't understand I'm like so you see it right and you're going through it But what is going on when you're brain where it's making you jump back and forth? I don't know I think it's just losing focus. I don't I don't know in regardless of the like it could be the most important thing You've ever read You know like what if you just like won the lottery you got a piece of paper in the mail Oh, I'm reading that this one five billion dollars and you're like wait a minute do I owe five billion? What does that say I can't read this read this for me? Yeah, no, I don't yeah It's just I don't know if it's about it's about the text messages are cool Yeah, I mean all it's all it just it's harder and now you know it like when I grew up They didn't give any sort of special treatment to that now it's almost mandatory in schools Right if you're dyslexic they give you more time for test taking they give you more time for reading they have you know Teachers that will help with the dyslexia. There's tools you can use now Yeah, so I got kind of bone Do you have something here? This is something weird could be related? I've been seeing this a lot online and I'm very curious about this People are saying there's a link between ADHD symptoms, I guess we'll call it a histamine levels in your body and I brought this up on the screen. It's not on shown for everybody But there's something that pops up about it. There is some studies to it and what I've been seeing is this link people are taking Zertech and Pepsi-Dac together which creates some sort of histamine receptor blocking Interests where I'm like I don't it blocks histamine receptors located in the blood vessels airway and skin and reducing allergic Responses sinus congestion so they're saying that it's it's a reaction to histamine That's that's the mixture of Zertech is there are texts more like allergies There are ones into that Pepsi-Dac is like acid and you know I wonder if there are there's different things that they're talking about when they're saying ADHD I could see people being easily distracted But when I say ADHD the people that I know that haven't usually there's one or two things in their life that they can really Fucking focus on you know whether it's playing golf or whatever it is a thing that you do where you could just focus on that Yeah, but other stuff you're just scatterbrained and you can't and they'll say all you have ADHD You know or you know you're thinking a million things at once you can't focus That's what they always call ADHD, but everyone I know that has that it's always whether or not they're interested in the thing Sure as soon as they find the thing they're interested in they can lock in for fucking 12 hours and forget to eat well You know some some people when pressure Sorry to get you off When like you squeeze people they either excel or they fold right when you squeeze typically I excel So I don't know it where that comes from but when you put the pressure on I mean That's why maybe you know I can do the job I do. It's like there's 200 people looking at you right ready I'm not seeing you got it yourself to tears or it's emotional. It's like you squeeze Some people are good at it. Yeah, but it's also you had to be good at it because you didn't have a backup plan You know, that's also part of it. It's like you know your dad wasn't gonna help you out You really were out there like if you want to make it in anything you have to be able to perform Like no matter what it is if you're a lawyer when you're in court You have to perform you have to be able to like keep your shit together and execute That's your job relies on that and if you're a focused person you recognize that and you work hard to make sure that you focus And that you can execute when it's important. It's like People that avoid things that make them uncomfortable They never develop that skill and that's very unfortunate because it's one of the most important skills You could ever have with anything it's being able to Focus and being able to perform under pressure. It's very important. Yeah, and we're missing that in life You know, we don't have these life or death moments like that our ancestors had all the time or some fucking villagers are sneaking up Over the hill and you spot them and you run back to the fucking camp and you grab the bows and arrows and you Yeah, go to war like we don't have that so we don't have like Like a constant checking of whether or not your pressure system is functional. Yeah I mean to bring it to this movie that I've got coming out tomorrow. It's a World War II movie Lucky strike. I'll say the name plug it That generation of men Had that right because they I mean world war II. I talked to my dad about it What it was like he was only like 12 years old when World War II was going on But he says he remembers listening to the radio and everyone in the family listening like you could hear pens and needles Because it was we didn't know what was gonna happen I mean people were scared for their life even back home in America They didn't know what was gonna happen and that I think is why that generation of men and women are just from a different breed Yeah, you know and you know you've set up before on your podcast. It's like the hard hard men You know great easier times easier times great. It's like the cycle that we're in it. It's It's um, yeah, I don't know. It's uh, I don't know. I think we need a little bit of that We need a little hard harder men 100% well, we need to stop Using this term toxic masculinity. No, there's criminal behavior like yeah toxic masculinity is a guy who beats people up and robs people and rapes Yeah, that's toxic. My that's criminal behavior. Yep. Okay masculine behavior is not it's protective masculine behavior is a guy who gets things done provides for his family Takes care of people you can call on them two o'clock in the morning because you need a favor or you stuck on the side of the road Like yep, although it shit is important. Yeah, strong people are good It's it's good to have strong people like in this idea that somehow another strength is bad for societies like really crazy It's like you know, it's did the strength needs to be channeled correctly And that's why I think we have to encourage more people to exercise and I would say for men You should at least try martial arts 100% it's so good for your brain It's so good for your confidence. It's so good. You're your humility and you're also your understanding of like your vulnerability So many people are fucking delusional I've seen so many drunk people that don't know how to fight start fights and you like do you want to die? Are you trying to die? You're gonna you're gonna run into some fucking guy who knows how to fight and he's gonna hit you in the face And you're gonna bounce your head off the fucking concrete. You're gonna die. Yep, so stop stop doing this But that delusional comes from not being around Test it all the time. Yeah, not sharpened. Yeah. Yeah Having experience knowing what it actually is and it's dangerous and you should you should do some dangerous things in your life It's probably good for you. It's good to experience a little bit of fear. It's good to be nervous. It's like You got to grow and we are We're in a society where people just want relaxation. They want comfort They want entertainment and they just want to be sedentary and that is fucking terrible for our mental health Coincidentally we're in a mental health crisis where a giant percentages of people who act that way Who are sedentary and overweight not taking care of themselves are mentally ill You said something that was interesting the being scared being really scared and pushing through that thing whatever it is Yeah, for me when I you know it was it's been martial arts, but it's also been surfing oh yeah And you know being scared for your life on big days and going through that and getting to the other side You've never been calmer you've never been more Zanned with nature and clear in your mind about and Happy because you've accomplished something you pushed your boundaries you kept pushing them and pushing them pushing them how old we when you started surfing I was young 810 oh wow yeah, I mean you know where it was like and and you know at first It's you know these waves scare you and then it's you know the bigger than the room scare you and and you go through these Kind of can be only you feel like life and death experience if you You know if you push if you're pushing yourself. Have you ever had a shark situation? I've seen sharks but never in a way that's That's been like oh my god. I'm a bro if I saw a shark. That would be oh my god I'm on a styrofoam fucking yeah You'll well say well there's a difference between between You know seeing a shark Further away or seeing a shark on a boat Or seeing a shark you know isn't gonna hurt you. What are you talking about? You have a conversation with the shark bro? We're not right. No, but look you spent you spent as much time in the water You spend a much time in the water as is you know the surfer of done their whole life You you kind of understand what what sharks are gonna hurt you. What's going on here? Jamie great white talking about a border Sloskey oh great Good Lord, do they even know what's happening? It's not here that way. Oh my god. How do they not see that Finn? Not looking behind them. Oh my god. They didn't even see it. That's great. Are you sure? This is a nai? Oh, it's ABC news Wow, but I don't actually don't think there's any more sharks. I think there's more cameras You know, there's just more people with drones and cameras seeing them well There has been heightened shark activity in some places where people are for sure I think particularly in Northern California I think in North. Yeah, yeah, well Australia a lot of how man there they seem to be angry over there too Like their sharks are angry They're fucking their crocodiles are angry. They fuck people up. I Was reading about this guy who was the first guy to die in an alligator attack in Texas since 1830 something and the story is I don't know if this is true Jamie pull this up see if it's true The guy's name supposedly Rest in peace Tommy Tommy Woodward. He was drinking with some friends in a marina in orange Texas when he decided to swim in Adams Bayou people warned him about a massive Alligator that had been seen in the water his friend pointed out near the dock and his response was fuck that gator That was the last thing he said And then they killed the gator killed him. He was the first guy killed from an alligator in Texas since 1836 yeah, you don't swim in the bayou if there's the bad guys one of the most Texas fucking things that anybody's ever said Fuck that gator right before he died His probably drunk is respecting nature drunk as fuck He jumped at a water fuck that gator is a wild thing to say before the gator eats you and that's you know humility got to have a little humility Tommy Tommy don't say fuck that gator Here it is man mocks alligator jumps of water and is killed Oh, this is recent no no 2015 so what is the story? What does it say? He said fuck that gator in this article Fuck that guy so there's a sign that's posted. It says no swimming alligators and Anybody went oh yeah, it said he removed his shirt removed his bill fold Someone shouted warning and he said blank that gator blank the alligators Fuck me. That's a fuck. Oh, I think they blanched. Why didn't they just write F dash dash dash Jumped in the water and almost immediately yelled for help. I could have been with the guy actually quoted even though he You know, he was in quoting and maybe he doesn't feel like standing at work right right right right Yeah Immediately yelling for help is crazy Oh No bueno. Yeah, I was in Florida a couple years back. We went alligator hunting and They hear everywhere like it's kind of disconcerting. We were in the Everglades like in there There's a ranch so we can go hunt alligators. It is There everywhere is Not hard to find them they're fucking all over the place Like it's how many of them are there that you don't see is the real question It's a weird feeling because I thought like it would be like hunting elk like you got to go find them like would be glass and forum Where's the elk go over the next ridge do you hear anything somebody make a call? Yeah, you hear that out there? No, no, no, no, there's there's one. Oh, there's one. Oh, there's one. Oh, here's one or here's a dead one Here's one one another alligator killed. They're fucking look at this. No, thanks dinosaurs. Where's this? This is guys tent. Yeah Oh got bro run. Yeah, get that video off. What is I've seen this as you listen like Brazil? I think so I think this is in Brazil. I think this guy guys. Oh fuck all that look all the eyes Oh, I see that Oh my god That's terrifying So they must all come out of the water at night and this dude put his tent there I'll have to five on this or oh my god, dude that is insane That's insane. You know they're all hungry. Is that many of them? How many deer can they eat? You know They're not small at all dude. They're all could eat you fuck all that But the weird feeling about Florida being there was the just the sheer numbers of them And then knowing how many pythons there are and you I didn't see any pythons, but I go How many do you guys see pythons that are bro? Like occasionally you'll be just driving you'll see something making this way across the road and it's 15 feet long No, thank you like a fucking football players thigh. I don't mess with that. So I don't I'm I would weigh rather be in the water with sharks Because at least you can you can you know you can open your head. You can you can you can you can you can a tree if you're out in the woods But in the bayou I don't know man. It's three swamps Yeah, don't go in the water water there. Yeah, but outside of the water. I would weigh rather be on ground If you're like if you have you know distance and you've gone you have a lot of things When you're in the water with a shark you're fucked me you can barely move Well, you can actually if you if you they're really deterrent by if you touch their nose So if they're coming at you and you poke them hit their nose They're usually gonna turn for real. Yeah, have you done this? Come up you don't flip your legs and scream In front of him yeah, pop them on the nose pop them I've heard that before I've heard punch them. I'm like what are you talking about? Yeah, here it says pop the nose a punch a shark in the face save this hollow Hawaiian surfer I'm okay. It's not good either way. You don't want to be in the water with an angry shark well in Florida They don't have as many shark problems, but they do have bull sharks And I was watching this video. There's these guys that go fishing I guess is the keys and they go off of this giant bridge and it's like real far to the water So they have to have this like gaff system where they drop a line down and they gaff the fish and then have to pull it up They're catching these tunas and they never get them to the to the bridge They're just getting destroyed by sharks sharks all over the place down there. Yeah, bull sharks are real dangerous because they They'll keep attacking whereas a lot of sharks bite out of you know Misconfusion right there. They sort of think you're a seal or something Yeah, and then they bite another yeah, okay bull sharks. They'll just keep coming They're like little chihuahuas like pit bulls. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, fuck those things. They catch them a lot now. What is going on with this guy? We'll start skating at the tuna. Oh really? The video Well, this guy's actually in the water the guys that I've seen is this in the keys as well said big sharks circling I thought I was gonna be a little more exciting than this. Oh man, imagine you're pulling a fish in you see a shark You like you just take it take the fish Jesus Christ But a lot of guys that they pulled them in they're cutting half, you know Oh, yeah, so you can they bull shark fish down there now you can catch bull sharks every day They're trying to reduce the population because apparently it's a very high population They'll you know bull sharks are the reason why jaws was made. Do you know the the original story behind jaws? No, I know that the inspiration was actually Bull shark attacks in freshwater on a river in New Jersey So bull sharks are one of the weird sharks that can live in fresh water and yeah, right? Is this the thing in 1916? Yeah, so this is the they caught that bull shark and they killed I think two people right? series of shark attacks four people were killed and one critically injured and since occurred during a deadly summer heat wave and polio epidemic in the United States had drove thousands of people to seaside resorts in the Jersey Shore So They think it's a bull shark. It says there's a bit of debate, but it's in fresh water 40th anniversary jaw screening in that bay and people sat in the water Also natural selection But they've found bull sharks as far north as Illinois. Oh, yeah up the river says yeah, they make their way up the river That's scary. That's crazy. It's the most aggressive shark and they found them in freshwater I think that dude that used to have that show river monsters. Remember that guy. Oh, yeah, I remember the show. Yeah, the guy Just caught fish all the time like the craziest redneck. No, it wasn't a redneck. It was actually a good Educated guy with a foreign accent. Where was he from river monsters? Yeah, I mean, I remember the show I just don't I don't know if I ever watched it and just were seeing what's it? The river monsters guy the guy with a gray hair He was a fisherman Jeremy Wade's is that's his day. Yeah. Where's he from? He's not from America, right? There you go. Yeah, British biologist I think he did an episode on the bull sharks I think there was one of those where they were trying to catch him in freshwater They realized like these things they go way up the rivers. Yeah, wait and they can live in freshwater unlike all the regular sharks Yeah, I think maybe some of them can but I think most of them have to be in salt water like great whites stuff like that But they do I mean they've tagged great whites and they go around the world I mean you think they would if they thought you know historically that they stayed in certain temperature of waters and certain migrating patterns, but they found them all over. Yeah, my daughter got really into megalodon's at one point in time So we really started like researching megalodon. She got a dog hunting. No, not really you know what? I mean for the oh no, we're they just got one online, but you you start watching documentaries on megalodons and you know And then there's the people that think the megalodons might still be out there Okay, probably not but either way like the fact that that thing actually exists You know shark the size of a whale They're fucking everything up. Yeah, like you you wouldn't be surfing if there was megalodons. Would you? I probably still would I mean I mean I don't know I mean It's not a bad way to die. I guess You'll suffocate and get digested Yeah, they're doing something you love. Yeah, that's good story I guess for other people. I mean it'd be pretty quick. You know what's worse. What's worse? You live this crazy long life and you're in bed for the last Five to seven years of your life and you're hurting and you're like dealing with cancer or this that we're just bam Get it by a shark. I don't know. I think kind of yeah, I could see it I guess But still the instinct to stay alive is so strong. Yeah, when I'm 100 years old and in my bed New drug you're gonna bring me back to life Yeah, they probably will be able to do that too. It was gonna get real weird If they really can take old people like I was watching this video where they were talking about human skin cells And at least in a lab they've been able to take human skin cells and take like 60 year-old skin cells and make them 20 again Yeah, that's gonna be really weird. Well, I just don't hear here's a thing like I'm all about living the best version of your life being as healthy as you can Maybe not for like that whatever you get like being optimal But isn't kind of the most beautiful thing about life is that it is finite Yeah, that it's like people say I'm gonna live forever. It's like I don't know if I want to live forever Yeah, no, there's something to that man Have you seen this trailer for this movie called white whale fall actually Josh Brolin happens to be mentioned him earlier What happens? My whale no way. It's in the trailer. So it's not spoiler and it's about him surviving Is it real? Just kidding. I don't believe it's all been through that things because it's not in the whales mouth Oh, the whale eats them all this scuba diving. Oh, Jesus, and then the rest of the movie is about Get now get now. I guess. Well, how long does he stay inside the whale's body? Real complex why in 95 minutes. I bet he's 85 to 95 minutes inside with his scuba tank inside the whales body This is bananas. Oh my god. I just keep swallowing it. I mean, that's what the movie. Oh God damn it. Is that real? Is that a new movie? Oh my god. I saw the trailer recently And I was just remember thinking of it talking about it. It might be awesome or the dumbest movie that's ever been made. I can't decide Yeah, I don't know what do you do if you have a knife to try to carve your way out of the whale. Yeah Rasty, you have to have a knife. Yeah, you would but how much time would it take you to carve your way out of a whale? Forever you're gonna run out of air if you have the scuba tank and you have a knife Do you really think you can get through a whale and how much? I'm gonna take it to go to fish But it's not a fish. It's a fucking bus You're very motivated. That's true. It's just true, but you got to get through rib cages. I don't know if that's a thick enough plot to have a whole movie This is the big one. We're green lightness. Is it this is our jaws? Oh, God the business sometimes just that's so bad. How long will it take you to carve your way out of a whale? Well, he puts sperm whale and he's got less than an hour of oxygen. Oh So that's you got it Time another time. You don't got a call you call through 80 feet. I think if you kept cutting it up it might throw up If you keep cutting the inside of his tongue just kept slashing and all that he might just throw you up Yeah, but yeah, he might recognize or something wrong Like you would like if something was if you put something in your mouth and start biting your tongue you'd be like You try to get rid of it. I would imagine the whale would do that too. I just start fucking up his tongue There you go also to keep you from getting digested just stab him and just pull yourself forward And I'm gonna get you have an exit plan. You've got a plan You're not gonna cut your way out. I just think there's too much bone. I don't think you're gonna make through it through that bone unless you go through I don't even know where you would go like the neck. I could figure out how to get through on an elk I'll go that way. I would go where the holes are there's holes back here where the you know the guts are and there's holes up here You know like where you'd shoot him if you're shooting a frontal they're not gonna cast you in this movie They're like though he's getting out too quick. I don't think I'm getting out quick I think I'm dying of nowhere. I don't think I'm gonna make it. Let's look at the anatomy of a sperm out here You're gonna be wearing it. Okay See I want to get out through the neck see right there. That's where I want to get out but all that stuff Yeah, but you're not it's gonna take too long for you to get through all those You go right to the sphincter and just like you know open the little hole. Yeah, just convince him to digest quickly No, there's too much traveling, okay, you're gonna want to you're gonna want to go through where you came in You don't want to go through the intestines up right there. No, and also you're dealing with asses They're gonna burn and I think you want to cut through the front So I think as he's swallowing you you got to dig in and you got to make your way through the bottom of his jaw You got to start cutting and maybe you get out But let me just read let this movie we need to find out. Yeah some crazy person Maybe it's really good Josh Brolin's in it. It's probably kills it actually Great, pretty popular. Well like near-term. It's best feeling novel. Oh my god sounds like a pretty good story Say me to move you out. There was a whale they spotted fairly recently that had a harpoon in it from the 1800s. Oh Wow, yeah, that's alive. Yeah, it was alive Yeah, and it had this harpoon embedded in it soon you find that story. That's a wild might be dismissed Instagram foreshit Okay, seven but yeah fairly recently I remember that they found this whale and they recognized that the harpoon was from the 1800s Yeah, 2007 native Alaskan Whalers near Borrow Alaska made a remarkable discovery of 50 foot bowhead whale found with a metal fragment of a late 19th century bomb lance an explosive harpoon embedded in its neck the artifact traced to new Bedford, Massachusetts the explosive harpoon was patented in 1879 and manufactured in the late 1880s So the whales age by survival surviving the initial attack whale lived for over a century with the metal tip lodge safely in its neck a thick blubber The extraordinary survival story helped biologists prove that bowhead whales can live for a hundred to over 200 years Did the whale get shot near Massachusetts or did they travel to Alaska with that device? That's a good question Well, they were probably wailing in Massachusetts a lot So they probably like made good tech like East Coast manufacturing and then they probably shipped it off to Alaska There's not as many people up there. So they probably didn't have as much Manufacturing so imagine they just in the 1870s Yeah, they would ship things by train they would ship things by train of boats into the eight Yeah, I mean they always had that they always had trade You know you could always ship things not easy But if you wanted to get guns like say if there was You know if the army was in California in the 1800s they had to get guns and they would get the guns shipped to them Yeah, they do the carry the guns with them as they made their way across the country or they can get them shipped to them Yeah, I went to a Shout-a-Movian Iceland. Oh God 20 feels like 20 years. I think it was 20 years ago What was it? the movie yeah, it was called flags of our fathers and it was also World War II and you know the Wailing sort of trade was it's not wasn't looked at in the same way. I think Americans Like look at wailing they're like, oh my god. How dare you they look at its normal. Yeah, yeah It's it was really interesting that it's day alive. Yeah, yeah, and it's like what where do you draw the line? It's everyone's got this like oh you can't kill this, but I can have my Dude to live in my car Wailing is on the menu. Yeah, cuz you need to stay alive like especially way back in the day Yeah, there was not a lot of resources in Iceland. Mm-hmm. You know They have a fermented shark dish in Iceland that It's very popular that Bourdain told me was the single most fucking disgusting thing he's ever eaten Really and it's a delicacy like they all love it. See if you could find this fermented shark thing that we got That whale is Interesting question kind of like what I asked. It's a it was even older There's like another problem is that that device would have been used up by 1890. It says because they were very popular I don't know how Specifically what I've gotten in that whale interesting says what you don't know is if some Yankee Wheeler had a harpoon made in 1830 traded to an Inuit and then the Inuit or his offspring used it 40 years later But because the bomb lance was patented and stocks were used up quickly Boxed up box dose and his colleagues identified a narrow window Which they believe the whale was shot somewhere between 1885 and 1895 Biologists in Alaska will now try to verify the estimate by examining the lens of the whale's eyes. Whoa Whales generally become cloudy their eyes become cloudy as the age Found only in Arctic waters the bowhead was in danger of being hunted to extinction at the turn of the century But bounce back after demand for whale-born whale-bone core sets plummeted Holy shit, dude Danger being hunted to extinction at the turn of the century but bounce back after demand for whale-borne Whale-bone core sets plummeted. Holy shit dude That was it whale-bone core sets were killing all the Imagine the whales like why are they killing us are they eating us like no these chicks? They just want to suck their waist in tight guys. I think that's like what? No, no, they can't be serious right? That's what they made him out of oh wow, so it had like spines From the whale bones what? So that's what it looked like like a core they turn into like a almost like a like strap whale bone That's whale bone. That's a strange What imagine having to figure that out? Why wouldn't they just use wood? The old boning for synthetic whale bone. They probably ate the whales and then they're like oh look this excess bone we can use Yeah, I guess they probably just had the bone and realized it was kind of flexible No, this is whale bones weren't even made from bone at all. I went to I went to my buddy's cattle processing plant in California and they use everything I mean everything they use the Part of the heart I believe It's an organ. I can't remember they use it in medical operations. They pull it out and then they send it on ice They use it for some patching of the heart thing. I mean down to everything hooves everything Wow, and it's it's actually like fascinating to see you're like oh this is Super efficient this uses for a lot of different applications for hide for for all kinds of stuff Which makes sense because it's all valuable Why would you not use it all and it makes people feel better if you know that the whale's being completely harvested like every completely Everything is used. Yeah, that's awesome. Yeah. I mean If you have a connection that's really the best way to get food if you have a connection with a really good ranch and they're real Ethical and it's all grass-fed meat and animals are raised on a pasture like they're supposed to be even the way they slaughtered him at this place was Super it was really gentle. They and that was the whole thing. It's like We're taking a soul But this is part of life right life eats life and The way they did it was really painless and I was just boom boom and then it was No country for old men's style Oh the air bullet. Yeah, yeah Apparently that just shuts the lights off shuts the lights off quick and then they bleed them out how badass was that motherfucker in that movie? Javier Javier was so good It might be one of the single best performances. I've ever seen in a movie. Yeah, because you believed him Yeah, you believed him when he's making that dude flip that quarter You know, he's I mean he gives you the chills. Oh, yeah, not a hair that weird hair cut weird haircut Oh, and it but it's just the commitment to being a psycho like that dude's got some darkness in his eyes That much yeah Weird haircut crazy haircut God, you just Javier is a bad motherfucker dude. There's something about his bad guys that are like this cape fear roll that he's in now I haven't seen it yet. I haven't seen it either, but the fucking trailer made me uncomfortable Just seeing him in the trailer. Yeah, he's a good creep He plays a real good psycho. Yeah, you know, there's some dudes where you're like I believe it and some guys you like come on man You're a nice guy Also the original cape fear I mean Robert and narrow on the original cape fear man You've played bad guys. Do you have a problem playing bad guys? Is it hard for you to get into it like what is more challenging for you? Like to play a bad guy or to play like the World War two thing you've got to play someone from a different era Which I would imagine has its own challenges, but is it a hard for you? You can see you're so nice Do you have a hard time when you play bad guys? Well, I got to do it for Guy Ritchie, which was like, you know the ultimate right here rules Yeah, and a rat the man and it was actually kind of liberating kind of fun you could sort of Do things you're not supposed to you know you could like act out on your Impulse is a little bit. You know you think it's something fucked up in your head and you're like why would it? Why did I think that I'm not gonna punch that person in the face? Why did I think though you kind of like You know to like a lesser extent you obviously aren't doing everything but you you could kind of like revel in your own Like messed up thinking But I don't I don't love doing it to be honest. I think I think I want to do it very selectively like I mean for Guy Ritchie, I'll do anything, right? He's I think he's one of the best best best ever look at you. Yeah, and so you know I got it had to kill a kid there I was I had to just do the dirty work and get it done even look evil there like some Something's different. Yeah, look your face does it look like you You look evil. Yeah, it look like we genuinely evil. Yeah, yeah, it was loose I was tying up blue sends there. Is it when you're doing that when you're playing an evil guy? Are you thinking evil? Little I'm look I mean at the end of the day. It's a job. I know I treated as a job I'm not one of these crazy psychos like Let things become distorted in your mind when you pretend your Abraham Lincoln for six months. I mean yeah I believe in Daniel Day like I believe Maybe you know maybe I you know if you want to be the best I think it comes with a price and that price sanity Yeah, a little bit of sanity. Uh-huh. You got to give it up. My dad was never like that He was like it's a job like go to work do the best you can put in the reps Make sure you know your shit and you come prepared and you have some something interesting But I can leave it at the door man. Yeah, you know you see people like their minds get twisted and we deal with with artists right artists are Like it'd be special sometimes Yeah, and they take themselves very seriously. Yeah, but there's also a certain amount of you have to be thinking about how that character would think right if you're really gonna pull it off And you really did pull it off so you had to be having some Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah some like you have some I would love to talk to you I was like it was a it was a greedy role Yeah, and I was like I kind of let the greed take over Which is a little which is a little scary? So do you have to think like a greedy guy before the like like when you're getting ready for a scene? Like how do you get your head in that space? Yeah, a lot of a lot of Manifesting sort of those thoughts and emotions like what fucking do I'm gonna take whatever a book I want right now You see you sort of you know you You play that but then you got to let it go Like at the end of the day man you got to let it go right you got to be like I cool That was that was that thing and then it's gotta be slippery right? I think it can be if you don't have If you value this career to Preciously and you don't realize hey, we're telling stories It's fun. I'm so grateful. I've gotten to do it But it doesn't define you might have made me But it's not gonna break me right I have other interests and other things And I know there's other important shit out there that I could do in this life. I think you have to have That will level of thinking because if you think this is everything I mean it's too extreme It's like extreme what we're talking about before it can get to It's not healthy mm-hmm. Well a lot of people have problems after roles are done like apparently Jim Carrie really struggled after he played Andy Kaufman Because yeah, yeah, I'd like to talk to him about that because it seems like he got from all accounts that people that work with them on the film like he got so into that character But he was like being Andy Kaufman all the time. Yeah, we heard a lot of counts like it was it was like they were like dude You got a chill You got a chill I mean, I've worked with some that are that have taken it to the level Yeah, they said Jared let oh did that when he was playing the Joker the people like hey man stop stop sending me dead birds rats you did rats Shiloboo Yeah, Leboof Leboof. I don't know how it's get corrected. Sorry, Shiloh, but yeah, there's a lot of those guys they they go Into that rabbit hole and they can't crawl out It's just I think just having also it's like frontal cortex being defined right like you get famous too early when you didn't I was I worked as a valet I worked as a bar bag. I forget did all these shitty jobs that you know You kind of like oh, no, I understand like how the real world operates you get famous too early you get stunted in your growth Mm-hmm, and I truly believe that I think so too and I think it's a real crime when they do it to little kids It's at 100 percent. They never make it out normal. No, I never met one Leo Leo Leo Leo made it out. Yeah. Yeah. He was a child actor. That's right. He had good people around him. Yeah, you know He's disciplined and he Yeah, he's got a good like sense of the world That's good. Yeah, but he always has like 20 year old girlfriends Is it every time with 20 year old I don't understand like what do they even talk about? But at the end of the day Let's talk very few. Well, he did really he really was famous on you pretty young. Yeah, really He might be the only one but I mean I guess Jody Foster seems pretty put together She doesn't seem like she's lost her fucking marbles But then you see the Britney Spears of the world and these other people and you go, oh man I don't think that was really good for them. You know, yeah, there's I think also Corey Feldman You see these people that were like huge movie stars there young and as they're getting older It's like I don't think they're doing good Yeah, their heads all fucked up. Yeah, well, you place too much value on that too, and then it goes away Yeah, where's your identity? I had my colleague Galkin in here. He was very interesting Very nice guy like very smart guy interesting guy, but he struggles, you know, it's like he realizes he Was sort of robbed of a normal childhood. Yeah, became famous as a little kid man home alone He was little. Yeah, my dad. I mean could as to my dad because he he did really a job of protecting us from that and and very private we didn't live in LA didn't live, you know We lived in Carmel we was a very You know as normal as it could be But in the sense that he was like no, that's you know You just you need to be a normal Child and learn how the world works Carmel's beautiful man. It is nice place to grow up. Yeah They say they say newlywed and nearly dead Right that's what it is because it's like people get married there and then they fucking go there to die Yeah, it's so true. Yeah, it's a little slow for me, but it's beautiful. I do I do appreciate it But they're annoying homeowners associations Come on But you were at the day And you don't know what you're supposed to do. This is off white. This is not white Your fence is the wrong color. Yeah, I can get a life Well, people love to control their their neighborhood They they get horrible on those homeowners associations. Oh people who are really into controlling the neighborhood like oh I'm like so bored with that story. I'm like God. Can you just be different? Surprised me with something else, you know, yeah, and old people like to live around other old people too Makes them feel comfortable. They don't want to be around parties. Yeah That's what Carmel like calls out to them if you keep the real estate price high great now I got old people living around old rich people. Yeah. Yeah, the most fun They're the most fun They're the most entitled Most they think they could tell you the most what to do because they used to tell them everybody what to do But still Carmel fucking beautiful beautiful part of the country. Yeah, that coast. Oh my god and also sharks Out there a lot of great whites They're all over the place up there. Yeah Yeah, but it's a California man is one of the most beautiful places on earth. It has so much variation There's something you got deserts you got the beach you got mountains you get me get everything all in this one beautiful state Yeah, everyone was I mean even in the like development of our country I was like everyone was going out west because it was so prestigious Like oh the gold rush and getting out west and then California really LA it was the movie industry That's really what it's kind of sad now because it's they've completely driven it out I mean Barely have TV shows barely it's brutal. It's brutal. Do you still live there? No you live out here now Yeah, I kind of I tell people I live on the road Because that's essentially where I am, you know, I was I was Atlanta I was here I was there I was in Italy making a movie Well, that's the thing about film right like there never it's how many films get filmed in Los Angeles these days It's not don't even beneficial to live there. I've never I don't think I've ever worked on maybe I've worked on one film But it was up for a week and it was we shot the rest of it somewhere else. Yeah They make it so hard for people now so stupid. Yeah, it's rough. It's rough. It's um, it's a sad because film is you know inherently Like Hollywood is is inherently something that we've produced out of California out of America and it's like to see that Just get completely blown up. I know industry. Oh dear friends to live back there. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah Yeah tons of California friends and You know, I look I was never I don't have a lot of industry friends I had I do have some but actors like sometimes aren't my people They're just not right. I just I don't know like the I don't want to intellectual as about I don't want to talk about acting. You know to me like yeah, it's like it's like cool It's something I do but it doesn't define me, you know some of them were just they're so self-important Yeah, and it's you know you it's not even an almost not their fault almost because they're getting their asses kissed all the time They're on sets and people are trying to get them bagels and coffee and everyone's always catering to them So they start feeling like they deserve that from the world. Yeah, it just gets real weird It gets weird there's a lot of deep insecurity in that industry, right? It's sure I'm masked by Mass by like false security right like it's like I'm the man. I'm tougher. I'm It's thing you build this ego up and you're like yeah Dude like we're just doing a job here. Can you get to set and shut the fuck up? It's just the attention that you get you know You get so much attention from the world that you start thinking you're important and Yeah, it's natural natural for human beings But especially even more natural for people that pretend to be someone else for a living No, and you know in like some of that accountability man in the industry is unbelievable. I you know I just worked with somebody that and I think was just without saying any names, but you know just Maybe you know people just get too famous for too long if they think the world owes them something and then Mm-hmm. It comes to like doing the right thing You're like dude you get just it's black and white do the right thing. Don't be a piece of shit. You You can't do that. That's unacceptable behavior. I know like fuck that I can do And you're just like what dude. What are you talking about exactly? You could you could say a name and then we'll edit it out. I want to do that I just you know We started working on a film with with a director and and they decided you know Have to read spend a bunch of money that they just didn't feel like they wanted to work with this other person and and Didn't want to do the big job do the thing and so I was like okay Well, you need to pay that money back now to that person who invested in you And I don't do that. That's like well Yeah, you do. Yeah, you do. That's the right thing to do so they decided they didn't want to work with another person Yeah, do I work with like another person after we like started pre-production on the film? So they're trying to get the person kicked off the the movie or they just left and they just there it was their Directorial their story their thing. It was it's like Bro, you think you took money from somebody. That's also a good way to get sued. That seems like yeah Person can get sued pretty easy for that Yeah, but it's just it's like it's just the the bigger The bigger thing is just I've seen some behavior in this business. That is shocking that would not go in other industries but for some reason because there's stars Yeah, I really want to it's also the thing There's a thing that some people want to be a star so they can behave like that They want to be a star so they can order people around or just do whatever the fuck they want to do and just be unpredictable and wild like they actually enjoy that aspect of Being famous. Yeah, I to be honest. I never I really didn't like people People think they want to be famous. You don't want to be famous You don't want to be famous rich. Yeah, rich is better rich is better, but to be fit like that goal is So twisted it's not like I love telling stories and we're doing a creative endeavor and you move people Whether you'll make them laugh make them cry or whatever But the whole other side of that is like just really ugly and it's I think I was lucky in some ways because I got to see it growing up and got to see like How it's bullshit Um, right when your dad's one of the most famous movie stars of all time. Yeah, and he's just your dad Yeah, you go. Oh, this is bullshit. It's bullshit. Yeah, completely And also your dad is not like a guy who gives into that stuff either Yeah, he's not a guy who worships that kind of fame or it's not interested in that at all Not at all. He's just to put your boots on go to work, man It happens to be in a creative endeavor, which is really cool And it gets to use that you know use that muscle, but Did you hesitate at all about getting into acting because your dad was so famous out? Sure, I think I was always like I think I was always like hey I love telling stories. I love watching movies. I love this I don't know if exactly I wanted to ever Do you like it wasn't like oh, that's my but you love my thing I love the storytelling of it And I was like a conduit in I'm doing other other things in film now producing and I do want to direct It'd be nice to like show up with my own clothes to work Also films like directors medium. It's not really an actors medium you need actors Part of the deal, but the making of a film goes way beyond the filming of a film You know, there's a film made in script and development. There's a film made while you're shooting it And there's a film made in editing have you ever directed anything before? I've you know done in a creative capacity Where I've been a producer. I've Had hand in directing But not like hey, that's my own. That's my name on the on thing. I'm super proud of it I said find the right material To go on to go out and kind of schlep around do you write? No, no, and I it's a backbone of the industry right Yeah, if you could write your own thing. Yeah, I don't know. I like win like the discipline to do it for like for what you do is It's tough, you know, you have to Thought to paper. It's mm-hmm. That doesn't interest you It does in a sense. I just don't like sitting You know what I mean I I am really good at collaborating and talking about material and saying what about this? What if he's in this what he did is what about this? What can we go this way? So I think maybe you can have a writing partner. Yeah. Yeah, yeah Maybe you have a writing partner or someone who you drive with that's creative And you guys can get together and you could come up with your own idea That way you have like material that is exciting for you and you could direct that Because I would imagine if you're even working with guys like guy Ritchie And all these directors you work with you've got a chance to see the the discipline in the highest level Like you have to see those guys do it. You know you get to see how they piece it together must be fascinating. It is and everyone has a different Different way of going about it like guy Ritchie here's the thing about guy Ritchie You learn the script then you show up and he's just like Throws it out the window and goes you say this you do that you do this and then you're like Okay, and so if you're not it doesn't work for everybody some people can't handle that heat. I love it I'm like this is awesome. Let's do it. What is it? Okay? Let's go So meaning he wants you to improvise he wants you to talk like a real person. It's not necessarily that it's it's improvising It's more He's seeing the movie. He's wearing multiple hats So he's seeing the movie what he's already shot and then he's like I actually don't want that scene I want him to say this and this he kind of like is molding the movie in real time in real time and then what he'll do is He'll go back to his trailer They have like a blacked-out trailer and they'll watch the movie and he'll They'll radio in and say hey say it like this or do it like this or do you know do it one more time So he's kind of like watching the movie as us as an audience member It's really interesting. Is he the only one you know that does it that way? Yes 100 And then you have guys like my dad who would never do that they would they wouldn't even they're just they're like right there Just going okay. Have you heard mad Damon's story? I'm which one mad Damon was working with your dad and he did a take and And he liked it, but he wanted to do it again because we do it again and Clint's like no we got it Yeah, but I've been fucking working forever on this Thing what all one more go at is like we got it. Yeah, and he probably said something like well if you want to waste every once time sure And the math like no no no no no no we're good We're good Funny yeah, it's a funny yeah Whatever Guy Ritchie's process is it works. It works his fucking shows his movies are Some of my all-time favorites right from the beginning right from Locke's talk and two smoking barrels and snatched Holy shit this movies are so good and he really did such a fantastic job of almost like He's like the Benchmark for that genre of like British crime genre. Yes. That's him. That's him. That's that you think of British crime drama Oh Guy Ritchie. Yeah Guy Ritchie movie like there's this dude his name is Lee Murray Lee Murray it he was UFC fighter He was famous in London in England for being like a street fighter and this a crazy guy who's fighting in MMA at a really high level like one in the UFC And then was a part of the biggest armed robbery in the history of the UK No, I oh yeah, this guy with a full on psycho. He's a gangster. Oh full gangster He was such a gangster that he got stabbed in the heart in a street fight And they made a video of him hitting mid six weeks later six weeks later. He's back in the champ It's he was crazy person. I got to see him fight in real life He actually knocked out a friend of mine, but so he got arrested for this crime. Oh, yeah Oh, he's still in jail still in jail. He's still in jail. It'll be in jail for probably the rest of his life They stole an enormous amount of money and they did it like in a very high tech like like the movie heat like that crazy Yeah, like they had full masks on armored fucking body armor the whole deal. Yeah, and how much do they steal? Oh, wow The biggest I think it's the biggest armed robbery in Britain's history and they hurt they hurt people doing it They didn't hug on me. They didn't help them. I don't know. Be killed. No, I mean, I just wondering like if the largest peacetime cash robbery in world history Wow, so it's worth 92 million dollars 53 million pounds back then So that was in 2006. So this is after he had been in the UFC So I you know, I called this fight in the UFC. I was doing commentary about then Uh, they left over 150 million behind 150 million pounds because they ran out of room in their transport vehicles Holy shit. How do they get caught only about 21 million pounds of the stolen cash has ever been recovered So somebody made away with more than 30 million pounds So he flew to Morocco, Murray and several associates fled to Morocco Because he held dual dual British Moroccan citizenship and Morocco did not have an extradition treaty with the UK He evaded British authorities Moroccan police arrested Murray in June of 2006 in a shopping mall and robot following an international manhunt Instead of being extradited. He was tried in Mon and Morocco after initially being sentenced to 10 years Moroccan appeals court extended his sentence to 25 years in prison for his role in forming a criminal gang Kidnapting and arm robbery So like when this guy got arrested when everyone's your story everybody was saying that guy's got to be a guy richy movie Yeah, like that's that's how much Guy Ritchie has like locked down that genre And I think there was some talk Is there talk about Guy Ritchie doing a movie on the Lee Murray heist? Something came out and Chasing lightning No, no, no, I did it Something came out. It's like a mini series about it. Oh about the heist But as Guy Ritchie been connected to a movie about it because I know a bunch of people were talking about it saying like it has to be a guy Ritchie movie like if you're gonna really capture who this guy was yeah, he was a real nut like a real like world class fighter who would plan like give me that because I don't know what he looks like Jason days to stay them could probably nail it Okay, yeah, there it is he's perfect. Cast already. Yeah, I mean, it doesn't have the hair for it But because Lee Murray had a full head of hair, but it does a matter. It's been a rumor for a long time But he instead did a true kind of docuseries called Diamond Heist instead Mm-hmm. It's like a similar story, but it's not the same story at all. Oh, okay The story itself is so bananas It's just the fact that this guy was his world class MMA fighter. Yeah, who was also a robber like a high-level Yeah, I mean you don't still like $90 million without do they have footage of that robbery? Is there video footage of it? I feel like they're security footage of it and they look nuts Let me looks like a movie like you know, they might it might be fucking masks on everything the whole deal it's just That When you think about that kind of a guy and that kind of a story I mean that is right up Guy Ritchie's alley He's like that show maw bland god. It's good. It's good. It's so good. It's so good. It's so like it's like a movie that's like seven hours long However, many episodes there are it's great. It really is great Who is he or who's you have a favorite guy that you've worked with he's he's got to be up? I mean he's yeah if if he him Gotta you know, I gotta work with Oliver Stone. Oh, that's awesome, which is like, you know Sitting with the devil iconic man George Tillman Jr. is a great director. I don't remember that movie a men of honor. Yes. We're met with cubic good in junior Sure. He's a great director There's a lot of there this I've gotten to you know work with some really cool David Ayers really interesting I got it tough. He I don't know if you know his story, but he was He's had a really dark past, but he he was essentially he lived on a submarine for like two years like underwater Whoa, yeah, he's unlike you got some screws loose if you lived on a submarine for two years underwater for two years and fuck you up for 200 first right now I'm just thinking about getting out how claustrophobic you could get like I gotta get out of Out your squash in that party a brain way too long. Yeah, I could do that for an hour I don't even know if I want to get into submarine after I watched the The tin can they just exploded. Oh those people. Oh. Yeah. I was like, oh, that's not wise When you watch the recreations of what must have happened them They were just liquefied instantaneously by the pressure of the ocean that'd be a good way to go Maybe better than a shark quick. This is like that Yeah, but then people are talking about you're like you're an idiot like you got in that stupid tin can you're a billionaire idiot Even worse. I can't go down like that. Think about all these fucking people that would love to have it just a piece of your money People are talking about you're like, you're an idiot. Like you've gotten that stupid tin can. You're a billionaire idiot. Even worse. I can't go down like that. Think about all these fucking people that would love to have just a piece of your money so they could go have a margarita in your lake somewhere. I'm gonna go to tin can. This is gonna be great. I'm gonna go to the bottom of the ocean. Tell everybody, I look through a tiny window for fuck you. Well, I had a conversation with Cameron. And Cameron went, James Cameron went to the bottom of the fucking ocean by himself. No, no, that's not. There's so much wrong with that. I even feel like bottom of the Mary on a trench, right? Like I think he holds the world record for like single piloted submarine vehicle, the deepest depths like, no. And I also, I feel the same way about space. You know, I'm like, I'm a big must fan, but I don't have any desire bro to go to Mars or go to space. Have fun. Have fun. You do that. Yeah. Okay. Good here on this planet. It must be awesome to be just, I would like to be an earth orbit once just to look down. I bet it's not like the four or the landing. They say you have that experience. Like all these different astronauts have talked about it. It's the overview effect that you, when you're above earth looking down on it, it just, you like, oh my God, we're so fragile. It's all just us together. We have to stop. We have to stop all this. Like you have this realization of what we really are and what we're really doing. And I was stupid tribal conflicts are in like world, I mean, yeah, world war. Yeah. This is cute. We're peating the same cycle. It's sad actually. It's it's it's sad because eventually it'll probably happen again, a world war. I mean, that's the like if you look at the math, it's kind of happening right now. It's like what's going on, man? Are we gonna keep doing this? I guess that's what we're doing. That's very disturbing. When you're playing a character in a period piece like that, what do you have to do in terms of like, make sure you're behaving like they behave and talk like they've talked like, did you have to watch film of those old people and you talk to a lot of people. In this case, this this movie, you know, was about the guys are, you know, most all passed away at this point. But I luckily got got to meet a lot of veterans because I've done 20 years of doing a few warm movies. So I've gotten to meet these folks and talk to them and hear their stories, see like sometimes the pain in their eyes when they tell these stories and you realize, you realize the gravity of what they're carrying and what they did for the world. There's so many heroes in world war two, you know, so many people that did so many things that affect like our way of life. I mean, and affect a lot of the world's way of life. I mean, all France and most of Europe is a speaking German because of what happened. And so you carry like that weight with you. It's it can be if it's a real, if it's, you know, you know, the person you can watch tape on them, then you get a you get that like luxury. But if you don't, then you know, it's just I think it's not carrying that weight and just trying to be as true as you can to that it's it comes with a cost doing doing these movies because not only you go and make them but then you go and promote them. And you meet these people. I met one of the oldest living veterans the other night at at the Washington archives in DC 107 years old. Whoa, Colonel Stern and got a hold his hand, you know, and really quite clear still had it like, you know, like shockingly when he spoke to me, I was like, oh my gosh, but you could feel that generation that you could feel that what he had been through. He was he was actually at the battle of the bulge. Whoa. And you're like, oh, and then to have him tell us like we got it right. And that's what if like, you know, but like brought me to tears. I was like, I was like, I don't like that was shook. But so the moment's like that comes, you know, it's like, wow, this is this is a great responsibility. Tell this story. Now can I imagine having a conversation with the 107 year old guy who's been through war and the war was what? How many years ago in 1942? What is that? I'm here. So he would probably put him in 20. Yes. So right he would have been like 84. Yeah. So he's four years ago. And it's still the most probably impactful thing that ever happened in his life. Imagine that. Imagine your 107 years old and your life is kind of defined by something that happened 84 years ago. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's, it's, it's wild what they went through. I mean, wow, wow, I can imagine. I mean, if they're like, hey, pack up Joe, it's like we're, we're going to wherever it is. Like, I don't know. I ran wherever we're going right now. And we're going to have to kill people. And imagine the information you're getting, what are you getting? Like newspaper articles and radio broadcasts. Yeah. What do you read? The show. The show? The guy he met. A battalion commander during World War II stern. His name was Senator Radcliffe. What is his name? Herbert Irving Stern. That's his name. So it says a battalion commander during World War II stern was awarded the Silver Star medal during the Battle of the Bulge for his actions in April 1945 while driving through Germany stern is men discovered a concentration camp with 3,000 Jewish women. They liberated the camp providing immediate relief to the prisoners and destroyed the facility. Isn't that amazing? Like we have to celebrate these people. You know, like imagine your overseas, your, your, your kid. It's 1945 and you, you liberate a camp of 3000 Jewish women that are being imprisoned. Yeah. It gives me chills this thing and about it. Holy shit, man. He's been like 35 years old, 34 years old. You actually could see what that guy's saying. I mean, I don't know if we want to. I mean, that would change your whole, change your whole world. Like look on the world, man. I mean, but you have to think that way, right? When you're, when you're playing these guys, you have to almost put yourself in their head. How hard is that? Like what does that like? It just, it comes with like I said, it comes with a cost. You, you go through an emotional journey. You, you pay a price. You have to lend your own emotion and own grief and whatever that is in your life. And you have to kind of relive some of that. And it's, it's part of, you know, going through what it would have been like to, to see some of these atrocities, to see what it's like to lose your best friend, right beside you, to lose people that are, you know, to see a concentration that you can't follow women that are, you know, probably skin and bones. And like it's just, you know, makes you just so, it makes me so grateful for what we have and where we're at. That's also the human's capacity for evil. When you're faced with it like that, it's, it's so disturbing that people are capable of doing things like that and that they still are. That they're still going to this day right, right now somewhere in the world, there's human beings committing atrocities and killing people. I know it's brutal. It's brutal to think how savage we can become. Like it's crazy because like you think about it, it's like we're not far off. You take water away for 72 hours and we're dead. Yeah. So how quickly do we turn savage fighting each other if we don't have basic needs? Oh, yeah. The civilizations are very thin, Benir. Yeah. It's very thin and it's very vulnerable. And I think most people are delusional and they're very well fed, very well fed and rested and they don't have any idea how precarious this thing we exist in is. I think when you're, I would imagine when you're doing a World War II film or something like that, like you're forced to realize your forced encounter that reality of the human condition. That sometimes I mean, throughout history, it's kind of the defining moments of our past. When you think about the history of the world, really you're talking about the history of war. You're talking about the history of war and conquests, invasions and conquests. It's like the most of what we talk about when we talk about history. You know, we talk about the various wars and what happened, what was the result and who was the king and who did this? What was it over? Yeah. The resources, this war was really, I think, I think why it's so fast in any way, World War II is still so fast in these because there is no ambiguity between right and wrong in that war, really. Right. What they were doing in Nazi Germany was terrifying. You know, they were exterminating innocent people. And we came together as a world, you know, coalition and fought that evil. And that is very different than a war like Vietnam where we're like, why are we here? Or you know, you're questioning what is this just a politically motivated thing? No, this was like, this was to save people. Yeah. That is, that's very different. Yeah. We think of that as our last great war. That is the World War II in most people's eyes is the last just war. Yeah. You know, we think it's like that's the one that needed to be gone. Because it wasn't just evil people was evil people on meth, which is really crazy. When you, when we, I didn't know that until like a decade or two ago, yeah, that they were all on meth. And then we had Norman Oll, he wrote, um, how do I say his last name? Ooh, or, or he wrote this book, Blitzed. And it's all about the Blitz greg when they went through Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Poland in like three days. Yeah. And they was all meth. They just gave them meth. Yeah, that was in the beginning of the war. Yeah. Yeah. They had like 35 million doses of meth. I'm not. That is not. And they gave the guys in the front of the lines the most meth. The guys in the tanks, like you guys get the most meth. They wanted to just mess up just driving for three days, killing everybody they see. And then when they ran it to the people in France, they were all drinking wine. So like they're all chilling and how, like, they got just kept fucked up, man. Yeah. It's just, it's not that long ago. And that's what's really scary. It is. It's super scary. Also, what's, um, what was crazy about this movie and, you know, I, I learned something new every time I do a, a war movie. Um, I didn't realize there were German Americans living in America, like, live at a life here. And when the war kicked off, there was a lot of them that went back to Germany and fought for Germany. Whoa. Can you imagine that? How many like, like thousands? Whoa. I went back and like, you know, and then they were spies and they were, they, a lot of them spoke English, a lot of had the American culture, you know, they understood and they became like spies and it was like, can you imagine doing that? Fuck. Fuck. Yeah. Imagine giving up on America to go back to fight for Germany. What? Like, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey. Hold on. Hold the phone. Don't you know this spot is better. You should be fighting for this. You fucking dumb ass. Yeah. Yeah. The, the people that are willing to do that, that's a, that's a different kind of brainwashing. Yeah. I mean, I, you know, it makes me think about some of the brainwashing we have nowadays. Like, and you kind of think like, I don't like, you know, there's a lot of conspiracy theory stuff. And I'm not, I'm not a lot, but I do see, you know, we were talking about it today. It's like, how strong is the government to like brainwash, you know, the MK Ultra stuff? Like the stuff where it's like, you get like a patsier, get someone to do something that you want them to do, kill somebody, whatever. Yeah. That's like really terrifying. Yeah. I think your own thoughts and emotions, but also if you find someone who's vulnerable, you can coax them slowly, but surely into becoming a different person. You give them a purpose. You give them a direction. Yeah. You can, I mean, they've done it before. It's not, they didn't stop doing it in the 1960s. That guy who tried to shoot Trump, he was probably a product of that. Yeah. I've I had a guess by some organization, I'm not saying it's the American intelligence agencies, but someone talked that young kid and they getting on that roof and trying to shoot Trump, someone, you know, someone gave him direction, someone who just, his background is too squeaky clean after it's over. They professionally scrubbed his apartment. His apartment was professionally scrubbed. There was no silverware in his apartment when they went to examine it. All of his hard drives are gone. All of his computers were gone. He had more than one cell phone, which is very odd for a 20 year old kid and had no social media profile. The whole thing was far. Can you explain to me that the theory is going on with like the Charlie Kirk of it all? Because I know there's, I've heard a lot of like stuff and a lot of smart people that I like respect like there's something going on with that that we don't know the full. Well, there's something going on with the guy being able to climb on top of that roof with a gun, dismantle it, put it back together again and then dismantle it again and put it back together again. Like the whole thing makes no sense. They think they have footage of him in a backpack. So, but a backpack doesn't carry a gun. And so the excuse was, oh, he dismantled the gun and reconnected it. Well, that doesn't fly. So the problem with that is anybody who knows anything about guns knows that you take a scope off a gun, you take the barrel off the gun, you take the stock off the gun, you take, you got to put it all back together again. You might not be on anymore. So you're going to have to, you're going to have to cite that gun in, right? And if you're cite that gun in, you're going to want to have targets to practice on. You're not just going to take a hundred and forty yard shot or whatever it was, where you shot Charlie Kirk, not knowing if your site is on because you I, I was hunting once and I fell with my rifle and we went back to the range to test it. It was off on a, so when you're shooting on a block, so you're not moving at all, all you're doing is pulling the trigger. So it's just to make sure that the gun is on. It was off by six inches at a hundred yards just by moving from a fall. You know, and so you have to check that and then you have to cite the gun back in. You take a, you just take the scope off and then you put it back on and screw it back together again. There's no guarantee that that thing's going to be accurate. And this kid's not like a marksman. He's not like he's got a ton of experience shooting people and shooting at a distance. The whole thing is, it's grow, the whole thing sounds gross. The text messages between him and his boyfriend or whatever it is, where, you know, he's saying how he did it or he's going to do it. They seem like AI made them. It seems crazy. And then there's also the fact that there was footage of him in a yogurt shop. Is that verified the footage that was in a yogurt shop that was like 20 minutes later? The guy, the guy's just chilling at some fucking frozen yogurt store. That seems weird. What about this stuff with like the, the people that were like right around the shooting and stuff and like, is there like some weird stuff? There's a lot of people to think that someone, some of them were signaling for the shot to happen at a certain time. That's a lot of bullshit. It seems like speculation to me because, you know, people move around all the time. People are in the crowd. If, if I was standing there and I went like this and at that moment, someone got shot, okay. Is that a common amount? Not of them. Yeah. Or if you're watching a certain point in that, in that person gets shot. Like a lot of movements going on, you get a tribute, that movement to someone signaling. To me, what's weird is the actual wound itself. So a 30 oxet wound versus an, well, it does, it's not a big enough hole. 30 out six is a big rifle round and to shoot a guy in the neck with a 30 out six, you would expect, first of all, you'd expect an exit wound and there's no exit wound. It just goes in and it looks like a smaller hole. It doesn't look like the kind of hole that I would expect from a large rifle round. I would expect it to just blow a giant chunk of his neck right off. That's a, that's a round that you'd shoot an elk with. It's a big round and then there's a video footage of him from the back and it doesn't look like there's an exit. There's no exit. So it just goes in his neck and stops. The details about him being a Dairy Queen are very weird. It seems like he was at a Dairy Queen but they don't know which one and the one that thought it was that close downward, like a full weeks afterwards. Okay, but he was, there is footage of him at a Dairy Queen. Yeah, they just which one it was and when it was. Okay, either way. After you shoot Charlie Kirk, do you really go to a fucking Dairy Queen? Like there's a lot of work. Are they saying to? Oh, good. That's right. Yeah. Right before you go to a Charlie Kirk, get in and get in the lizards. You know, them blizzards go out, caffeine in it. I think it's also weird that we haven't heard him talk. He hasn't taken a stand. There's discrepancies between whether or not his family turned him in or whether or not he said he confessed to his family. You know, I don't know what they're saying now. He hasn't even there as an update as of June 12th in a hearing and this article says there hasn't been a plea entered yet. That's crazy. There's a tendency to death penalty of Robinson is convicted. He has not yet entered a plea. That happened in September. How is he not yet entered a plea? Is that like? There's going over details about how to keep you in limbo and prosecution going on public talking about the bullet fragment found and sense of saying this shouldn't have done that. There's a whole back and forth about that. Hmm. I don't know. I'm pretending to know, but it just feels like there's a lot of stuff. I'm sure like you said, there's some bullshit where people are going to go, oh, the I see luck and you're like, come on. Tucker Carlson was just talking about it and he thinks that Israel killed him. He thinks Israel killed Charlie Kirk and then a lot of people saying that's ridiculous. And then how many people are getting paid by Israel to run cover and how many people are just saying that Israel did it without real evidence? I don't know. But he was critical of Israel apparently in text messages and saying that he was going to get out of the Israel supporting business. Hmm. I don't know what that means. You know, I don't know. Okay. Because apparently there was also a long letter that he wrote to Netanyahu who was expressing his support for Israel. So is that real? I don't know. It's so we know these days to just like nothing is 100% real. Yeah. If it's a major news story involving anything significant, at least some of its bullshit. And so we're all just sitting here wondering did this kid really shoot Charlie Kirk? Because his position on trans people, is that really what we're supposed to believe? He was in love with the trans man or a trans woman rather. And so he shot Charlie Kirk because of that really? Do you think like a younger people though have like a bigger distrust in the media? I feel like now I feel like that's changing. So it's maybe for the best. Yeah, for sure. But I mean, this isn't even the media. This is the government. You know, this is the official position. Like they paved over the crime scene like within days afterwards. That's weird. This is a lot of weird shit, man. The Thomas Crooks thing, they cremated him within days after he was killed. Where's the toxicology examination? Where's the results? I want to know what kind of psych medication this fucking kid was on. What was he doing? What was happening? Why did he shoot at the president? Why did he kill people in the crowd? What the fuck was going on? And we don't ever get told, this type of robin's thing is a weird one, man. It's weird. What's the gun itself alone? I've heard varying depictions getting on that fucking roof with a gun going through the stairwell with the gun. He doesn't have the gun. So did he get the gun up there already? So they're saying it's in the backpack. No, it's not. It doesn't fit in the backpack. Well, maybe there's a stock, maybe the barrel's in his legs. He taped it to his pants. Fuck off. Fuck off. You can't put a gun back together again to make it that accurate. So I don't believe that. And then he took it apart and then jumped off the roof with it and then put it back together again in the woods. I don't know if that's exact with it. There's some version of it. But any version of it where this guy under a high stress, high adrenaline situation is taking a party gun and putting it back together again. Fuck off. Fuck off. I don't believe that. Yeah. Especially on train. Yeah. I'm not a... Hey, jumped off the roof afterwards and escaped. Like, okay. The thing with... Which one is this? This is the first shooting of professionally scrub department. Weird detail that doesn't seem to have accuracy. It says right here, July 24, 24, House Homeland Security Committee hearing rep Eli Crane said he had received information that Crook's house was scrubbed, cleaned, and even silverware removed before investigative units arrived. Crane entered the article making the allegation into record and from there, professionally scrubbed, and no silverware talking points spread through blogs, forums, expos, and podcasts. But officials have said, when Crane has Pennsylvania State Commissioner Colonel Christopher Paris, whether the home had been extremely clean or missing silverware, Paris implied that he had not been given any such details in his briefings. But see, this is what I like to say. Look at this, parents. This is what I like though. You're fact checking yourself. And I think this is super important because people start... No matter what we're talking about, people start regurgitating their own narratives. And it's like, no, no, hold on. I could be wrong. And let's fact check, maybe, met Emma. Maybe I'm not wrong. So he was living with his primary residence. It says it was his parents' single family home. Did he have his own apartment? He had a separate apartment. It said he didn't. But it says primary residence. Well, I mean, that's what you call it. But it says not in his own separate apartment. Does that mean he didn't have a separate apartment? I asked the question, did he have his own apartment or whatever? I would have bought the apartment. Oh, I see. I see. So I gave you that response. The house in Surinets' Streets were searched and cordoned off by federal agents and bomb squads after the assassination attempt. An investigator is reported finding bomb-making materials there. Oh boy. So in case it didn't work out with the gun, he had a bomb. Did he think he was going to make it off the roof? I wonder what he thought. I thought he'd shoot the president and just jump away. No one's going to notice. Well, there, that sniper's all over the place. They took that guy out the moment he shot him. I wonder if someone talked him into doing it and convinced him that they had a way to get him out of there. Yes, and that's the scary thing, right? Yeah. The mind control. Right. Like you said, you know, especially if they're giving him drugs. That's my point about the toxicology examination. So a lot of people were very concerned that they cremated him right away. Because if you got a hold of the toxicology examination and you found out that there were some drugs in there that they give people to influence them. Like maybe at a LSD in a system, maybe you had something else and some other psyche or psychiatric medications in the system that you would say, well, why was he given this? You know, is this something that we've done when we're working on mind control experiments? Are we given people these things? Yeah. Are we still doing that? There was also metadata that connected a phone from DC to his house from like Virginia outside the FBI area where where the FBI offices are back and forth to this guy's house multiple times. A lot. Metadata from a phone. Can't say who's phone? Who knows? Probably nothing. Or don't they know? I mean, he's also in a black rock commercial. If you want to find out who's phone that is, they got like people can find out what I would imagine. Right. Yeah, it's all weird. Yeah. It's not, I mean, look, there's probably a lot of people before the election that want to Trump dead, fill in the blank who you think it might be. But most likely somebody got a kid to try to do it. Yeah, that's me didn't pull it off. But he came close. Scaring man. Real dummies who think it's staged, which is so crazy. Oh, that way. I've hurt that. I was hearing that name. They let him nick his ear with a bullet. What? Do you know how dumb that sounds? Do you have no idea about shooting things at distance? There's no way to perform it is. So you know what? Why is not a fucking chance in how that you can nick someone's ear with a bullet at that distance and be that accurate? You can easily blow half the fucking head off, you know? And like what? So like they're going to take that risk to perform it. And that's what happens if they're not. Kill the people behind them. Yeah, because someone gets shot, right? One guy dies. At least one person died and another guy got shot really badly. And two other people I think are suing now. They're suing the government for negligence because of that shooting. Yeah, because they're permanently injured because they got shot. Wow. Yeah. And the whole, the fucking, the whole thing where the lady was ahead of the Secret Service was saying that they couldn't put anybody on that roof because the slope was too steep. Like what? And that didn't even make sense because the slope of the building where the snipers were on was steeper. It made no sense. So it's almost like it was set up so that that kid could get up on that roof and take a shot. I mean, look, it seems like the powers that be are pulling some strings. It's all I'm saying. Oh, you know what I mean? I'm always trying to. If you're not playing by their rules, they're not kissing the ring. I can't Hollywood this way. You know what I mean? Hollywood is like there's a lot of that bullshit. There's a lot of that bullshit. A lot of that like kissed the ring and things you're like, nah, I ain't gonna do that. You know, bang, you know, sing that. You let the, you know, like how bad you want to be Batman. How bad do you want to be Batman? If it cost me my soul maybe I'm good. Yeah, well, good for you, dude. You've achieved a nice balance in your life and work relationship. And I think that's very important. You know, and like I always tell people like he's like the normal sky. You know, like the normal sky that it's a movie star. Like that I know like every time but like I've introduced you to people that like who is he? That's Scott Eastwood. Like what? That's Clint Eastwood's son. It's like like he's so normal. There's a lot of their normal people though. There's some great ones. Oh yeah. You know, like this. They exist. Dude, Matt Damon and Ben Affleck are fucking super normal. Yeah. They're like regular guys when you talk to them. They're, they're managed to keep their as hard as it is. Yeah. Keep whoever it is that's them. They, they're still that. Yeah. So kudos to them. Kudos to you. And thanks for these vitamins. Yeah. I'm gonna tell you what's up. Tell me what's up. They suck. I'm gonna tell you that. I'm sure they're great. I'm just kidding. North performance. That's what it's called. There we go, baby. And your movie. I'm lucky strike. I'll tomorrow. Okay. It's perfect timing. 250 years. Celebrate the veterans. Yes. Yes. Good luck with that. Thank you. Congratulations. I'm happy. All right. Glad to be.