Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Let's go. What's happening? Hello, doctor. Hello, doctor. Hello. I feel good to be in the lab coat. It feels like my opinion means more. Dude, it does. I mean, I look, this is freaking incredible. Like, you don't realize the power in costumes until you got a lab coat. I'm like, if we were walking around a CVS, right? People would ask us for advice. They probably like, is this the right spray for me? Isn't amazing. It's amazing. Like, what is the purpose of a lab coat? Like, why this particular coat? What does this provide? Any protection? Is it good for the act? You want monkey blood? You want monkey blood on your good shirt? Like, you got to like, where the lab coat because like you get blood? Right. In the late 19th and 20th early 20th centuries, when many scientific breakthroughs happen, the white lab coat started to symbolize cleanliness and scientific rigor. Not only it made doctors and scientists easily distinguishable, but it also made spotting any contamination easier. That makes sense. Was that a problem back then, mixing up your doctor with your scientist? Is that a real problem? Was that what they were saying? It says it makes doctors and scientists more easily to, oh, together. Yeah. They're both we're elsewhere. It's not like costumes like doctors. They're not. I'm sorry. Right. You go to the doctor. Dr. Helped me. I'm not that kind of doctor. I'm a PhD. I study nuclear atoms. I like that, that acknowledges that this is a kind of ceremonial outfit. It's a pretty throw because it's like symbolic more than practical for some people. Well, there's a bunch of those, right? Like the judges robe. Oh, my God. How weird is that? Because if you had a guy who was dressed like in a golf shirt with like shorts on in a pair of nikes. And he's like ruined judgment on things. He'd be like, fuck that guy. Who's that guy? Yeah. He's a regular guy. He's like, take a tank top. He had to do the tank tops to make some of his life. The dude is dressed like Joe Durt. Also the hammer. Yeah. He bang the hammer to like signify that justice has been served. What a weird trick. That is a weird. I mean, this is when you realize how all of society has got occult aspects to it. Like those are people in ceremonial clothes. Yeah. Banging a ceremonial hammer. If not occult, definitely cult. Well, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, cool. It's like, yeah. Yeah. What is the root of cult and occult? Like what is the connection to those two words? The devil, Satan, Satan. There's got to be some kind of connection. The fascinating thing about cults is that when they get to a certain size, we stop calling them cults. Yeah. Like the really successful. Well, the idea is that there's no such thing as a successful cult. And that's really just not true. OK, the words, cult and occult are popular terms that should not be confused as one another. So what are the differences between them? The term cult typically is used by the secular media to describe religious or semi religious groups whose members are controlled in almost every single respect by a single individual. Some good examples are hard Christians and Scientologists. But that's not like a single individual. I don't think that's a good definition. You know what I'm saying? Ah. By a single individual. That's not. I think that is the group. That's the classic. I mean, right. But they're saying Scientology. Scientology clearly has an organization. I mean, there's one guy that's the head of Scientology, but they have like a whole. They're very complex working. Very complex. Oh, well, I mean, I think the idea is that the main cult leader generally has like the doctrine. Deputies around them. OK. Like, you know, he has his own sort of close inner circle. Right. In that case, it's true. Right. The bigger it gets and the deputies have deputies or whatever you want to call it. And then that's how you get a big functional cult. Right. Right. You know, and I think probably, I mean, it would be safe to say that a successful cult passes that barrier between what the fuck you guys believe that shit to what the fuck you don't believe that shit? Like your cult doctrine becomes the like language of truth. Yeah. And then you've succeeded. Like then your cult, that's like the, that you're one in a hundred million maybe. Most cults just fail, I imagine. Yeah. But that seems to be just a natural pattern for human thinking and behaving that we for whatever reason, like naturally fall into group think. Oh, yeah. And if we're led by a very strong charismatic person that we think is exceptional, will it will accept it? Yeah. Right. And I, you know, we've talked about this. I didn't see the function in that. Like if you, like if you're in a situation that you don't know how to handle, you want the person who's the best at handling the situation to say here's what we do. Yeah. And then that's great. Then that's when it works. Right. But it should only be it should be situation where I it shouldn't be like, you know, everything. Right. That's where it turns into a cult. Well, that's like that that what is that term that some people that are really smart tend to believe they're really smart at other things because they're really smart at one thing. They'll get a distort. It's a very common term. I know what you're saying. It's it's at the tip of my time. It's a distortion, but it's a thing that happens to you when you're really good at one thing where you think you're just exceptional period. Right. And you think you know more about me. Maybe, you know, like there's scientists that are really terrible about health. They're probably brilliant when it comes to certain aspects of whatever it is they study string theory. Yeah, sure. But they're their knowledge of health. Their knowledge of how to work. They're like, I've talked to scientists. Like, how do the vitamins are important? Like, fuck are you saying? Dung crew. Thank you. The smart. Can you please? Sorry. It says the smarty feel the dumber you are. The dumb people think they are smart and the smart people think they're dumb. If you're like most people, you likely be very good at something. And you openly admit your less competent at something else. However, we've all met someone in our work and life who always overestimates their knowledge or ability of a certain topic or skill where some people are obviously incompetent in a particular subject. You're like confidently insist they know everything. That's when you start to wonder how on earth could this person be that well stupid. In fact, this is not uncommon. Even William Shakespeare mentioned it 400 plus years ago, the fool thinks himself to be wise while a wise man knows himself to be a fool. Today, this phenomenon is known as cognitive bias of a Louisiana superiority. So, but it does have something to do with you being good at something and being really stupid at other things because you think you're smart. What a great insult to tell someone that they have a dumbing figure. Yeah, that is a great way to call someone dumb. Yeah, what? It's interesting because that's what this is the problem with the term dumb. Really what it is is what are you focusing on? Because there's very intelligent people that didn't focus on communication. They didn't focus on language. They didn't focus on proper grammar or how to structure good sentence. They focused on a particular act, whether it's swimming or whether it's chess or whether they focused on whether it's playing guitar, playing pool. I bet brilliant people playing pool. Are they able to told you about my friend Johnny who could do complex math in his head? Yeah. I mean, not complex, but math in his head. So what you would do, you would, one guy would have a calculator and we would do this at the pool and then we would go 300 divided by five minus four plus sixteen times two and he would bang. He was rattled it out. We would go, what the fuck man? Yeah, what the fuck? And he was homeless. Did he say how he did the trick? No, he just knew how to do it. Holy shit. He could just count. Dude, he was just insanely smart. But that implies like that's there was a kid in my neighborhood who could do that. And it was the like he was annoyed because once you are known as being able to do that, that's all people do. They don't want to talk to you. They just want to get you to solve complex math and then go like holy fuck, but like it makes me think that like they're perceiving reality in a completely different way. They must be. They must be. They have to be. They must be. And this guy Johnny, he had a lot of mental health problems, like serious mental health problems and drug problems. But he was one of the most brilliant people I've ever met and socially brilliant. You know, he's a pool hustler. Yeah. But he's very socially brilliant. Like he knew when people were full of shit. Yeah, he knew when people's egos were flaring up. He knew like any loved comedy. It was like his favorite thing. And so I met him at the pool hall and I took him to see comedy. And you know, I took him to one of my shows and he fucking loved that he's like, oh, I love when they call people out on their bullshit. Like it was like he was like a social scientist. Yeah. But also could play all these different musical instruments, homeless, homeless. I met a kid who was 16 years old and he was a chess wizard who like wanted to hang out with the bad boys. It was really interesting because he was like this super nerd that all of a sudden he was hanging out with these guys who were smoking and gambling and he was 16. And it's like really rough pool hall. And he would sit down with this guy who just got out of jail. And this guy just got out of jail and in jail learned how to play chess in his head. So they don't have a board. So because they don't have a board, they have to call out the numbers in their head. So I'm watching this recently released prisoner and a 16 year old super nerd play chess in their head. And they're calling it out. I'm sitting there like it's like I'm watching them do magic. What? Yeah. So like C to fourth. Yup. Yep. Yep. And they're keeping track of the whole table in their head. They just see it in their head. And there was no arguments by the way. It's just you know, you hear about, you know, I think we talked about it. The mothership, the other night, but you hear about people who perceive numbers as colors or something or as in it. It's like their brain has made a different connection. Because because if you think about what our eyes do with photons, that's insane. That instantaneously it forms time space around you with like zero effort. Like it's interpreting all this data, color, wavelength, so that shit. It's crazy. Yeah. You're a theme, color, cinthesia. I want to show you people playing chess in their head because it's crazy to watch it. But what I was saying, there was no arguments. Like they never said, no, no, no, I had this that there. There was none of that right. They knew exactly where everything was. And they were like check. Check. They're seeing the table in there. Yeah. Really it's like they're going to visual. It's like they're just seeing it. And so and they're keeping track of all their pieces and all their opponents pieces. Yeah. Yeah, man. I mean, that's wild. Watch them. It's really interesting to see. Do you have that? It's called blindfolded chess. Oh, it's got to be a skill. There's videos of people teaching you how to do it. Oh, wow. But I'm trying to, this is just like people talking about it about it trying to find a game, I guess it's not shown to people though. It's kind of hard to watch. Is there one that says how two people playing blindfolded chess? I figured something would pop up by playing chess. Is that it? No. Yeah. I read in chess. It's head to head to head mental combat. That's just a different kind of chess. That's why I thought this was a game. What is it called again? This is something else. What how do they what do they call blindfolded chess? How about just type in two people playing blindfolded chest? Chess. There it is. Blindfolded chess. It's just one guy. Hmm. There's a guy playing 48 games blindfolded. Jesus Christ. Wow. While he's writing an exercise bike. Oh my God. That's so insane. Same same time. Oh my God. That is so insane. What? Is there a video? 80% win right. 80. Can you imagine getting beaten that. It's just. I feel so bad. He says he developed a technique of a memory palace. Oh my God. That is used by memory competitors. Usually to remember things like numbers or the order of playing cards. He said each game is like a room in a palace. Yeah. It's all there. He explained the chest.com. I walk into my kitchen and see that stack of bananas. The abstract images are an analog for specific moves. So presumably he now knows a lot of different fruits. Wow. That is so insane. That memory palace shit is really interesting because you're like you're connecting your memory to the visuals. Yeah. So I can go back to the beginning when you can go through each. I wonder if that. I mean, this is essentially a short-term memory thing you're relying upon. I wonder if that wonder if that does anything for your long-term memory too. Like I wonder if they do say the chest is like one of the very best games for just your cognitive function. Makes sense. Super complex. Yeah. I mean, think of it's basically like running with your brain. Yeah. Right. Did you ever get into it? No. It's scared. It's pretty. I only got into it because I had a cool video game where the chest pieces could fight into that made me like get interested in like the most surface level. I mean, I was horrible. But you know, the opening moves and how each opening move, there's statistically I think the right opening second move to do is the opening move and then you all these combos and shit that you have to memorize. It's so. And then you have to think so many moves ahead. So based on all the possible things they might do, producing all these parallel chest timelines and you're trying to pick the one that's like the one you win in. Chest falls into that whole golf thing with me. I'm sure I'd love it. Yes. But I don't want to do that. I don't have any time for anything. You're like that. I already have a problem with pool. You know, I fucking want to play it all the time. Yeah. Well, I mean, it's a lot easier to for me to like level up and Diablo. Four. Then go to the gym. Right. Incidentally easier. And my brain does not produce the same level of pleasure leaving the gym. But what is it like 30% of that? And I think sometimes if you are particularly weak, you'll just settle for that. You're like, you know what? That's fine. I'll enjoy that. And then it just goes on and on. You know, you need to have undisciplined people on your show sometimes because I'm always struggling with it. You know what I mean? You're like discipline. You but I am like it's an aspiration. And so I'll get going to the gym. I'll start working out. I feel better than I've ever felt my life. You know what got me to the gym by the way? I started going to the last podcast. You described how you feel not working out. And I'm like, that's the last two years of my life. Like, you know, some like, fuck, I got to do this. And like, you know, walking out. It's simultaneously wonderful and kind of sad. Because you walk out and you're like, I feel so good. Like, this is all I just had to do this. Yeah. It wasn't painful. It's fun. Yeah. And now I feel great. And you're like, fuck man, two years. Two years I went off of it. That's scary when you're, you know what I mean? When you're when you're oscillating between those two modes, you know, and you don't want to get stuck in the devil's mode. But you know, it's a possibility. You know, you somehow glued yourself to that. This one, like you, you don't seem to really like fall off. You know, did you at first? No. It's necessary for me. And it's necessary for me for mental health. And also, I'm not, I don't want my body to fail. Like, I don't, I've seen people my age that don't exercise and their shoulders don't work. And they're knees are fucked and they're always tired. And yeah, like that's not a good way to go through life. If you want to enjoy life, you want to have as much energy as possible. And the best way to have as much energy as possible is to be really fit, be really fit and healthy and eat good foods and take a lot of vitamins, take supplements, take, you know, eat healthy food, try to stay the fuck away from processed garbage. Don't drink too much. Right. Don't, don't do anything bad for your health because your energy depends upon this physical form. It's literally made out of what you put in it. It's literally made out of that, both with effort and with food and with sleep. The effort that you take to sleep. Right. And then also the effort you take to have a stress-free environment, you know, the effort that you take to put out as little bullshit as you can and to like be nice to people as often as you can and just sort of keep harmonious, fun people around you. Yes, you feel better. Yeah. You know, like when if I'm going through something like some friends of minds or squabbling and I have to like get in between them and have conversations, I fucking hate it. Yeah. I hate it. Works. I hate when people's feelings are heard. I hate when people are mad at other people. I fucking hate it. And I think a lot of times they can be avoided. But if you're not avoiding it and you're just jumping it at all the time, your stress levels are so high, your comfort levels are so low. You're always going to be feeling like shit. And there's people that get caught up in a cycle of that. They're always calling people out and getting called out and an insult and trying to find the deepest burn. Ooh. And keep that shit out of your life too. Keep that shit out of your life. But don't don't not call things out when something's atrocious. Right. But just the less bullshit you have in your life, whether it's bullshit that you have to deal with because you didn't exercise or your body's breaking down. It's like car maintenance. Like if you just don't ever change your oil, you could go a long time. I dated this girl once when I was 22. And she told me she had never changed the oil in her car. I go, how long have you had this car? She started the car. It was like literal black smoke was coming out of the bag. Oh, holy shit. She had a firebird. And I was like, you've never changed your oil? She never changed your oil. But your car was still driving. That's a lot of humans' bodies. It's the same thing. It's very similar. You're not doing the maintenance. Right. Yeah. Man, it is interesting. You just described two parallel universes that exist side by side. And if I had a bet, there are more people in the discordant, that what you'd say in the inner harmonious reality than the harmonious. I think that probably, I mean, it's cynical to say, but probably what? 70% of people to some degree are stuck in the gravity well of whatever those things. It's a gravity well. That's that. Because that's the thing, man. Climbing out of that fucking hole is the hardest part. But that hole has its own gravity. And the gravity is around addiction to just the stuff you're describing. You're addicted to drama. You're addicted to eating shitty food. You're addicted to staying up late and doom scrolling or whatever. It's a gravity. And so then you've got to crawl out of it to get into that other place. And you get into that other place. And generally the first thing you think is, God, this is incredible. But then the more you stay in that place, you kind of forget how bad it felt in the other place. And that's where the pattern can like you get sucked back into the gravity well. You don't want to stay steady in the discipline. Yeah. I think that's a lot of people. Like that is it. It's more people than not because our natural human instincts are to, you know, brag. It's like to squabble. It's like there's natural squabble that's built into people. But it's a pattern of behavior. It's a pattern of thinking. You can recognize that it's a dangerous pattern or a shitty pattern or an unproductive pattern. And overall a negative pattern. Just get it out of there. Yes. You can do that. I've done it. You can do it. People can do it. You got to learn what it is. You got to admit your own aggression. Yes. Because if you don't, then you trick yourself as you engage in some conversation and to thinking that there is an aggression behind it. And you know, I don't know if you can get rid of all aggression and confrontation. Like I don't know if it's possible to fully drop it. Imagine. But you know, listening to other people too. I have to do that. If you're like you, you, you, you were being short. You know, or you were, whatever. It's not a listen. It's right. Even though I don't think I was, right. Our, our volume might be different or something. We were having a conversation about this last night in the green room too. It's like the way we talk to each other as comics. Like, you know, everyone had a story of how they talk to their wife or their spouse like a comic once. And like what the fuck did you think was going to happen? You know, where like the way you would say something to me, like if I did something really stupid, you're like what the fuck did you think was going to happen? And I would start laughing. Yeah. But you can't make those kind of jokes sometimes with regular people. Like regular people where you were in salt, like you could say like the most heinous joke to Tony Hinchcliffe. And he would fall on the ground laughing, holding his side. Yes. You could say terrible things about him and connecting him to Joffrey from Game of Thrones. And he'll be on the ground laughing. Right. But if you do that too, just a regular guy that you work with, it's very likely he's going to be severely upset. Oh, very butt hurt. And we are so used to talking to each other like that. Dude. I've made like permanent, I don't want to say enemies. But I know there's people who like won't talk, won't talk to me now because I forgot that. And just, you know, I just had to have a habit. Yeah. Just you interact with them. And you can't, you can't do that. No, you can't. I just put, I just put tear, I dropped in my eyes. So my face was wet as though from tears. I walked out in the living room and told our midwife that Obama had died like, and thank God she has, she laughed since a humor. But then still in the room, it was like, what the fuck am I doing? My wife is looking at me like, what are you doing? It's a midwife. You're coming out here with fake tears saying, oh, Obama died, Obama died? That's fucked up. Everyone like went, oh, what? Because you know, it's, it would be so upsetting. But like, and then I realized, what am I doing? What am I doing? What am I doing? You're doing what you're doing the great way. It's a clean room in my living room. You're always doing that. When you say something to me, there's always like this, what's, I know, you should do it. You should definitely meet them. Wow. Remember that last night? Me too. Me too. You were trying to convince me. I can't even say it because I have to admit what we were talking about. Oh, yeah, right. You know what? Yes, exactly. Exactly. That is with comedians. Yeah. From reality. Yeah. Just like making up a story that with each other instantly, it's such a fascinating mode of communication. And it's definitely not normal. My favorite is when someone does it, but with like subtle propaganda, like real on the edge like a Z-Fuggin. I'm sorry. No worries. Wait, hold on. God dammit. Sorry about that, man. Dude, it's a normal thing. What's going on here? Happens all the time. Let me just check, you know. Yeah, you're proud to have a baby. Why we're doing this. I think it's about to have one more human. That's right. And I'm very excited about it. But I'm so sorry that my phone when I feel normal. Don't worry. I would ignore it. No, no, I know. I'm gonna get it. Please continue to remember what you were saying. Oh. Yeah. I love it, dude. The, the, to me, like this once you start applying this to everybody, and you realize like a lot of times we're like using a mode of communication based on our experience with our particular job or business or whatever and trying to get other people or, or even your, the way you were raised. Right. This is you learn this mode of communication potentially from lunatics. Like you can't choose where you're born. That's very true. And then those people enter into conversations, thinking that everyone else understands their, what it's like, to come out of that kind of universe man. And then you're like, you're an asshole. No, you're an asshole. And it's like, no, either of your assholes, you're just, yeah. Applying, you're trying to get people into your reality tunnel. Instead of at least like finding the middle point between your, your, there's still worse. Especially, like it's one thing of you're having some argument with some stranger, but especially when it's like a good friend. Joe, I remember what you were saying. Well, what was I saying? You're saying when people have an agenda, like when you're in a conversation with somebody like that, and you detect some kind of slight agenda in there somewhere. Oh, I was saying you, the, some of your best fake arguments about things, you get real subtle with it. Or I'm like, what is, what is you serious? Like is it right? And then you'll slowly, right? Slowly enter into the preposterous. I got you. I got you. Yeah, that, oh yeah, I know exactly. So if you were doing that with like normal people, it would take a long time for them to figure out what the fuck you're doing. And then when they do, they're like, why? Why did you do that? I know. That they could never, then they would never trust you again. Yeah, it's so seabed. What do I, you just told me is, is, sister was eaten by a bear last week? What you know when I'm realizing, there's a, there's another layer of comedy. There's another layer of comedy. It's green room comedy. Right. Green room comedy is some of my favorite comedy. The best. Some of my favorite comedy. We were crying last night. Yeah. We were crying. Yeah, every night. And it's cool because it's got this rhythm to it. Yeah. Like sometimes it gets quiet. Yes. It's a good idea. It'll start up again. It is so cool, man. Yeah, it's a really interesting thing. It's that two shows, two shows at night is goddamn magic. Because you get so loose. It's so silly. Yeah, man. Yeah, man. Yeah. Like the times I've stayed, I have to leave it because your about to have a baby, I have a baby, but the times I've stayed, especially super late, it's really fun. And so I think the other thing that's cool about it, man, is I feel like everyone is acknowledging how special it is. Like nobody's taken it for granted. Everybody's like, are you kidding? Yeah. Like, we're, we're due. Right. This is a possibility. This is happening. Yeah. Isn't it crazy that it was an idea and now it's a real thing? Yes. It was an idea and now it's a real thing. That's the, I had the wildest idea about ideas once that what if ideas are a life form and the way they manifest in reality is they get into a person's brain and then influence that person to take action to create them. The same way. is they get into a person's brain and then influence that person to take action to create them. The same way, like a parasite will get into a grasshopper's brain. Like a water, like those aquatic worms and they convince the grasshopper to commit suicide so that they could be born. Like weird shit happens with parasites. What if ideas are a life form? Does everything that exists that human beings have created? Just think about the fucking immense amount of objects that we've created. All of them came from ideas. Yeah. All of them. And we think of this is my idea. I had this idea. But we both know that ideas are very strange. They come to you in the weirdest ways. It's the reason why people believe in the muse. It's the reason why press fields book the War of Art is so good. Yeah. Because when he documents this sort of journey that he goes on every day when he writes, where he summons the muse, he does it like, and he is in his mind. I know it's a real thing. And then starts to write and treats it like a ritual, which are going to be there all the time. What is happening there? What are you summoning when you get these ideas? Whether it's summoning something that's a creative work, like literature, or whether it's the invention that changes society forever? Right. All of them came from ideas. Yeah. And a lot of them, like a lot of the great ideas, like Tesla, he just openly admits it came to an a vision. Yeah. He saw it. Like he doesn't even ascribe it to his own mind. It was like a vision. Don't you feel that way about some of your best jokes that they just pop in your head? Yeah. But you know what's weird about Tesla? And I'm sorry you guys have been wrong about this, but I read it and was blown away. And I think it was on his Wikipedia, but I could be wrong. Apparently he was thinking about Faust when he had the vision. Now, I hope I'm not wrong about that, you guys. Jamie, Jamie would you mind? I'm sorry, dude. I could be wrong. I'm sorry, y'all, if I am. But yeah, so Faust is about an alchemist. He makes the, yeah. How poetry inspired Tesla to design one of his most important inventions? Do do do. Once I'm there. There it is. Faust. Yeah. One of the lesser facts known. One of the lesser known facts about Tesla is that he was also a great fan of poetry. It was an expert of curtains. I think Gurda. Gurda Faust. Gurda Faust. Gurda Faust. That inspired him to finalize his invention of the alternating current motor, the term world-changing invention, certainly applies to this innovation. So what inspired that was a poem. I thought was a play, a poem about an alchemist selling a soul of the devil. So all of modern technology originated from the inspiration that he derived from a poem about a satanic bargain. Whoa. Is that wild? When Faustian bargain? The Faustian bargain was the, according to the person who invented it, was the inspiration for technology that we are still like using today. So then you go back and you think, well, what inspired Gurda? You know? And then you realize it's like this crazy wave of, like it ripples through time. Like somebody gets inspired, writes it down. It's beautiful. I don't know how long past between when he wrote that and Tesla had his vision, but certainly obviously Gurda probably had no idea that when he spent the time writing that thing and trusted or write it down, he was going to warp the entire planet. His poem was going to ripple out and warp the entire planet just from a poem. That's wild, man. Isn't that crazy? Isn't that nuts, especially if it's so meta? You weren't wrong. It is a play, but it's written in verse. It is a poetry. Gotcha. Wow. 1808. 1808. Someone writes a cool poem about selling your soul to the devil. Cut to now there's self-driving cars. Oh my God. I guess they're string. I mean, even back to the club, the idea of the club, you know, when we were all talking about doing it, these ideas were just like, yeah, then we could do this. And then we could do that. Yeah. Should we have this? Should we have that? We spent a fucking year and a half of doing this. It was a long process before it actually got built. Well, that's the problem with ideas. It looks like they mimic, and I'm not just saying this because my wife's pregnant, they mimic childbirth. In the sense that there's some kind of gestation period. That's, you're intimidated with your inspiration. Yeah. Then you've got to start growing it. And then the phases of growing it can be like really torturous and long and like, somewhere in there, you're like, this sucks. This is really the dumbest thing of all time. And then you keep working on it and maybe realize that's true. Or you find the fixes. It's like a puzzle. But that is why so many people I think are letting inspiration come all over their face. But not letting it inside. I always tell people that the way I try to think about things is bandwidth. I try to think about, I pretend there's a number. Let's say that number is 100. I have 100, 1,100 units that I have for my information, for what I'm allowed to think about, that what I can use my brain for. Anytime I put stuff in there, that's nonsense. Anytime I put stuff in there that's negative or unproductive or at least unless it's funny. Yeah. Anytime I'm putting stuff in there, that's taking away from all my other stuff. And one thing that people need to understand is that one of the things your brain will do to protect yourself from whether it's the pressure of success or succeeding or accomplishing things, your brain will when you're presented with the stress of trying to accomplish something. It will put extra emphasis on all these stupid things in your life to distract. Yes. And it almost like protects you from the stress of having to do the work. And you see people sabotage their lives. Savatars their careers. You see it happen to artists, musicians, fighters, comedians. It's a normal thing that we do just as human beings. You get freaked out by what you know you should do. So you spend more time paying attention to the things that you shouldn't do. Yeah, man. Soaps sabotage. Self sabotage. Very real. Very real. And based, at least my own assessment of it, it's based on the delusion that the feeling of procrastination is less painful than the feeling of doing your work. And it couldn't. It's the opposite. Like procrastination, you spread it out across your life, like your weeks. You just spread this nice, shitty coding of procrastination, mild anxiety, general like sense of like, I'm a piece of shit because you're not doing it. And then when you finally get around to doing it, you realize the thing you didn't want to do is so fun. Most of the time, engaging, interesting. But if nothing else, you feel so much better because you're finally taking care of it. And you realize all that anxiety, all that if you somehow could quantify the amount of anxiety you're going to feel procrastinating versus the amount of anxiety you're going to feel doing something, you know what I mean? It's exponentially more anxiety from procrastinating. So the logic's all wrong. It's a fucked up way of dealing with a problem. It's a master procrastinator. You know, I feel like I can talk about this because like having identified, it's always feels better when you do it. Always. Then your brain will worry and I think in a more healthy way. I hope mine does eventually. No, I think also Duncan, you know, you're so busy. And you're so busy with your family and you're so busy with your podcast. You're so busy with your comedy tour. It's like, yeah. It's very hard to allocate time to do stuff. And one of the ways I have it easy is I have a gym right here. I'm a gym at home. I make it easy so I do it. And I just, I have to do it. If I don't do it, it don't feel good. I don't think good. I don't act good. It's better for me. It's medicine. And so I take my medicine and then I'm happy Joe. Hello. Yeah. Everybody's friend. I want to give everybody hugs. I want to be nice. I want to see everybody succeed and grow and I'm not in my own head. Right. I'm free. Right. So I have to be free. For me, I feel like the human body, especially when you've put a lot of demand on that body over a long period of time, like I have, it has requirements. Yeah. It's like a dog. You know, when you have a dog, one of the things that I do with my dog is I exercise that dude. I throw the ball for him. I play with him. We jump in the water and swim together. Dogs need exercise. Right. They need it. It's like, and when he gets it, he's like chill. And relax. And when he doesn't, he's like a little antsy. You know, you could tell like he's a little down. Right. He wants to exercise. He's a dog. We, yeah. It's fun. He likes chasing that fucking ball. Let's go. Right. I get so excited. I always feel like I'm boring him. I'm like the ball again. He's like, fuck yeah, the ball again. Let's go. Yeah. It's never not fun for him. Yeah. And so that's his medicine. And when he gets his medicine, he's a happier dog. Right. And that's my medicine. Yeah. It's just a thing you have to do to maintain your body at the best form. Yeah. And if you maintain your body at the best form, you have the most energy. If the most energy for thinking, you have the most energy for activities, you have the most energy for anything physical that comes up. You know, I, I'd like being strong. I think it's important. I think if I could give him who's an option in pill form, like could you, would you take this pill, there's no side effects other than your health will improve. And you'll be much stronger. Would you take it? Everybody's going to take it. Yeah. Of course, well, that, that exists. It's just not a pill. You just have to exercise for long periods of time and be very consistent. You made me picture in my head how fucked up will be to come home. Your dog is laying in bed, playing video games with like some Kleenex on the floor next to you. You would, you would take him to the vet like immediately you would take them to the no, I'd be like, how long you've been doing this, man. You can play video games. Can you talk? That's what I'd say. Do you remember my bet? Do you remember my bet about the talking dog? Yes. You can talk. You can play video games. We're going to be rich. Oh fuck man. We shouldn't get high anymore. Oh man. Yeah. If your dog was playing video games, it'd be the coolest thing ever. You could go play video games with your dog. What if he's good? Society or collapse? Like that would be the end of society. No one is fucking anymore. Like that's just play video games. They would with their dogs. Just get a dog. That's going to be a real problem sometime soon. Anyway, there's going to be, they're going to invent something that allows you to orgasm with your mind. Yeah, there's going to be some neural link type deal where once they tap into functions the mind and start expanding the abilities of these neural links. Can we tap? It's going to be nuts. And they're going to figure out a way to reproduce more effectively with less errors without biological sex. Sure. Since gender is just a construct anyway. Everyone's just going to slowly eat plastic until you dick shrinks. And we're all going to become aliens. You know man. Before we become aliens. I honestly buy into that idea. But before we become aliens, all the weird shit in between us becoming aliens, that's the part that like what the neural link stuff or the inevitable, whatever the brain interface shows up as. The inevitable day that someone hacks into whatever the server is that's dishing out feelings or whatever it is to people. There will be like an orgasm wave because someone's going to hack it. Someone's going to simultaneously give like an incredibly powerful orgasm to everyone on the planet. And you'll just watch it around you as people like come super hard because everyone's neurolink a hack. Like if that's going to happen or whatever. Or something more sinister. Something I don't think if I was an evil dictator I'd make everybody come. Yeah. But if you're a troll, you would. If you're on fortune. If you're not a devil, you would. If you're a devil, you would. You're not a devil. You're not a devil. 100% 100% 100%. An orgasm wave. You'd watch like the president, they time it with the president's speech and you'd see what Biden looks like when he comes. Probably starts yelling. Oh, bang, bang, bang. Yeah. I mean, that's the, I love that part of society is interesting though how there is a subconscious to society. Like that within society there's the self that people present. And then underneath it there's all the shit nobody sees. All the shit that people do behind closed doors. All the shit that isn't that person they put out front. And you know the bigger the tension between those two things is the worst your life is going to be. But the yeah, man, it's just weird to think about that. Like no matter what, no matter how professional a person presents us. No matter how like they've got it together they seem to have it together. You don't know. Yeah, you can't take spaghetti paths. They could go home and just cover themselves since spaghetti and cry. A lot of crying. Yeah. So that to me is interesting. Like within society is a whole hidden realm. And specifically as far as I'm aware, no one has seen a president come in the public. Like it's more secret than aliens. Like there's no video of a president coming. There isn't that I'm aware of. We will never know. You don't think on Epstein's island, those videos, presidents coming like you have played them like over and over. Well, do you why do you think Epstein had that giant painting of Bill Clinton in a dress in his for you? Dude, do you know that picture? Yeah. That painting Epstein's taste in art was not great. Like if you look at the shit. That was great. That that painting is like I got you, bitch. That's what that is. Oh, right. You got a president who was on the flight logs 26 times with Epstein and you got that guy in a fucking dress in your house. Okay. I'm done. I'm sorry, dude. I'm officially dumb because I've known about that picture. And I've just been like, why would anybody want that picture? That is I got you, bitch. That just still like, hey, yeah. That's I got you, bitch. I got it terrifying. That's terrifying. Imagine if I knew some horrible dark secrets about you and you came over my house and I have a giant painting of you right when you walk into the front door. Yeah. Of you in a dress. Yeah. And I'm like, hey, buddy. Hi, welcome. You're right. How fucking terrifying that would be? That's terrifying. You know, he knows about it. I mean, you walk right in and bam. There's that painting. Now you kind of control a president. Holy shit, dude. Holy shit. Well, that's right. 100% what they were doing. 100% what they were doing. Dude, I just don't even want to think about. I don't want to think about all the like entities. We'll never even know about that ride presidents around like a fucking horse. They just gallop around on them. Just riding around. We got another president. We did it. We last owned another one. We got one. And that is so crazy to think about. Like a president who is being extorted, the president of the United States, being extorted. And like what the hell would feel like to be the president and know that you are no longer actually the president, that you are now the like you are just a puppet of some other fucking thing. Oh, dude, I hope that's not. I would think you're right. But God damn that's sinister. I wish it was just bad taste. Just shitty fucking art on your walls. Uh oh. No. No. You can't shitty art of your friend who you flew with 26 turns. Joe, I just I didn't put it all down. I didn't put it all together. You're right, man. No, that is clear what that is. Yeah, clearly. Oh, that's wild. It's wild. I got a P. Me too. Let's come back. Where are we? And you were creeping me out because you were like, there's like you have a talent for creeping me out, man. Like, like when you describe bear attacks, you fucks me up for a while or shark attacks. But yeah, we were talking about, uh, we're talking about the Epstein Clinton painting and how, you know, sort of like the implication of anything like that or the reminder of anything like that is because the, the, our leaders are human and humans are culpable and hackable and it's easier to invade a country or take over a country by just control the leader. You control the country. So there's a clearly a pressure there. There's obviously people who love to do that and probably try would try and have probably succeeded a few times, meaning that our understanding of democracy is like the president represents the people. It's like totally wrong. But in fact, it's potentially someone being controlled by people you'll never meet or maybe never even know existed. Hmm. Yeah. Creepy. That can't be true. Well, it's got to be true because if it was, well, they would never if you had an enormous organization that controls everything, yeah, control everything in the country. Would you really let a new person just run it every four years, right, whatever way they like? Right. Wouldn't you, if you're there forever, you're there forever, you're not there for four years. Yeah. You're running the various agencies and like wouldn't you make sure over time that you secured enough control that the president really is just sort of a figurehead? Joe. I am a doctor and I'm sorry, but it seems like you're in a sense of misinformation. Not, yeah. Mal information. Mal information's put the thing up. Say this was fact checked in his wrong because to me, it feels like, yeah, you're like implying that the president, the president of the United States past presidents were controlled by secret groups or corporations or something. That sounds crazy. What's preposterous? It's a democracy without, that's not even possible. Nobody, nobody on this planet would ever want to control the United States without having to invade it. Nobody would ever want to do that or try to do that or succeed in doing that. God damn, man. You definitely couldn't do it with money. No. Presidents don't like money. No, they generally shy away from it. Most of them are dead broke even when they're in there in the White House. Like, you know, they're like dead fucking broke. That's why Bill Clinton ate McDonald's. Every day, every day, people had to loan a money and shit dude. He would get his car booted and couldn't go full into getting the boot off. Yeah, this is why all of our American politicians are like the poppers when they get out. Middle income. It's isn't why all of how much they actually make. It's insane amount of money. You look at how much money they get out after they get out of the White House. Yeah. Like, what? What are you doing? How'd you make that much money? Just got back into business. Yeah. You weren't in business at all and jump back into that housekeeping business. Now you worth hundreds of millions of dollars. That's kind of crazy. You know, just some, you know, actually I have a blind investor. I have a, what do they call it where they don't know? The investments being made like I just happen to have like a really good business due to like invested the $10,000 I saved up before I became president and it turned into millions. The most transparent one is speaking fees because it's speaking fees are a way that you can give people money. You can just give them money and they perform a thing. They talk and it could be the most uninspired nonsensical horseshit talk. It does the matter. They're going to get a half a million dollars. And then that's just a normal amount of money that you get. And then you go here and you make it over there and you go here and make it over and you collect from everybody. So you have some sort of financial arrangement but that financial arrangement is about speaking fees. See this is what I'm talking about, man. This is the liminal or subliminal part of the human experience. What you're talking about right now is upsetting to people but also a lot of people will say don't even talk. You're not even supposed to say that. And even though it's true, like even though it's in plain sight, trackable, traceable, precedent for it in the past, not even that like astounding. You were supposed to like rest in this strange dream world where human beings experiencing some of the most power you can have in the world. Don't go a little totally or completely insane or don't get hijacked or don't get like we're supposed to pretend that doesn't happen. When you look at the president, look like just Biden seem like he'd be hard to trick. Would you even have to trick him now? Maybe. It's so hard to know what goes on behind those closed doors and they're making decisions. Don't want to meet. See they made it. They sent an extra, how many billion dollars they accidentally sent to Ukraine? 6.2 billion dollars in accident. They accidentally sent it? Yeah, 6.2 more than they were supposed to. Well then they just sent some more. That must have been a rough phone call that. The county area provides an extra 6.2 billion for Ukraine military aid. Whoops. Sorry. I'm thinking, look, I kind of fucked up. I was a little bit of ketamine when I was doing that. Whatever the transaction. So can you send back the $62 billion? 6.2. 6.2 billion dollars I actually sent to you? Can you just send it back? Because you think if it's a clerical error, right? Then they're going to be like, oh shit, I didn't notice the 6.2 billion dollars coming to my account. That's how rich I am. I'll send back. There's so much money. Because I get some point. You know, it just, I don't even know what it is. There's billions, lots of billions. Yeah, it's pretty weird. The Pentagon said Tuesday that it overestimated the value. The weapons that sent to Ukraine by 6.2 billion over the past two years about double early estimates resulting in a surplus that will be used for future security packages. Oh, don't worry about it. Just use it for future security packages. It's a security package. It's a surplus. What do we know, man? Security packages. We don't know shit. And I'm just saying we're going to keep sending money forever and ever. It's a security package. It'll just go back into the pot of money that we allocate. That's a big fucking pot. Future Pentagon stock drawdowns. Look at that. Future Pentagon stock drawdowns. Ew. Why does that sound like they're playing a game? You know what I'm saying? That sounds like a game. Carlin's got the ultimate bid on it, man. Like the evolution of war language. You know, it used to be called shell shocked, but then they change it. It's like the whatever that language is is inevitably confusing. It's confusing and it's also it has this air of authority to it like the judge wearing the robe. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, by talking about it that way, stock drawdowns and you know, Pentagon allocated money to the same money, but in May, they found three billion more back then. I don't know if that's 10 or if it's whoop, they just doubled it. Well, their keyboard's probably broken. All right. Like some mistake. It's a mistake. It's a mistake. It's a mistake. It's a mistake. It's a mistake. It's a mistake. It's a mistake. It's a mistake for people. But we're all doing the right thing. Even though it is like mainstream news, that's what I like that's so brilliant about it is that they're just like, yeah, you know, it's a pot. We had a pot and it goes in the same pot. It's the other stuff. It goes out there. Everyone sees it. Everyone's busy, dude. Yeah. And no one has time to really like start thinking about 3.2 billion dollars. 6.2. 6.2 billion dollars that we've all put into that pot. Like every single person living in America has put some dollars in that pot. And some of those dollars, you know, bridges are fucking collapsing. You know, it's, it should be mildly frustrating to people mildly frustrating to realize 6.2 billion dollars of like fireman checks, teacher checks, nurse checks, the front line workers. That money is like, doesn't that matter enough for them to like be more careful about it? And also when they fuck up like that, where's the apology? You just blew 6 billion dollars of tax money. And it was a mistake. Like you're not keeping like imagine if you're a accountant made the same mistake. Just basic account. Would you keep that account as your accountant? And if you did, you're a fucking idiot. You got to fire that account and get an accountant who doesn't like misplace so much money. Right? And especially if the accountant didn't apologize, which is like, oh, right. Well, as you see, we have a different pot where some of your money gets a pot thing. It's allocated. It's allocated. It's allocated to the pot. Do you know how complex our pot system is? You should see it. I've got a thousand pots back there varying sizes. They did change according to astrological shifts. Don't even worry about it. It's just a pot. I kind of got to go. Okay. What? Come on. Like it's so frustrating. It's so frustrating. It's very wild, dude. Very wild. It's very wild that they just keep printing money. Jacking up inflation, printing money. I love that one because it makes it into the printing money thing, which obviously have money printers. It's really funny about that. Somehow people believe that that money doesn't go just right hot off the press to people in the building. Or that it doesn't, like some of that money gets shifted around and like, you know, or some of it is printed. I know. I'm sure there's like no other securities in place. We have securities in place. It's numbered. We've got to come on. Right. If you have a money printer in America, are you fucking kidding me? If you're the main printer of money in America, like you're the one who like presses the printer on the computer to print out two trillion. You're the main printer of money in America. Like you're the one who like presses enter on the computer to print out $2 trillion dollars. Wow! You're like, that's like living next to the sun. You're just... Imagine being that person. What does money even mean to you? Nothing. It's like, it must be so weird. This piece is a paper art. Everything that people are struggling for. And you know the smell of it? You come to work, you come home and you smell like money. You smell like the ink they use for money. You have to pour ink into a... I'm like, why do they... What's the ink? What's the ink? And you put it in and what is like the ink that... the pre-money ink look like? Not only that, they have to do it in a very complex way, so it can't be easily duplicated. I mean, just think about how silly it is. That paper money. Like it's paper. It's kind of paper. Paper. That you can't duplicate. Like no one can duplicate that. Like you have to make it so complex that it can't be counterfeit. And change it up. Yeah. But they have like little things in them. And you're like, you look at it a certain way with like... Yeah. I've seen it. I mean, it's gotten increasingly like... You know how you talk about the... I love it. The race, the evolutionary race. Like every time like Gazelle has to get a little bit faster. And then if it's getting faster, the predator has to increase its speed. And so there's just like evolutionary pressure to like keep things going faster. Same with counterfeit, right? It's gotta be like... So they're like, okay, we saw the problem. We put a like triple hologram underneath that is... It would require 700 micro sheets of paper to duplicate. Somebody's looking at that and being like, how much money would it cost to duplicate that? And they're like, oh, probably a million dollars. And they're like, great. Well, pay for it with a money we print. Well, take the loan, print the money and pay for it. And then they're like, fuck, they figured our duplication technique. And then our hologram technique. And then they're like, fuck, we gotta put something out in there. And then it's just never ending... I imagine like... Right before we're a cashless society. Hopefully forever, dude. I hope forever. I hope we net... Like it is so scary to imagine the like losing the privacy, losing it all completely because every transaction is in the public eye or observable. That's really scary, man. I mean, it's like, I don't even do anything interesting with my money. Like except like tip on the road. Like, you know, I use my card and I know that's... The argument is that's traceable. I ain't very realized that. It's scary because there's an option. You wanna just like blow some cash on something. You can't. You could just... No one will know. It's the... Whatever it is. Not that I would ever use cash for anything other than legal purposes. It's just like... You know what I mean? Like one day in the future. Everything will be traceable. That's right. And that's... You know, this is where I get... This is where being raised in a Piscopalian. In the book of Revelation, it's gonna... It's a Christian. You're gonna read it. This is where I get scared. Because it's too similar to the mark of the piece. It's too similar to exactly what it says. You won't be able to trade. You won't be able to do anything. Unless you have the mark. Unless you bear the mark. So what is that... That term... How's the mark of the piece described in the Bible? We should read it. Because I think you're onto something. We're now officially podcasting. This is fucking it. We're opening up the book of Revelation. This is... We're in now. Ugh. Yeah. The mark of the piece. It's like you can't do anything. You can't tell. If you don't take the mark, you're fucked. I mean, that's... That's that. Like if you were to move the ability to trade currency in a private way... Yeah. You now... You are now controlled. You are now monitored. That's like... Then I saw another beast rising out of the earth. There are two horns like a lamb and it spoke like a dragon. It exercises all the authority of the first beast in its presence... And makes the earth and its inhabitants worshiped the first beast. Whose mortal wound was healed. It performs great signs, even making fire come down from the heaven to earth... In front of people. And by the signs that it allowed to work in the presence of the beast... It deceives those who dwell on earth... ...telling them to make an image for the beast that was wounded by the sword... And yet lived. And it was allowed to give breath to the image of the beast... So that the image of the beast might even speak... And might be to... Cause those who would not worship the image of the beast to be slain. It also causes all, both small and great, both rich and poor... Both free and slave, to be marked on the right hand... Or the forehead. So that no one can buy or sell... Unless he has the mark. That is the name of the beast or the number of its name. This calls for wisdom. Let the one who is understanding calculate the number of the beast for it... Is the number of a man and his number is 666. You know, so wild. That stuff. Reading that. It is really clear that they spoke differently. Yeah. And also really clear that you are getting a translation from another language. Like this is the best version of the English translation they could give us. It gets weirder when you get to the original. Like when you get to the original. Cause one of the reasons that seems weird is... That is a code. It is not like it is encoded. There is some kind of other thing in there. Jimmy just pulled this up. The classical Greek word, Shahrama, Shahrama, Shahrama, Shahrama, Shahrama, Shragma. Translated as the mark of the beast in Revelation 1316 can also mean any mark engraved imprinted or branded stamped money, document or coin. The mark of the beast is interpreted differently across the four main views of Christian eschatology. That is a code. So that is a code number one. Just one way to connect to it. And it helps when you are honest like a Dalek is forget about the whether or not it makes sense. But imagine like a mind produced that. So whoever wrote that. Like what was their consciousness like? Dude that is some heavy shit. Like and it is so specific. When you get to the original. At least I have not done it for the book or the book or the book of John. It becomes even more intense and more like wait. What? In the beginning was the word logos. So you realize suddenly like within it is the psychedelic cosmology that in the beginning there was like truth. There was this truth reality. And then that truth like manifested extruded itself into time space for a second to like talk about like heaven or to talk about like the real reality outside the simulator, whatever you want to call it. And this is the best and it gets translated a lot of different ways. It was something like it was a light in the darkness and the darkness did not understand it. So it's like the truth appears in the darkness. The darkness is like I don't we don't even know what this is. I can't see it. I don't understand it. And then that was the like Jesus is a representation of that. The manifestation of that possibility of like pure truth appearing in a world of darkness. And whoa dude that's fucking core. Regardless of historical truth or whatever. That's just a beautiful and deep heavy way of talking about parallel universes or the possibility of things happening on a planet where people have gotten completely lost. Or suddenly in the midst of that something appears that isn't lost. That is like a pure representation of a higher consciousness or something. Sometimes it likes to talk. It's like when you it's like sending like you're putting yourself in one of your Sims in SimCity. You just go down there and you're like okay, here's what's going on. And then pop back out. And then they kill him. That's the best part. It's like the and so the book of John I just look this up because I'm writing about it. But the book of John is Matthew Mark Luke synoptic Gospels. They have the same stories in the mostly John not synoptic and has all this weird shit in it. And not that any of the other stuff isn't weird but particularly weird stuff in it. And so those three gospels they have within them something that I've always struggled with understanding the logic, which is to be cleansed by the blood of Jesus. Sacrifice the God, child, drink his blood, sins, cleansed. Whereas book of John it has less of a focus on that and or the redemption through the crucifixion. And more saying the crucifixion itself was the ultimate because it was the like collision between light and darkness. Where light instead of getting aggro, fighting back. Just like prayed for the people killing it and died. And like dude you're not going to sleep at night. If you're crucifying somebody who's praying for you, who's like looking at you and loves you. Not in a fake bullshit spiritual way, but loves you and knows you. Know is known you forever and loves you and truly forgives you. Oh dude, that fucks the whole game up in ruins darkness. It's the ultimate atom bomb in the face of power. Yeah, go ahead and kill me. Dude, it's really cool. So regardless, the book of revelations and all of that stuff, I think it clearly emanates from an expanded consciousness if nothing else. Like you think there really was a Jesus. Well, I think, you know, I read that controversial book by Reza Azlan about Jesus. Pretty good. It's called, oh, jeez, Jamie. I'm sorry. I don't know the name of it. It's so dumb. I can remember what books say, but I can't remember their titles. But yeah, he says apparently there are references to zealot. And it's controversial. I know some people don't like it, but I enjoyed it. It says like apparently there are references to a Jesus, but never described as Messiah, but as a magician. He was going around healing people and stuff. So there is some reference to the being, but you know, like I get so bored with the attempt to find the historic Jesus. Because I think it really misses the point altogether. Like I think like you get so caught up in like trying to like find the grail or whatever that you lose track of regardless of the truth of this being walking the earth. Does it change the substance of like the parables and their referencing of some realm, a transcendent realm, a possibility outside the suffering of the mundane world. outside of like sucking Emperor Dix, seeing it a little bit of power. Actually there's something in any person's life, like you can just like wake up and see it in Kingdom of Heaven. No, sis. So to me, I don't care if just a lot of smart people who are trying to convey an ancient cosmology created like a character to embody that. Because I don't think that was to me, that's not the point. I know for a lot of Christians it is. And I don't mean to fenjal. It's just, you know, I'm sure any Christian out there, if you're not like wrestling with the Bible anyway, you know, you should wrestle with it. You're said it's meant to train you or get in your head and like grab you and confuse you. And then it's an amazing work. It really is like the New Testament. I mean all of it. So some of that one of the controversial aspects of when Martin Luther translated it, when they translated it into phonetic language so that people didn't have to know Latin to read the Bible. Yeah. And he, one of the more controversial things is he was like, I think he was expressing something very similar to that. That you're really supposed to like get out of it, what you get out of it. It's open to your interpretation. I think it would, it loses all its power if it requires an actual flesh being. And I get why people want that. I understand the argument. But like to me, written within it is like, you know, the communion for example, right? Jesus never said, here's how we're going to do communion. He did like say something really quite beautiful about which is like exactly like maybe the sweetest thing you can say to your family. If you're dying, which is when you eat good food, remember me. And when you drink wine, I'm going to be in that wine. Oh my God. That's so sweet. It's so beautiful. And it's like such an invitation for everybody. Anyone you can all eat. I'm in your bread. I'm in like I'm in what the life force itself to the point where you can connect with me just through basic like diagonals. I love that. It's beautiful. Like it's such a great way of fucking up the middle man, the priest class, the hierarchical bullshit. It's like no, I'm here. I'm completely with you right now. Yeah. Just you gotta reach out. And so these whoever wrote that, I think that's what they were saying. It's like you're kind of in a weird part of the multiverse where it's easy to forget. There's a lot more going on than what you think is going on there. Yeah. And it's easy to fall prey to all the tricks of that place because it's a tricky place that wants you to worship it. And you don't have to do that. Like that's beautiful. So yeah, I don't care who it. I don't care who whoever wrote it or the people who wrote it or the, you know, the, whatever the true story is. It's going to be a mystery forever. Yeah, but it's such a fascinating mystery. It is. Like I wish I could read Aramaic and then read the Dead Sea Scrolls. God, I know man. Because that's the oldest one we know of, right? That's the oldest version of the biblical stories. I'm pretty sure, man. I mean, I wouldn't. I'm pretty sure. I imagine there's fragments and stuff that like. It's so fragmented that they had to use DNA to determine whether or not the scrolls were from the same cow. So like when you would find pieces of animal flesh that were from different cows, they knew, okay, we'll put that in this pile. God damn dude, that would have been a fun archaeological date to be working on. But also, what a mind fuck. You know, like trying to piece that puzzle together and you try to figure out, how old is the Dead Sea Scrolls? Like 4,000 years old or something? Dude, I don't know. I have no idea. See how old the Dead Sea Scrolls are. I know they found them in Kumeron. They found them in Clay Tablet or Clay Potts. Third century BC. Wow. Wow. Wow. Yeah man. I mean, then like when you get into like the Torah Hebrew, when you get into like the, a lot of the stuff Jesus was referencing. And you realize like not only is it like powerful writing with like incredible parables in it about like ways society collapses or families collapse or a life collapses. It also is like mathematical like that, that you know, I can't remember the name or there's a whole thing where you like the number, you know, I know we've talked about this God in nature, same number like. God in love is the same. Yeah. So it's what the fuck? It's ancient Hebrew. They're their numbers doubled as letters. Yeah. And then you see there's an intentionality to that patterning. Yeah. And so then then you realize like, oh, so like on top of telling these powerful stories, they figured out a way to encode within the powerful stories more information that only people are going to find if they dig deeper that's designed to be there for you if you want it. But you've got to want it. You got to dig in. You know, in the days like that language is too complicated. Listen, band in it. I mean, that shit. They abandoned it. We think about how complicated. Ancient Hebrew. Oh yeah, yeah. Yeah, any more. Also uncovered was a 6,000 year old skeleton of a partially mummified child and a 10,500 year old basket, which is really authority said could be the oldest in the world. A CT scan revealed the child's age was between six and 12 with the skin tendons and even hair partially preserved. 2021. I don't remember hearing about this. I don't remember hearing about that. I've never heard that. Wow. 8,000 BC. I'm sure even one of the 8,500 BC when I found this basket was made. Wait, what is the, can we read that among the recovered texts, which are still on Greek is Naehoom 1566, which says the mountains quake because of him and the hills melt the earth heaves before the world and all that dwell there. And who can stand before his wrath? Who can resist his fury? His anger pours out like fire and rocks are shattered because of him. I mean, that's nature. Wow. Hold up, hold up, go there back there. It says the authority said these words differ slightly from other Bible versions, shedding a rare light on how biblical text changed over time from its earliest form. The dead, the Desi scrolls have a lot of really weird stuff in them. Like what? Well, you know, the Christian stuff, the John Marko legarosto from the sacred mushroom in the cross. That's all his interpretation. I'm sure you would have to be a scholar to understand even what the fuck they're saying. But he was essentially saying that you can trace back the word Christ to an ancient Sumerian word, which means a mushroom covered in God's semen. And he thinks that when God orgasmed on the earth, things would blossom from it. This is like what the way ancient people used to think of when it rained. He literally think God was coming. And then when those mushrooms would just appear out of the grass, which mushrooms grow really quickly. You know that. So when people would wake up in the morning and see these mushrooms after the rain, and they would eat them and trip their fucking balls off. John Marko legarost believed that this was the source of the original Christianity. And it was a lot. We was about psychedelic rituals and it was about fertility cults. Yeah, it was about people trying to duplicate, trying to have children. I mean, that's crazy, man. Yeah. Oh God, that would have been so fun. The trip back in. It's from God's jizz. It's from God's jizz. It's from God's jizz. It's unless your knee breaks and there's no doctors. There's no nothing. You just die. Infection, die. Yeah. I'm driving. Oh, there's a lot of drawbacks. I'm driving. No pedicillin. No antibiotics. No vitamins. No grocery stores. No hand washing. No hand washing. No knowledge of what's going on with bacteria. They probably wash their hands occasionally. I mean, they're killing fish. I'm sure they're shit. We're not doing right now. It's a species that we should be doing. Like some thing where in the future they're like, they didn't, they didn't tap their pineal glands every morning. Right. What? I thought there was one hack. Yeah, it just what a hack that makes you live longer. But yeah, I mean, I think if you explore the psychedelic universe as a as an existent place, that is has its own consciousness, its own mind and is interested in spreading itself into like little bubbles of like, I don't know, parts of the universe that have forgotten about it. Yeah. Because that's the thing. We get amnesia of it here. Everyone's a mejic to that reality. Exploring like, you know, the idea that sometimes it wants to send a letter here. Yeah. It tries to break through not just the Jesus, but with any like of what we call a messiah or profit or whatever. It's just like a leak in the dam separating us from eternity and paradise. And these leaks appear in the form of people saying these things that run counter to power structures. And almost immediately the leak is sealed crucified or whatever. And then the whatever they were saying, it's co-opted and suddenly a hierarchy appears within the things. And now you've got a pre-class in Christianity. There's a, there's a entire hierarchical systems of Christianity. And that's fascinating to me because like the, the thing that my understanding of it is like you don't really need a pre-class. Like you don't need any you and me, like you and truth. You get to, you get to hang out together without anybody telling you actually that's not that real truth. Your mind is broken. Here's the perspective. Yeah. When one person is the person who decides the way things should be and makes the rules. The translations. Yeah. And they dressed like the Pope. They dressed like the Pope. There's a, well, I mean there's so many costumes for it. Yeah. But generally if you see someone wearing a costume and it's not Halloween, you know, or you're not like a convention, you better watch the fuck out especially if the person wearing a costume is telling you that they are such an authority on this subject or that that you can't even fucking question it. That your questioning itself is offensive. Now you got to watch out because if that's happening you could be in a cult. Like if someone's telling that to you if they're like, we don't even ask that question. Yeah. That's, you better watch the fuck out because that once people start doing that man. Yeah. You know, they shut down. Then now they're shutting down the truth. Or the joy they come from turning on the light in the darkness. You know, like the joy of when someone comes to you confused, truly confused. And you give them like real data that can change their lives. You know what I mean? Now you're ruining that possibility. Not to mention you're telling people not to trust their rational mind. Like the essence of who they are. Like it could be off a little bit. Oh, watch out man. People in costumes. Yeah. People in costumes. It's just wild that it works. Police uniforms. You know, look, it cops. How to just wear guns and like a badge around their neck with regular clothes. That would be a disaster because there are so many like at least now if you want to like impersonate a cop, you got to like go to a costume shop. You know what I mean? Now anybody like I'm a cop. Isn't that crazy though? They like they have an outfit and wear an outfit. Yes. With a star. Some of them. With a special star that imbues power. I mean, this is credentialing. Right? Like this is like once you have gone to the university for a certain amount of time, gotten deeply into debt to the banks, you were given a credential or like a license, right? To practice whatever the particular thing is that you went to school for, but you like essentially have like given the banks all this fucking money to get a magic star on your certificate where people know, okay, this person is the real deal. And that that that that is really like fascinating man that that you know, when I go to a doctor, I want to see some fucking certificates on the wall, but I never in my life going to a doctor. Like remember the certificates and gone home and like, did he really go to that university? I never. Never. Well, they have caught people doing that pretending to be doctors. No, it's leasing office space setting up fake things on the wall. Dude, I saw a whole forensic files about it. Like I think I did surgery. Oh my God. Like I think I was like had his hands and people's guts to trick them into thinking he was a doctor. Wow. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. People are fucking crazy. Yeah, man. And it's like I just think about like if it's like people are printing money, you think people aren't printing certificates for themselves of this school. And I just knowing in general people are lazy. No one's going to look this up. And if they do, I'll just change my phone number. If they don't, I'm a fucking doctor now. I'm a doctor in a hospital. Wow. Yeah. Well, there's always been frauds. There's always been these weird people that pretend to be somebody. It's such a strange thing because it's just like an exercise in how well you can just keep pretending. You know, because you got to pretend for a long time and you got to tell people stories about where you went to school. And yeah, what hospitals you've worked out. Yeah. It's it's camo. It's like it's just like any other predator man. It just figures out how to like blend in or turn into its prey and then boom, you're in there. I look, why are we veering into this paranoid land? It's like so scary to think about that. But I guess you're supposed to. I guess that's it's important to like recognize that aspect of things or you get like, you get fucked over usually. Usually. Usually. You have to be aware that some people are just full of shit. You have to be aware that some people are just their sociopaths. They don't have the same sort of emotional connection to others. And what they're doing is like trying to play a game like I'm going to pretend to be a doctor. What who says I'm not a doctor? Yeah. I'm going to talk like a doctor. I'm going to listen to doctors on YouTube and way they describe certain procedures. I think I could do those procedures. Oh, you know, fucking just pliers on someone's tooth. Oh, no, they're just lying. I'm an dentist. I'm a dentist. I can't be a dentist. It can't be that hard. They're just teeth. How hard would it be? You just put some putters. You just drill it in your teeth. You're nervous doesn't know. She thinks she's a doctor. Yeah, man. She's just a nurse. She got hired. Yeah. Or the dental system. They're going to be right. What is just an assistant with rubber gloves on? Someone works there. Yeah, dude. Like what the fuck? It's like we, you know, again, you just have to like it's, you realize like if all you have to do is put on a costume and you know, maybe not everybody, but enough people are going to be able to do that. If people are going to think that you are important or more advanced than them, all you have to do is put on a costume. Yeah. Of course, people are going to do that all the time. All the time. People do that with business suits. They wear business suits. Yeah, they wear business suits. And you know, people, there's something suspicious about it. It's like, shouldn't, shouldn't just what you're saying or your skill set be enough. Like the fact you have to indicate on top of that by wearing like a weird outfit, that's suspicious. I mean, I'm not saying ceremonial garb is important. I get it in like certain like rights. Like, you know, the, the priests wearing what they're wearing all has significance. It's a fractal. It represents something like, I'm not saying that it auto means something's fucked. I'm like, but it's just such a exploitable flaw in society. You know, that's all. It's like even if it's exploitable, it's. Mean something's fucked. I'm just like but it's just such a exploitable flaw in society You know that's all it's like if nymphics is exploitable. It's been exploited I mean there's like clearly you just go on YouTube some lunatic Just decides to start pulling people over. Yeah for sure. I wonder if anybody's ever pretending to be a Disney employee Like give people tours and they're just a crazy person. Oh my god Like somehow you just get the Mickey Mouse costume in there. Yeah. How could you well? I bet there's so many employees How could you know there's a way? I mean you could certainly like sneak in and probably find a costume and like get into it and then just walk around Disney World and nobody would know Florida man pretended to be Disney World staffer to steal a famous character, please say oh Hi, Florida man. Oh, it's Florida man. Oh, one year ago today. Oh Interesting a man allegedly pretended to be Walt Disney World employee by wearing a name tag Work pants and a work vest to the theme park in May Florida man It was looking for security got job at Walt Disney World has been accused of stealing a character statue from the park in May Wow Argy D to statue worth up to ten thousand dollars. Wow Christ Tung grand for an argy. Did you start you you guys switched to Disney. I found the story of a teenager who got access to two different hospitals And bought a car for like $50,000 before you got caught This says he just went up to the like customer service area and said he lost his badge and someone a volunteer gave him a badge What one of the places? Oh my god. He's in all kinds of places inside the hospitals. Oh my god Don't think he did anything, but they also says he bought these scrubs for 60 bucks He had access critical care areas including emergency room intensive care units operating rooms Cath lab and even newborn nursery. Oh my god. So this fucking maniac was just around people's newborn babies Nurses became suspicious Bailey went largely unnoticed and spent weeks hanging around the hospital from March 31st 2022 to April 28th 2022 then one night in the ICU Nurses got suspicious in the ICU He was talking about his girlfriend and cars just all sorts of stuff and the more he was talking about the more I felt something is not right Holy shit, and I identified nurse told investigators I don't know if he was specifically asking for access to the computer But he was just mentioning that he doesn't have access and he was asking how you get access Nurses found Bailey's social media account and realized he was not who he said he was They reported it right away and the teenager was escorted out his badge was disabled and the police got involved A month of him just wandering around What a weirdo He's talking about girls and cars that threw him off like what is it? What is he talking about? What's supposed to be working? Why is he spending so much time in the newborn area? Just wandering around with his badge dressed up like a nurse. Did you ever see that there was like some YouTube video like People realize if you carry a ladder and no movie theater you don't have to buy tickets Like if you walk into a movie theater holding a ladder people just assume you work there and you just like these kids Were just filming themselves going into places with a ladder. It's like the ultimate key to get you in to anywhere That's so ridiculous Dude, I know it is ridiculous. There's just so many you know levels of Society that if you don't have any ethics or morals you can just hack it. Yeah So it's like just terrible really You guys for me and just sure you can walk in anywhere with the ladder as long as you look like you know you're supposed to be there Don't stop you He's in a restaurant just walking to the kitchen five star hotel No one stops them I see people doing this at the Oscars at different music festivals They just get the credentials and just show up and just find the right person Yeah, it's crazy. We don't number our cinemas. Yeah, cinemas are not numbers I just Okay, yeah, look I don't know. I mean fortunately for us. There's like lots of people who aren't you know false prophets That was the word for it false profit like I think that's in the book of revelations of the rise of these false prophets who Like where the costume But they're the opposite of the thing Most people I've met like from the rom-daw's retreats and stuff certainly my meditation teacher David Nick turn if you just met him talking to him You would never know right away that he had like trained with Show you and jump out Rampishay one of the great Buddhist teachers He's not putting it out there. It's not like you know what I mean, but then Other people with those retreats you forget like you'll meet these people who've spent their entire lives meditating like Living in caves in India, but they're wearing a wine shirt So you've don't you just forget for a second You're talking to them then you realize you will realize because there is a difference there is something there that's like what's the big difference? You know what are the closest thing I can point to you it sounds so weird like the times I've been hanging out with you Every once in a while being out with a UFC fighter or Like some weird Seal or something, you know like some dude who like is like You know they come to the UFC whatever so You're hanging out with them and then you realize like this guy is like for someone who like Could murder me right now is the nicest guy ever met in my life You know what I mean? They have this glow they have this like they're tuned in In this way now. I don't mean to compare spiritual teachers to UFC fighters But I think what they have in common potentially is discipline like real rigorous hardcore focus discipline upon some system and With those teachers man there there's this like glowy Non-bullshitty very authentic quality to them and inevitably you present to them something that's bothering you or or whatever and they have this way of just instantly Shifting the energy around it so that you feel like it's manageable or you can it's not what you you realize fuck man I had framed this in this horrific way and they just have this ability to Shift that not like in a bullshit way like always look on the right side. Get out, but a real compassionate What a way of like I feel like you do it to people sometimes like you see people and then Sometimes people are really good at seeing people but they're not good at forgiving what they see or they're not good at seeing like There's a possibility in anybody to be happier yeah, right and seeing that possibility They just see the shit that's making them unhappy You know and focus on that and and and and those people are dicks But like some people can see through that to like where you you could be and they believe you could get there and they do it effortlessly because they're trained They've trained themselves and being compassionate. Yeah, that's fucking incredible to be around that energy man I mean, it's like a good feeling because like you know when you're doing it. It's not like you're all fake You get serious, you know, there's a seriousness to it when they're talking to you when you're having that kind of conversation It's not like frothing necessarily and But mixed into that seriousness is like they're just trying to get through to you like to show you something Right, they want you to be happy. Yeah, it's very hard to know sometimes like what if someone is Being real or if someone is putting on a role Well, yeah, yeah, well, yeah, the the uh, the uh, children of ribbit shape would say One way you could know is it whatever the particular tradition is it's being articulated or whatever the thing is it should feel like fresh baked bread right out of the oven So the energy behind it is like does not feel stale musty When you're around it, it's like even though the traditions they might be Connected to or old as fuck You realize like oh shit. It's The tradition itself is like irrelevant like what the what the tradition was pointing to is outside of time And so you know what I mean so that that's that's where you when you're around it You don't just get the feeling of like fresh baked bread. You get the feeling of like this is like cutting edge like you're around like really advanced technology like a feeling of like Whoa this not only is this like right here right now in this moment, but uh I've been blind to it like I couldn't even see it until like now I'm seeing it and then That the idea behind that is not for you to go to them So you can keep seeing it The idea is like then hopefully that sets you on fire. So you your life becomes something like within your life is an attempt to like kind of Remember that or see it or like you know Recognize it, but this is why we need friends Because you will forget it or offer get it. Yeah, and we need people to like No, like hey Center whatever but like maybe just in the way they are. Yeah, she's looking very weird when they move off on their own away from their friends to some new place Dude, yeah, it gets real weird. Well, we're Now you have your family, but you don't have any friends like you don't know anybody there It's a bizarre reset Yeah, man. It's like it's fucked up because it takes a long time to have good friends like you know years and years and years get invested in like an informal way Yeah, man, and you you know, that's the thing like you gotta This is uh Well, they call it satsang is the name for it, but it's like a spiritual community. It's a fancy like word for Formation that appears in all things. It doesn't have to be connected to some spirituality. It's just like this energetic Like affinity or Happens between people and sometimes you'll meet people And you know, you know them right away. You feel like you've known them forever like there's an instant click with some people You know that's the satsang like it's beautiful, and it's like it's uh, it's a great name for a very normal thing. I don't think it's like necessarily crazy or like it sounds Maybe I'm making it overly spiritual, but you know, I meet people sometimes and it's like I've known you forever And it's like we're picking up a conversation Seemingly that we've been having Like many lifetimes That feeling that's just because it's it's so Refreshing when you meet someone who's genuinely engaging with you in a conversation It's the thing that people normally do right you have conversations, but how do you know Many people do you meet that really good at it and how many people do you meet? How many people do you meet that when you have a conversation with them? It's like really enjoyable it's really and there's a lot of like like there's a dance going on Yeah, it's not just one person just Spitting out and and you just taking all the details of their life's journey like okay, and then what'd you do? Oh wow, so do you talk to your sister still? Oh, you know, that's cool. Where is your aunt now? Oh? info dumping yeah info dumping oh That could be exhausting even when someone has an a fascinating life Sometimes that's exhausting because it's such a an attention hog of the conversation like it's it's hogging up the whole conversation Now because when you info dump, you know your life generally takes a long time to describe So this is like if we're hearing dinner for 40 minutes It's a speech like bring slides if you're gonna do that bring slides like do a presentation a visual presentation but Listening it's like like it's like when you get like when you get around a person who's listening to you Regardless of like how good they are conversationally like when you realize someone's like actually like listening and You know that that that that feels incredible man and especially when Like They're mixed in with that listening is like love Wow like like is the best. It's the best feeling ever and even if like you don't you don't agree on shit or you're gonna get confused about stuff or Whatever yeah, man. It's listening. Mm-hmm. We just Listening is like there's some people it's like it's very difficult to dance Some people suck at it. Yeah Yeah, it's not good You know, it's it's also requires concentration Sometimes people don't want to concentrate or agenda. Oh the other problem is agenda So it's like you know I love chatting with you and like any time An agenda starts popping up in the midst of our conversation. I try to banish it from my Mind so I like pop back into the moment But that agenda when that creeps into somebody You can see it on their face You're like fuck man. They've already decided what they're gonna say to me So why do I why do I even keep talking and they're just and now they're wrestling with you Like when people want to debate about things and you know that it's not really about the ideas It's about them trying to win It's so I Know I know that people love to do that certain people that love do that like I don't want to do that Dude I do I've done it. I just feels horrible. Yeah, cuz what do you like any like especially in like an argument people you love Some sometimes you being right It's like it sucks like great. So now you're right. Right. So now you're angry and right now What now I'm now you're just angry and right no connection has been made nothing is like changed other than you are Right and you're angry and that's man. That's sad when anytime like you win that kind of argument it's just like Nothing happened nothing change. Don't say it's gonna save us as neural link and once we get those things synced up And then there's gonna be no misunderstandings no miscommunications and everyone's gonna be held accountable There's gonna be an awkward couple weeks When neural link comes out there's gonna be two weeks of real awkward moments You'll find out how people really feel like all these dudes Who like have these Like if you're like an eight-year-old guy and you're married to some 30-year-old Instagram model So might you've tricked yourself, but if they do I know would you really think about you? Oh My god, I don't really like real good. It'll put gold digging right out of business Or they'll they'll have to get really good at masking their intentions Yeah, or they can they can like assume a persona for a certain amount of years to acquire a certain amount of money Or at least like if you let someone come dig in your gold. It's consensual. You're right. You want to come dig in my gold Right come dig it has to be that I have lots of gold once there's mine reading it's gonna have to be that way Yeah, it's just like hey can I dig in your gold for a couple of weeks? It's gonna be one of those deals for like I mean no disrespect to gold diggers or prostitutes, but it's basically prostitution You're doing it for money, right? If like if you're if you're some lady who's a professional-temptress and you can cling to some 82-year-old billionaire Yeah, like that is a very good financial bargain Like if you could somehow or another get in that will like how does that work? I don't know me love me or not So why am I not in the will when I tell you that I love you and you tell me that you love me. Where's What happens when you die? Am I gonna be taking care of? Yeah, Duncan. Yes. Yes. I'll put you in the will my dear. Show me. Okay. Look here. Show me show me there What's show me gobble gobble gobble? It was worth it Especially with their old ill like fuck the kids Fuck the fuck the ex-wife Fuck the shareholders. I 82. I just think probably like if if I was gold digging Number one I would like have to trick myself And to thinking I'm not gold digging to successfully execute a gold dig right like I have to So it's like yeah, shit's rough man. I've been able to pay my rent things are kind of fucked up I was hanging out with Bernie. He happens to like, you know As a massive amount of money from his business and you know, I don't know he just I know it sounds crazy because he's so much older than me But I feel like we have a connection You won't understand it. It's outside of time like this ages of just a number. Yeah, so you to fully Pull off the heist so to speak you believe In what you're doing and some and because it's a human being and because really like it's some level Bernie is still 30-year-old Bernie underneath all whatever's collapsing around them You do connect to that. Yeah, and you do start loving it because the cognitive dissonance Of being a pure of sociopath is too much So you fought you a part of you Fause in love in a weird gross way That definitely would probably end the moment. He's like, I don't care how many times you suck my dick I'm not putting you in the well But but maybe while he's alive It's worth it just for the perks. I don't know man. I mean this I'm sure you get it Ferrari I would love to hear an honest It must exist an honest story about a person you did that because I could imagine like the beginning phase You have this idea in your mind Well, really the fucking awful idea you have in your mind probably is that money is going to heal All of the emotional trauma That led me to a place where I would manipulate old people for their money You know what I mean it's right then you get the money And now and you and then you've your face with that awful realization like oh fuck I'm still fucked up Yeah, he died. I have all this money. I'm still fucked up. It didn't work and I and now I have to live with that I mean it's really really sad truly, but I mean also people like old dudes who have like You know hooked up with his girls. I get it. Let him. Yeah, I get it. Let him But I get all of it. Let him let it you know But what's interesting is like if a woman does like marry an 80 year old billionaire then he dies and she gets all that money She carries that For life. Yeah Like everybody she meets is gonna be like she used to be married to her And then when he died she got billions ever. He's gonna be like oh She's odd Yeah, this is a person Yeah, she's a bombshell and she married some dying old man Yeah, it's gonna be those people then it's gonna be people who are like That was badass congratulations good job Yeah, there's gonna be some people like that, but that's just a narrative. That's like a movie narrative What you were looking at is a deceptive person. It's like it's like It's a weird con game that you can do if people's emotions Dude, it's just you know man like fucking survival Survival is embarrassing. So when you get scared Very embarrassing when you get so scared that you you You're so consumed by your own fear that you Allow it to control you to the point that you like become a manipulator or a Con artist or Rifter or whatever and like behind it is just fucking fear It's like you know like you people get mad at the TSA It's like you can't really do much worse to the TSA than what They're already doing. Do you know about it sucks? I imagine to like rub down people all day long You have to drive to the airport. You're not going on a vacation You're gonna like be rubbing the back of your hand against irritated Stranger dicks all day long all day long and it's like if if a judge sentence someone to that That's cruel and unusual punishment. You would be like no You can't do that like that's inhumane. So it's like with This archetype of person man. I think like the suffering there experiencing the confusion the lack of security the uncertainty Realization at some level of their like inauthenticity That is a pretty intense punishment just buy it there alone Like what's your but is it a punishment if you don't know anything else because like if That's one of the things like remember when Gary Coleman was a security guard Yes, and people would like show up to his work and make fun of him Yeah, no one would do that to a regular security guard, but you do it to a guy who used to be famous You do it to a guy who used to have some right and now they don't and now you can just throw rocks at him Yeah, it's so brutal. It's weird It's weird because it's just a regular job. There's nothing wrong with having a regular job But if you had escaped That world and you had made a lot of money and then all of a sudden you have to go back to it and have a regular job People feel like they openly could mock you. Yep. Very strange. Right? Very strange like ha ha You have to work Right just like all of us you have to work like Yeah Work like what do you do it? Why you yell at this person right? Why you creep with this person out? The common thing in particular man. I remember like Hearing that and you see the photos when he was dead. He got a gold digger and like when he was married to this lady She took a photo of for the for the gram like right next to his body You ever see that photo? No here. See if you can find that like She took a selfie with get yeah, look at this So here he is she put that on her Instagram Look at that. I mean what was a while ago So I mean I don't know what year we're talking about if they even had Instagram Like I get doing that picture just because you want to remember someone you love or whatever I can't imagine publishing it though Poor dude poor dude poor dude Fucking rough one Whatever often man, it starts out with this amazing thing all of a sudden America loves you You're on a television show and you're the star. Yeah In that that is one of the wildest things that happens to Really young people they put them on a show and they're a star And then the rest of their life is trying to like Figure what the fuck happened. Yeah, like what? What was that? What was life? Dude. I mean this is the whole Right now there's this huge uh debate Over like the the model of Instagram influencer that films their kids all the time. Oh Right like the argument is like you know if you want kids to work in the movies There's all these protections from the really intense protections now But the Instagram stuff that you're monetizing like filming your kids and some kind of weird self-produced reality show There's no protection for the kids like there's no like You know, I think child actors now their money gets put in a trust You know that so there's a huge argument right now over like is that even like should that even be legal? So it's just like babies that have their own Instagram account or something like what do you it's a mode of? It's like a I don't watch it a lot my wife's like tells me about it sometimes But it's basically a mode of like you know putting up YouTube content So you're like parenting YouTube channel you're filming your kids every day all day long filming them like sleeping filling like Just as a for instance. This is this has happened a couple times on YouTube Child abuse charges against YouTube channel mom underscore the lack of oversight for kids Law insurers professional child performers are safe educated and not working too many hours But they don't extend to stars of popular YouTube channels. Oh Yeah, and so you have like really overzelics parents exporting their children Dude, it's like it's it's relentless and I think some of the kids are now like coming of age and talking about how fucked up It was like you know because it's like it's the birth. It's their birthday And then the toys they're getting them they're giving them for the birthday or toys that have been given to them by brands Right so and so there's a video of them opening up the toy by the brand and that acts as an advertising Yeah, yeah, so they get birthday gets turned into a commercial What's that James fucked up? I mean I'm not gonna share all of the details I guess but it's not good. Oh Yeah, child stars of YouTube hit fantastic adventures Allegedly abused by adopted mother the children told police their adopted mother starved beaten pepper sprayed them when they failed to follow directions for videos official said Oh Dude, I don't remember who this was but like Aaron showed me I guess like one of these people Um and again, I this is a second-hand information. I didn't read it But I know she's like sees this stuff set Basically there was some protection that got put in place where If you wanted to watch their video. I don't know what it was like They were being demonetized or any their point so they were gonna have to go behind a paywall And they were I don't know there were saying something about how like Something about pedophiles Admitting they knew pedophiles watch those kid videos You know what I mean? I'm like trying to rationalize The way they were doing it because it was making it harder for the pedophiles to watch kid videos to watch them some crazy shit like that But that's the other really fucked up aspect of it is that When you have a huge audience and you're showing your kids in bathing suits there is a definite percentage of the audience that Are not interested in watching your kids Saturday barbecue or whatever the fuck you're doing Remember don't you remember when like they figured out a way in the youtube comments? They would leave time codes for when the camera was like Instagram algorithms connect vast network of pedophiles seeking child pornography according to researchers Whoa Not to mention they're deep-faking their kids for sure, you know like they're taking the kids and they're deep-faking them and God knows what so you scroll back up to the top Jamie the top words is so Parent company better says established a task force to combat the problems and It says Instagram's recommendation algorithms have enabled a vast network of pedophiles seeking illegal underage sexual content and activity according to a Wall Street Journal expose a In a two thousand eight hundred word article published Wednesday the journal said it conducted an investigation into child pornography on Meta-owned Instagram in collaboration with researchers at Stanford and the University of Massachusetts Amherst Wow Holy shit, dude. Yeah, man. Yeah, this is like, you know The fucking organized pedophile network. Yeah, you really have to think when you're putting your kid online Like regardless of like whatever it is because you have to understand You know you are showing pictures Pedophile network. Yeah, you really have to think when you're putting your kid online like regardless of like whatever it is Because you have to understand You know you are showing pictures of your child to strangers. Yeah, and now there's technology I mean they're already what you think they're just deep-faking celebrities right and so you know Then add to that the monetization in other words So when you're mate you're filming your kid and you have a very popular YouTube account With like featuring your child You know that when you upload that thing Like people are watching your kid and jerking off right and And and and and that these people maybe know where your kids go to school where they live You know what I mean so that is an emergent Issue right now from protection. Yeah. Yeah. It's like a one of the weird things as we approach the singularity It's like one of the weird cultural issues that haven't been dealt with yet. Well, I've been very lucky to talk to a lot of people that were famous when they're young, you know from doing this podcast yeah, and I've never met one of them that came out better because of it I mean every one of them is just like struggling to try to figure out Why did I get exposed to all these strangers as a child? Yeah, yeah Well, I was exposed to all that attention as a child when I'm supposed to be developing Interacting with people trying to figure out what it how to move my body How to talk how to interact like why am I doing this publicly at six? Yeah, I mean your childhood Was converted into money. Yeah, like they took your childhood dropped into a money machine Mm-hmm, and it's like and and you couldn't consent and then your parents were so excited Well the parents are usually getting rich right and but and they're also saying like thank you Look at this life. We have you're so talented So then if you start feeling like I don't think I want to act anymore. I don't like this or this feels fucked up I just want some more free time all the guilt All the guilt kicks in cuz you're like I gotta keep doing it It's keeping my parents afloat the whole lifestyle I'm so fucked up to do that to get to deal the kids childhood and turn into money That's a great way to put it and then pretend Did the child is complicit you you trigger yourself as a parent and thinking we're all on the same team Isn't this great? What an adventure and it's like dude I? You know just my kids don't like it Sometimes when we are just taking pictures and I don't blame them You know I hate it when people take pictures and but they you know any parents taking pictures there kids But sometimes my kids are like they don't want the phone and it's like okay. Okay. No problem Imagine all day long all day long mommy's setting up another shot in the kitchen Spooky people are so nuts with attention. Do you hear about that one guy that crashed his plane on purpose for YouTube views Yes, okay jumped out of the plane hike like let it fucking crash For life reviews for views. I Mean I guess when you're doing the math and you think I'm interested to deliberately crashing plane to get YouTube views so like This guy just jumped out of a fucking plane So like who knows who's kid that fucking plane is gonna slam into yeah? Imagine you're hiking with your family. This is amazing And you get hit in the face by a plane By a plane that was like flown by a YouTube influencer Why would I mean just ruin that plane too? Well, I think the calculation is he knows the number of views he's gonna get on YouTube Well generate more money than the plane was worth so there's a profit there like whatever you paid for the plane is probably Less than what he'll make from YouTube from that video And he got video footage of the plane crash See the camera on the plane It is so crazy. We could do this now that we can convert our lives and the money It's so crazy. You could like just film yourself doing shit and then like maybe make So much money off of like just stuff that you know normal stuff So was this guy trying to say that he The plane crash Happened with him in it was he trying to like fake that and they had a hike out is that what he's doing? Or did he like let people know that he jumped out of the plane Alright here film that it was an accident that actually happened in 2021. Oh and it they just found out about the whole investigation happened It's cool man. There's there's videos of pilots Watching the video and like making commentary on why it's suspicious because like apparently you look at the plane And there's stuff that should be in a plane that's not in a plane like expensive stuff Yeah, he said it's like that he was acting like the engine went out and he had to bail But he also then went and knew where a crash and snuck back in and pulled the wreckage out before like the FA could go and investigate He pulled the wreckage out. Yeah He says it told him to preserve the wreckage. See the way the two days report the crash I Think he had already gone. Oh, it out of there something like that Huh More than two weeks after the crash. He had a friend and flew a helicopter to the crash site and air lifted the wreckage To Rancho Siskwok and Santa Barbara County where it was loaded onto a trailer attached to Jacob's pickup truck Is that wild? Yeah, he unloaded in a hangar drove the wreckage to an airport He then cut up and destroyed the airplane wreckage and over the course of a few days deposited the attached parts of the Rex airplane into trash bins in the airport and elsewhere Yeah, super normal would be just chopping an airport an airplane up and Put it in trash bins all over the airport think of like your inner dialogue is your depositing your plane Right you do to a body That sounds like it sounds like he's doing to a body. Yeah It was he was just trying to like it like like it's such a complex Way to get YouTube views like it. Yeah, it worked though. It worked but now it's gonna go jail Yeah for maybe a long time like yeah like I think so I'm gonna hear his faces Holy shit 20 years for a stupid YouTube stuff in a penalty of up to $1,644 for each day. He did not return I mean we do need strict penalties for sure for to keep people from just just like dropping planes out of the sky on us Yeah, yeah, you got a set of example for a guy like that and that guy could root dude I know who knows where that planes What happens if that plane catches wind that's so wild lies in the someone's house And then the guys are mass murder when they were making YouTube in the early days I don't think they ever thought that like there would be plane crashes because of their technology I don't think they ever thought like this thing is going to like influence right society and just destroy lives People are gonna ruin their lives for for views on this thing Imagine that guy had a plot out where the plane's gonna crash too Because he had to be jumping high enough where you can jump I don't know what that threshold is, but you got to be pretty high up there where you can jump and then film yourself Before even pull the parachute right so he's filming himself Yeah, I mean it was a plan like he thought about that plug and plane is way up there way up and that that sucker's How long do you think it flies for it? If you really do you've? That's a he could have killed people easily present. I mean the assumption is no one's gonna be out there But I mean that's a huge assumption such a huge assumption you could hit another plane You could do there's a lot of things that can happen. Yeah, you're way up there and you're bailing out While it's way up there So it has to be up there enough where you could jump out. How high was it when he jumped out? Does it say I'm looking for more details you just said he was trying to get a sponsorship deal With who better help Almost figured out so I just let people look that up you can kind of guess it's Doesn't say the name of it though, but What do you mean you can cut a guess does it's a wallet company? Oh, oh God Jesus Christ is trying to get a sponsorship It's I mean this era of capitalism is So bizarre like the way people are manipulating the system or just the what they're doing Wow Just yeah, that's what I love regardless how also you have to like ethics aside Whoa, yeah, that is badass like pull away the ethics Just look at like purely What you not only did you like fly your plane in this guy jump out of it But yeah, he represented the United States snowboarding in the 2014 winter Olympics. He's an Olympian and then he like put himself in the worst situation and managed to hike out and then Like monetize it dispose of the plane. He has a friend with a helicopter Who is like yeah, sure I'll get your wreckage? Fuck man, that's like pull the ethics out and it's like what a fascinating Rod and dude right like yeah, right? He's got a friend with a helicopter that pulled plane wreckage out of the mountains He's got like those are that's that's how you know you got a friend Yeah, or you're paying a lot right because like well Was what he was doing illegal Like yeah, you do this probably some rules like if you have to report a plane crash You can't just like take the wreckage. I imagine there's enough like ways you could talk your way out of that one really Yeah, I know you told me you reported it. Yeah. I didn't know. Yeah, right that I'm sure. Yeah I mean I don't know look. I don't know. I'm just out here working fly my helicopter around I don't know what's going on just picking up a broken plane. I am but a helicopter pilot. Yeah Yeah, I imagine the helicopter pilot is like price sweating a little bit, but he's probably okay, right? Like is there gonna focus on the yeah maniac who Who was playing into a mountainside for YouTube views? What a world what a world? It's interesting because whenever these are emerging technologies exist like social media sites where you can Do things to get attention you're going to see certain people that They grab a hold of it in a very weird way certain sociopathic psychopathic Members of our society who go I know how to do I am going to pretend to assault people at the mall or I'm going You know there's a lot of those that shit so weird and they do it for and some of them get fucked up Like they've jumped people at the ATM machine Like pretend jum like give me all your money and God just beats the fuck out of them. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I know. I mean it's a prank It's a prank. They always seem shocked. Yeah, that's the like why are you stupid kids that are living in the internet? Yeah, I've seen a few I saw though like I think some kid at home depot just got slammed to the ground like you know They're trying to fuck with these like old But big people who are like Definitely like the best part of their day. It's beating the shit out of something little puke with a cell phone. Yeah, maybe they're year Boy 16 fatally shot during prank gone wrong in northwest Indiana. Oh, no He was shot and killed in an apparent prank gone wrong 16 year old was found suffering from a gunshot wound to the chest in the backyard of a residence just before midnight Officer began administering CPR victim showed no signs of life He's pronounced dead at the scene police had the initial investigation determined the victim of an 18 year old We're in the back the victim ended 18 year old We're in the backyard with friends when the 18 year old pulled out a gun as a prank and it accidentally discharged striking the boy in the chest. Oh, that's different That's different like he didn't God God damn Jesus Christ. It's just you know this technology man like it's just it's it's growing and we're like yeah It's been introduced to this population This biome and and like yeah, it's like any other thing when you're introduced it to an ecosystem like it causes problems that you never expect Yeah Real problems this similar thing this guy got shot doing something like I guess like one of these YouTube videos where they're fucking with people in a store This is what I'm getting off of the video That's another guy he was fucking with someone like I shot him. It says he was harassing the gunman Yeah, so fucking sad Good night everybody imagine being a kid just trying to figure out what to do in this world Imagine being a teenager and you're looking at all the different possibilities for your life as an adult like what are you gonna do for a living? Yeah, and influencers one of those I Know real that's a real possibility. No. Yeah. Yes. Totally man I mean that yeah or like You know the other possibility the new job is prompt engineer if you're that no prompt engineer is a name of per Like it's like essentially an AI whisper it's someone who knows how to tell an AI Specific instructions that work for some goal. It's so generally like that's like art. Maybe like because you know talking to mid-journey which is the same text to art AI like there's a lot like when you like the the amount of Weird specificity involved Comparing three hundred seventy five thousand dollars a year and you don't always require a background attack. Oh wow Someone offering eight hundred K the other day Jesus isn't that cool It's like when now there's a job where you talk to robots where you're better at talking to robots than other people That's a real job now. It's and and God knows the other weird like by the time like you and I are super old man Like what the shit everyone's gonna be doing is gonna seem so odd. Yeah It's happening quicker and quicker. That's what's weird. It's like society is transforming culturally quicker and quicker Technologically quicker and quicker. It's like it's going to make these giant changes that are gonna happen at such a rapid rate That it's gonna be hard to remember when they didn't exist before. Yeah There's no time to get used to it anymore. There's no time. Yeah, you used to have so long to get used to even like stupid news like the room Which was like remember when the floor robot came out everyone was like what the? But we had time before the next thing came out now because of AI It's working on things and solving problems so fast that like they already Jamie, do you see that thing? It's a it already like solved some big problem in medicine. It's like it's already like Figuring shit out that's gonna have direct applications to a human lifespan Curing diseases and the amount of time it might take for to get to that point with human brains is Way way longer than the AI brain is that the Foulstein bargain because in the process of giving up Your your the way source information to artificial intelligence Then just starts to take control of our other aspects of your life. Oh Why don't we just do government we can do government better than people. Yeah, yeah Do you have to pee again so bad? Yeah, me too, man. We're back. We're back Dude, uh, so hard to concentrate when you have to pee it really is crazy It's like you barely get four cents since like I don't even remember what we were talking about I was just I had a piece so bad dude I love that we never remember what we're talking about. It's Really, I think is it like irrelevant honestly Ultimately because like what's on your mind right now? Yeah, just what's on your what's what's going? What's on your mind? The second man just like fuck I just you know The fact that like this is a conversation in like the UFO universe that's happening which is a watching all these like hardcore I'm still worth it. I just realized that in my thing though the like hardcore skeptics hardcore skeptics are now It's just interesting to watch and again until I see a UFO I'm gonna be skeptical. Yeah, super skeptical, but it's interesting to watch the the gradual shift that's happening And people who are like big time to bunkers. There is like not like okay I think they're real and I don't blame him for saying I don't think they're real because it's like really what all your all there There's still going off of like just people saying it's real, but the fact that the people saying it Like Marco Rubio coming out now. Did you see that shit right? But isn't it interesting? This is my observation What they're saying is they talk to people who say this Right, that's everybody. It's could including crush crush is saying That he has access to information and he was aware of information He was aware of things that the public wasn't aware of and so he wants to Be a whistleblower because the public deserves to know about these things. Yeah, but he has no access to it Rubio said he talked to people in the government who said they had first hand Right, but he talked to people who said they saw the thing under oath though, right right But where are those people like I until those people are standing in front of the camera Going I was on the spaceship. Yeah, I met the entities. They talked to me through telepathy. Yeah I think we might be close. They've got that hearing coming up and I and I know that I'm a lot of the early I like to believe that a lot of the sort of Careful wording of things right now is to protect people who worry that they'll get killed They have a sense of like shit man. They're gonna kill me if I tell you this But I because he did it I'm gonna come out and say it and You know so they I think they feel like shit. We've got to be very very careful To protect these people. I don't see any benefit for any body in the government to go on statement Saying that they've talked to people within The US military who I've seen UFOs. What's the benefit there? Like if it's not true, you're gonna look like the biggest dip shit on earth You're gonna be ridiculed. It's gonna ruin your career. But it's just a politician So I don't see much of a benefit in them coming out and saying that stuff That's the part where it's like I can't trace the how Marco Rubio What's he gonna run the next time he runs? He's gonna be like I'm the guy who got tricked into thinking there was UFOs right? Yeah, it has to hit sort of a wall of Public demand you know where the public demand is like hey, what is the enough people are talking about it There's enough Whether it's Commander David Freaver or the New York Times article Jeremy Corbel all these different Different videos they get released where there's enough credible people talk about it that they have to kind of address it And if someone like a senator like Marco Rubio How's a conversation with someone when they're saying yeah, we have crashed UFOs and we have alien bodies and we're hiding it from the people Yeah, dude and then that we're gonna this has been going on for 80 years Here's the deal if you are a politician and you realize we've all been briefed on this shit And it is coming out and you you other people don't have the guts to come out and say it You realize to be the first politician who came out and told the truth now There is benefit there. There's a lot of benefit and like the courage to come out and like support whistleblowers because dude I read an analysis of it That's so creepy because it points out that US taxpayer money is being allocated to if it's true. I'm saying our taxpayer money is getting allocated to Some organizations that are outside the control of the US government This is and has been doing it for 50 60 years This is unconstitutional like you can't do that like what does that mean that that means that there is a second Power structure within the government out truly like a secret right something and and that is like Be like you you we're paying for it and if you're benefiting from the technology if you're selling the technology to private Contractors and making money off of it like that like that's supposed to be for us Free energy whatever it may be. Yeah, so that is where it's sinister sinister is well also imagine if you're the government Imagine if you're let's say the Air Force and you have Control over some vehicle from another planet Where you have if that the airport wants jets they don't make them They hire someone to make them right they have a military contractor that has all the engineers and know that expertise and they hire You know all these people that actually make jets right right they need a jet they buy a jet If they acquire a spaceship They're not gonna hold on to it themselves. They they don't have The people to fuck with this thing they're gonna bring it to the people that make those things They go hey you guys make the stealth bomber tell me what the fuck this is right Tell me what the fuck this is yeah Yeah, man and and and can we make one and if we can't make one can we figure out how it runs Yeah, at least tell us how it runs. Yeah, any idea. Yeah, I heard that like Jeremy was on my podcast was talking about how they uh It's apparently um, I'm sorry Jeremy if I misquoting you. This is from me And obviously like so forgive me if there's a Error in the way I'm saying it, but uh It like it's compartmentalized. Yeah, so some of the reverse engineering people theoretically Don't even know That they're looking at wreckage That's what Bob was our said on my podcast He said part of the problem is like science can exist in a vacuum science is collaborative and The metallurgy guys weren't talking to the propulsion guys. Oh, yeah, but he talked to anybody you had like an area where you're allowed to Go and look at the vehicle and you know You were with your other teammate and everybody reported on everything that was said and done and yeah, man And just it was too limited for them to ever really figure out in his belief at that time So we're talking about 1989 if what he's saying is true What he was saying was that they were bringing him to this area and he couldn't tell us why if he couldn't tell anybody Where he was going and they were flying him to area s4 where they had this UFO They didn't have just one they had multiple ones and This sort of alliance with with brush was saying because they think brush would crush the saying is there's 12 of them They have 12 which is like For real for real or is this are you guys like sending money to you a crane? You don't want me to know about so you're showing me this like that sounds so crazy Yeah, I don't I don't buy the distraction theory because it's like man The US government's been doing weird shit with money. Well, but here's a distraction What if it's what if is this is just an advanced drone program and What the U.S. government is doing with his advanced drone program to Obscure it they just start releasing UFO stuff and having whistle blowers come out that are actually intelligence agents And they come out and start talking about bullshit programs that don't even exist Right, you know like they just start fucking with the people online which they've done with other stuff Sure, I mean if you look at what they did with MK Ultra Just MK Ultra alone You should be at least you should go what? What did you do you guys set up? Horhouses where you dose the John's and then film them through through what is it? With see through Whatever yeah devil says the government that's your tax dollars went for that that was a kind of days valuable research Do you get from dosing up some plumber looking to get as dicks sucked? You know and give the guy glass of water. It's got fucking tacit in it You're in the CIA Now fun that is you're in the CIA you're in like you're in the CIA you have infinite access to LSD They're just like letting you go into like brothels and like watch people fuck like wow Well, not only that you're a puppet master you're literally giving people crazy powerful psychoactive drugs against their will And you're watching them and you're learning how to manipulate people's behavior And that's the Tom O'Neill the book chaos. It's all about MK Ultra doing that with Manson and Manson doing that with his followers Do you know the gifted and talented program conspiracy theory? Connected no gate there were you ever in gifted and talented no, you know it's a one of my favorite current conspiracy theories and Admittedly conspiracy theory in other words. It's just cool. I don't necessarily believe it But basically the idea like like the gate program apparently and I looked it up in it There does seem to be some connection was sort of funded by The feds who like they like it was definitely somehow involved with the government basically not where goes into conspiracy land the idea is They wanted to find people Kids early on you demonstrated certain traits that then They could hire to work in intelligence grooming program for intelligence basically and so all these like and again I just love these things. I'm like if they're real or not. It's still cool. So there's all these like Aspects of people who are in it like an occipital bulb like people who are in it like if you like they have this bump on the back of their head Weird marks like sort of like when them navigation things are a serious exam radio antenna on your roof of your car Antina back there Is that what it is? You know it's supposed to know it's it's yeah, it's it's an implant That's where we go That's where it goes because they would spot for it would make you drink this weird pink shit They would like do this hearing test. Yeah, I mean Jamie. I bet you could find the whole list of like commonalities and people in the program And it's like Interesting like the hearing they had you would have to do this hearing test before you got in You would be in a windowless room or a room where the windows are covered up with a dude Giving you and I that's how I got in giving you a Giving you an IQ test the IQ test had the ESP cards in it along with a lot of other weird shit and then what would happen is because generally like smart people sometimes Or are kids who meet these things are underperforming your parents are fucking delighted So you hear from school. They're like actually your kid isn't a complete fucking idiot as it turns out He's got a very high verbal IQ and we think we should put him in the special Program and so anyone to be a fed well. Yeah, I mean you're not fit You're not asking like wait. What is the program? Well who came up with the idea for the program? You're like my kids smart. Yes, put him in there. They care about kids Duncan Yeah, I just want to get those smarter kids. Yeah. Yeah, I'm gonna put a lot of funding to make it. I'm smarter and smarter And we're gonna set up careers for them. Yeah, right and Nicaragua and they'll never know They'll just think like when we came up to them in the college They got a scholarship for that we provided and we're like hey, we love Your dissertation Yeah, can we talk to you about this really cool job? You'll never know you've been groomed your whole life to be in it again Probably not true, but interesting and interesting like new conspiracy that like a lot. It's really it's really interesting I hope people out there research to be in it. Again, probably not true, but interesting and interesting like new conspiracy that I like a lot. It's really, it's really interesting. I hope people out there research it for me because that's amazing. That's what drives me nuts about censorship online is that the really dumb ones that are obviously not real. I think are also amazing. Yes. I think they're fun. There's some people that are just out of their fucking minds. And then there's things that come up sometimes. Wait a minute. How did that slip by mainstream news? Like, why is this not a subject that everybody's kind of tweaking about? Right. Every now and then, like the hollow earth one, I was like, that is so ridiculous. That's so ridiculous. But it's still ridiculous. It's still ridiculous. But then they discover there's three times as much water inside the earth. Yeah. Then there is on the oceans. I got so excited about that one. I looked into it. What is it? Apparently the water's like compressed sadly into the soil. In other words, oh, now I could be wrong about that, but I can remember specifically the disappointment that swept over. Oh, I thought they were saying there's like oceans under the surface. What I read is that a lot of the water they're talking about has been compressed into soil. Soil. Moist soil. Dude, I, when I one night when I was super high, like I emailed a famous geologist because I just read about like the caverns under the earth. And I'm like, my god, like literally there's like massive empty spaces down there bigger than the Grand Canyon. Like, could that be true? I just still can't. I didn't understand it. I don't know the answer for sure. But you know, so look, look at like, uh, we're studying the plumes of Europa as a Europa to find organic life. We say within the ice of Europa, there could be organic life. Here it is. Sometimes scientists thinks earth's oceans formed when icy comets hit the planet, but new research suggests a different origin for the oceans. They simply seeped out of the center of the earth. The finding published in science suggests that a reservoir of water hidden in the earth's mantle is more than 400 miles below the surface. Try to refrain from imagining the expanses of underground seas. All this water three times the volume of water on the surface is trapped inside the rocks. Sad. So in this rock is water. So that's what it's saying. A piece of synthesized ringwood the blue mineral may contain oceans worth of water in the earth's mantle. Okay. But it's in the rock. Right. So it's like it's not water. It's tough lion. Like that's like saying all the people on earth consist of an ocean of water because most people like what are we like 70% water? Yeah, right. There's an ocean of water in people. We just got to drain the water out of the people. We got another ocean. Another ocean. What do you say? That's not an ocean. You have fucking rocks. You have wet rocks. No one's going to your fucking article. If you say there's wet rocks under the earth. Oh, yeah. You got to say there's an ocean. But there's three times in much water in these rocks. There is in the ocean. But yeah, but it's in rocks. It's not water. Unless it's water like you put in a glass. No, then shut the fuck up. That's how water you got rocks. But but don't destroy this for me, Joe. But but just think about the fact that life life grows in so many places. Right. And if there were voids within the earth and there was like some kind of heat source, whatever it is, and it gets hotter down there. And maybe some water didn't just make it into the, I mean, caves are fucking wet. Right. So if there were water down there, a heat source. And also if there was like some flow of water seeping in from, you know, the surface, theoretically, theoretically, some life form could evolve down there just like we did theoretically. It might not be like advanced. Like I might just be some kind of like insane fungus. My youngest really loves horror movies. We watch horror movies together. Yeah. And we watched the descent the other day. That's how great movie God damn. I forgot how fun that movie is. That's so fun. The descent two kind of socks. Yeah. But the descent one was it shit. Oh my God. The setting. Oh, it's so much in it. I believe they set it up. The movie. It's like, oh, right off the jump. Like, oh my God. Hot cavers. Hot cavers. Hot cavers that fucking squabble with each other. It's fucking great. It's a fucking I highly recommend it. The descent is one of my faves. Like, if like it scratches or rills specific it for me, it's like I love halloworth shit. And then like it just you've got. Well, it's not halloworth. It's caverns. It's like it's, I mean, it's beings that evolved in those caverns. I mean, there's a lot of redeculation and like there grabbing elks and dragging them into the hole and eating them there. Like, yeah, whole things is so dumb. You can't have a bunch of like weird, like mutants living under your forest and so many of them, too. Like, no picture. But I don't know. I think it was like another senator talking about the possibilities what these UFOs are. One of them said could be coming from an ancient civilization that's just choosing to reveal itself to us now. This was a government official saying this. Oh, I wanted to bring this up. Michael Nois. I didn't watch the video, but it was one of those things where the headline of the YouTube video. It's like, the on the Michael Nois, Nois show. It's something about aliens are confirms aliens are demonic. Please. Yeah, but he was talking to somebody that like, I think he was talking to Lou Elizondo, right? Who is a part of the program? The A tip, one of those UFO research programs. But there was this video about it. Do I need to make a feature link documentary called What is a Demon to teach Matt Walsh blog that extraterrestrial aliens aren't real? I would watch it. So Matt Walsh thinks, are they other varieties duking it out with each other? Is that what this is? I don't know, but please make the documentary. He thinks they're not real. So Michael Nois is saying that extraterrestrial aliens aren't real. He thinks they're demons. Intelligence officials now confirm that UFOs of non human origin have been recovered and studied. At this point, the only reason to discount these reports in your own preconceived belief that aliens can't exist. The evidence is really overwhelming now. He's not wrong, but it's, here's the thing. The evidence that we can get a hold of is all anecdotal. It's all people talking about these things until it passes that I'm on this. Huh? I'm interested that I'm not believing you yet. I know if you know about MK Ultra, if you know that they did that and they didn't get punished for it, those people just died. So what happens? Does it evolve or does it stop? Right? Most things evolve. Like most when you go back to Eisenhower warning about the industrial, the military industrial complex, like he was warning about it then. It was an emerging thing. Yeah. He was worrying about it. Well, that evolves to now control the government. Right. Right. So does MK Ultra and mine control does that evolve? Of course it evolves. It doesn't stop dead there. I was going to get people captivated. Yeah. I would start talking about all these things that we have, all these fucking amazing crafts that we've recovered, but not show you Jack I have a lot of people talking about it. And maybe this is just a preliminary step to showing you the stuff. Maybe I'm wrong. Maybe I'm wrong. And these are like real patriots to think the American public needs to know. Yeah. People have lived and died and not have this information and it's your duty as a patriot, as your duty as a human being, as a citizen of earth to let everyone know that we're being visited. Also, you might be covering up for the military industrial complex that's figured out a way to make hypersonic drones that look and behave like something that was created on another planet. I mean, yeah. Because they funded these researchers under some guys of a hedge fund company and yeah, flown in all these physicists and give them a lot of money to shut the fuck up. But top secret clearance, which you can't violate or you get put in jail. And next thing you know, you're developing some sort of magnetic propulsion system that can run things through the skies silently, instantaneously turn on a dime. Yeah. Well, you know, man, I think maybe that some of what I know I'm doing with my skepticism in this regard is I just don't want to be disappointed. Of course. And I don't want to it's like I so will love it if my kids get to live in a world where aliens aren't even weird. Yeah. And I want that world. So, so much that it's definitely going to give me some confirmation bias. And it's definitely going to like warp because it's so easy to see in something what you want there to be. But I just I like I don't I and I'm dumb, but I can't quite access the real the benefit. Like I think there's other ways to lie about your secret weapons program than by like gaslighting senators under oath. I feel like that is such a dangerous thing to do. And so to me, it's unless you think that center is a dark. You want to get rid of them. I'll tell Fatterman anything. I tell them anything. I'll tell that do it. I tell them I'm an alien. I'm an alien. We came to contact you basically had meetings with him. He's an alien. Fuck Fatterman is coming for the shit. That way. And it's like he should be. He's got the information. He's just a coward. You think fat. They told Fatterman. Yes. That's why he's pretending to be a person who doesn't talk that good. Dude, he has too much information. The best way to like not be credible. Like I don't want to be involved. Yeah, man. I mean, he would be a great person to like leak. Yeah, we told him. Have you heard this theory being talked about? Are the aliens us UFOs may be piloted by time traveling humans? Yeah. I've heard that before. I heard recent. I was trying to find where I saw it, but recently like in the last few days, I saw someone I think they were in the government saying government, a similar version to this. Yeah. There is a date that they have been told and that if they tell everyone the date, it will freak people out. So there's a fight about talking about this date about when time travel gets invented. No, that they think that these aliens are approved whatever are us coming back to warn us and they're like this if they do. About time and fuck it up. Oh, about a thing that we might do. Yeah. And they have an event. They're very, very vague in the thing I read about it. Maybe it's like Ukraine. I mean, Jesus Christ, but dude, also, if you, do you see Greta Thunberg went to Ukraine now to say, how dare you? Did she go? They're just called them. No. She went there to be a part of the Illuminati. They fucking welcomed her with open arms. Oh, well, let's keep talking to her. Holy shit. It's like, cheese, a kid, man. What are we doing? It's so bizarre. Did you have this strange kid on the spectrum? They fly around the world as the spokesperson for climate change. And the crank, this strange part about it is it's like this is not a person that most people think is the person they want to hear talk about this. Yeah. Who do you want to hear talk about this? You want to hear like a rational, educated scientist that's warning you about the very specific details of what human beings and our, our pollution is doing to the world. Like here's your science and graphs and data. Instead, you're sending a kid that like, got famous for saying, how dare you, how dare you robbing us of our future? You know, it's a on one level, not Thunberg. That's, I mean, the whole thing, the whole thing you just showed is is like dystopian. It's strange. But on one level, I get, I know that scientists are scientists. Scientists are not comedians. You know what I mean? And I know that like many of them want to convey the shit they're discovering to people who didn't go to graduate school. Right. And they need a mouthpiece. Like, you need someone to speak for them and they just keep fucking it up. Because it's like you generally like the mouthpieces, it seems like they're condescending. Like you need a mouthpiece that's like able to be like to not make the people that they're talking to, feel like they're being talked down to. Right. But that's how they hold authority. The best way to hold authority is to make someone on the defensive, make them feel stupid for questioning this. And it's so you hold that authority. So anti-science. Like, and you know, again, you go back and look at like Tesla or fucking Isaac Newton. What a lunatic. He was a lunatic. Yeah. Mercury in his hair. He was studying the temple of Solomon. You know what I mean? And Mercury in his hair. Yes, he did. And he is, what do you mean by that? He would put in the hair samples when they read hair samples. I guess in his laboratory, he must have had Mercury. So he's had Mercury poisoning. Mercury poisoning. And this is Newtonian physics. And it's like this, this is new. Look at Tesla. He's like fucking like on a date thinking about Faust, seeing a vision of like alternating current engine. Right. These are the people who warped society permanently. There was nothing tame, domesticated or normal about them. Like, imagine if you, if like I value over, I'm like, Joe, come into my, I want to show you something I've been working on. It's, you know, the temple of Solomon from the Bible. I think it's a code. I think it's a code I could use to crack. The source of all reality. And I feel like it has something to do with Mercury. I'm just not sure what. So I've been pouring Mercury on to this replica of the temple of Solomon. You would be, you would be really worried about me. I would be worried about this. This is Isaac Newton. And, you know, when, so it's just weird. This, like, this thing is emerged with a domesticated normal scientist or that like, you know, science is somehow like filled with just very normal, completely professional people in the history of it seems to be littered with maniacs. Maniacs. Maniacs. Yeah. And not maniacs who failed in their pursuit, but using the system discovered truth that changed history forever. It's really weird, man. It's well, we always want to think of a person as only being the thing that is so egregious about them or bizarre about them. But there are a lot of things. Right. You know, I mean, that like when they talk about like, geniuses that also were kind of crazy and did something fucked up. Like, we want to concentrate on that crazy thing. Like, wasn't Tesla in love with a pigeon? Yeah. Wasn't somewhere in general a pigeon? Yeah. Yeah. We want to concentrate on the weird, you know, a social aspects of them. They were all very bizarre and how they interacted with people. That's right. String of bad relationships. They had bad relationships, Duncan. And ignore all the shit that they said that doesn't fit into what like makes sense. Like, his death, Tesla's death beam idea, the idea that he could like create some resonance and send a death beam to blow shit up or like, probably good. Well, I mean, you should see that. I feel like Mary's talked about this. We've talked about everything. They've you seen the myth busters where they make one of these Tesla resonance engines and put it on a fucking bridge. And they're, they're not expecting anything. And then the whole bridge starts fucking. Like, like, yeah, that's right. I remember that. And they turned it off. Like, they didn't, they didn't continue the experiment because the bridge started like making some weird shaking thing. I'm like, oh, well, fuck, you know, man, I just think you're smarter than Tesla. This didn't work. This is just quack He's open up a gate to hell. Remember the event horizon? One of my favorite science fiction horror movies of all time. It's a great movie. It's about these people that use this time warp. You know, they fold space time in order to travel. And when they do, one one ship disappears. So another ship goes to look for that ship. And by doing that, you open up a gate to hell by doing that fold over space time. So you can get straight from one point to another point instantaneously far across the galaxy. Haunted spaceship. So everybody, everybody has to deal with the literal hell, like, Latin speaking demons. And it's a fun movie. I mean, which came first doom or event horizon? Which came first? I believe doom. I believe doom. Because that's doom. Do you know where the name doom came from? No, came from the scene from the color of money with Tom Cruise. Color of money when Tom Cruise is a pool hustler and he goes to this pool hall and he's watching this like the number one player play. And the number one player is this cool looking black dude. And he looks and goes, what you got in that case? Because he's got a pool case. He goes in here and he opens it up. Doom. And that's what doom was for the game community. That was doom for the game industry. When they, what do you got in that box? When this box? We got doom. And that's what it was. I mean, when John Carmack and John Romero, when they released doom, it's software, that was a fucking game changer. A 3D game first person shooter. You're running around and there's fucking demons and you're firing rockets at them. It was incredible. It was incredible. What a great idea military attack on how such a that game is so fun. All that it's so dark. It's easy to find that scene from the color of money. See if you can find it. But that's why they called it doom and which one came first. I don't know. I don't know, but I don't know. I don't know. Here's the first one. Yeah. Here you go. What you got in there? Here? Doom. Meanwhile, that is that Q to the opens up. That's a production queue. It's not even in the great queue. It's a job. It's supposed to be a balla bush cut, which is a handmade queue by this guy who is the master of the great queues. Like when you go back to guys like, see, that's that's not that's Eddie Cohen's Eddie Cohen is like a real modern day elite pool queue maker and he made a version, like a color of money version. But that's the that's the queue that just made and you could buy it. It's not like a, it means a good playing queue. It plays good, but it's not a balla bush. Balla bush goes a handmade queue by this guy who was a master who, yeah, I mean, they would age his would, he would age his wood for years and slowly turn them down and you know, you'd have like stacks of wood that had been air drawing for seven years before you cut them into queues. Like his stuff was like, it's like a violin. It's like you're buying a strative areas. Like that's that's a real balla bush. Dude, I just read this thing online of like coders making fun of the shit that pops up for like hackers. Oh, yeah. Because they know everything they're doing. Because they're like, yeah, you know, that that's when you have very deep knowledge or something. Because like a million years I would never even think like I wonder if that really is a like a queue. That's that's a good queue to play with. But to rep it to have that say Eddie gave me a balla bush and show that like, black garbage. What that was was they made a deal with a pool queue manufacturer, Joss, which is a, they make me very good queues. Don't make get me wrong. Like Mike Siegel, Mike Siegel was one of the greatest players of all time played with the Joss. I mean, they make amazing queue. They play good. But they're made it with a computer. It's made, you know, with machines. Right. Yeah. The, the, the, the ends are rounded. That's a, that's an old balla bush go. So that, what that is is a titleist. And what a titleist is is a house queue. So you buy a house queue and a lot of those really old house queues from like the 50s. They converted them into pool queues like two piece queues that you could bring with you. And that was a very popular queue because it was a, it's a full splice, meaning the contact would, the would contact of the two joints is like it's the, the old method that they used to use. That's cool, man. It looks like a very powerful wand and Diablo. Well, it's like you were playing not just with something that played well, but you were playing with something that was art. Right. It's, it's functional art. It was made by a master is made by in George Balbousha's case, you know, some guy had been making them in the very beginning. Yeah. And Willie Mosk only played with one like the great players played with them. But there's so many guys who make amazing pool queues now. It's like, it's really a matter of taste. And most of the players in fact now are playing with carbon fiber anyway. What is the like, I this part, I'm questioning because I don't know enough about pool, but what like if two equally match players are playing and one of them has one of those. And another one has just like a basic pool queue. How much of an advantage with the person with a really nice none none. No advantage. It's all about the archer, not really the, the, the, the pool queue once you become accustomed to it. You know what it does. So like every pool queue has a certain amount of flex. Every pool queue has a certain amount of weight to it. There's a balance. They're all different. But once your arm and your stroking arm becomes accustomed to the balance, then it can accurately determine the amount of force that it has to apply to the ball in order to get the proper rotations of the ball for it to line where you need to lie at land your next shot. Right. So it's, it's a matter of making the ball and then moving the other ball to their shot. And any queue can do that. It just, you have to know what that queue does. And then you have to compensate for what that queue does. Differ queues have a different reaction than more flexible queues. Right. Dude, it's such you know what, man. With pool, that's one that's got a pull golf pool. It's got this like, man, you could just see how like you would just, there was a, I wish I could, it's so sad. I can't remember the name of this cloak is that greener was incredible. Sorry. They have a pool table in there. And you know, I like, we would fuck around, which is never fun for you. I'm sure, because I'm horrible, but no, it's always fun. The, you know, I just, I see how addictive it is. Just learning how to do one thing. And then you get stuck in this repetitive, trying to get it to work. But it's so the difference, it's mind cleansing. It's like archery in that regard that when you're lined up on a shot, the only thing you're thinking about is that shot. Right. It helps me a lot with stress. Because I have so many things going on simultaneously that would require my attention. That if I have an activity, whether it's archery, martial arts, or pool, where you cannot think of of anything other than that activity while you're engaging in it, it's very beneficial. Clears your mind. Yeah, man. I, yeah, I need shit like that. If I don't have something like that, and it's such a relief when your mind gets grabbed by something, it's so great. That's why video games do have a role. There's a, there is a good role in video games. Yeah. The problem is they're so good. They're so addictive. They pull you in so far. Brian Simpson was explaining the oblow and he started showing the new Diablo on the screen. And he's explaining how it all goes down. And I was just seeing my, my fucking time getting sucked away into this goddamn game. Dude, it is. I can't do it. This is also like if you're into games right now, this is like the apocalypse because like the New Zelda came out and then Blizzard puts out the new fucking Diablo. And it's like they're both in their own way, just spectacular. And, and also, you know, it is man. If you, if you started with an Atari 2600 and now you are like getting to interact with like analogy now. I started with pong, son. What is this? That's a cutscene. Cutscenes from Diablo. Wow. Wow. Look at the cutscenes. But the cutscenes are just like a little movie. You just watched a little movie. You know, I mean, the game one day will probably like this. Dude, Jamie, I'm a spoiler, spoiler, spoiler. If you're playing Diablo, don't list. Can you find the cutscene from Diablo where the dude is getting eaten by wolves? Spoiler. Don't watch this if you're into Diablo. Wow. Really? This was actually uncomfortable. Look at that. Let's, let's end with this because I gotta get out of here. We gotta show soon. Oh, this book, the cutscene here. You might have to, yeah, there you go. The fisto. The app now. There you go. Oh, God. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. That's enough. All right. Let's wrap it up. Time to go. I love you to do that. Love you, Jeff. You are fun. Thank you so much. It's great being able to represent science with you today. Yeah. I feel like we did a good job. I think so. Hail science.