Cool. Brent, thanks for coming, man. Danny, thank you. Thanks for having me. I'm a huge fan of your content, especially your Instagram. I was ripping through all of your videos this morning. I I must have spent like the at least the eight hours out of the last 24 watching your Tik Tok your Tik Tok feed and uh you have a very unique way of approaching some of these uh conspiracies or or fringe ideas that are very popular in the zeitgeist right now. you come at it from a very uh levelheaded, pragmatic way where like you don't you don't seem like you're part of a cult. And a lot of these things that that are that are popping on the internet, what no matter if you're into UFOs or psychedelics or ghosts, these people treat these things like religions. Yes. Yeah. Which uh I think you point out very nicely. Yeah. It's there's a lot of personal worth wrapped up in a little closer. There we go. Yeah. A lot of personal worth is wrapped up in people's belief systems around these things. They may not have gone out, had a successful life otherwise so they can latch on to something that is just doesn't require a lot of proof. Let's face it, you could be the more spiritual person in the room, the more you know, super whatever. You've seen lights in the sky that makes you special. It's like a proxy for achievement. And unfortunately, a lot of people get wrapped up in that and they become very vicious trying to defend those ideas when there's other people out there looking for the reality behind them. And it makes it very difficult to get to the truth of what's actually going on without the propaganda and the scops and the culty behavior. Yeah. I've noticed that a lot on this podcast. I mean, I've learned it firsthand from from doing this podcast because I've been introduced to a lot of folks who have, you know, make a lot of extraordinary claims and don't have that same level of extraordinary evidence for their claims. Um, and I've I've seen the reactions on the internet, whether it be like in the comments on YouTube or on X, um, how people how there's this pylon effect to certain ideas or ideologies or, you know, these fringe ideologies where like if you if you come at somebody, you know, in particular, I think one of the biggest ones I've noticed is in uh, like the Flint Dibble Graham Hancock thing where there's there's like two polar opposite um, opposing nation states that are like waring against each other online is what is what it seems like. Yeah. And uh it's like I've noticed that in so many things and it's it's really unsettling because you know it's really hard nowadays to know what's real and what's not real. Very true. Um, yeah, and you're coming at it. I've seen quite a few of your podcasts and you're very level-headed about things and I know it must frustrate the hell out of me sit on the other side of the table and have a Steven Ger sit here and try to give you his narrative and then chastise you. Daniel, if you'd let me finish, you know, they're they're vicious about it. Fun guy. Now, I don't know. You said Dibble with Graham Hancock. Dibble Flint Dibble. I'm not familiar with him. What's his stance on it? M there's there's very good indication, at least to me watching him over the last 30 years, that Graham Hancock is a controlled opposition from the British. Well, there goes this podcast. Okay, sorry. Yep. Yep. Anyway, um Okay, cut it. Cut it, Steve. Yes. So, Flint, please continue. I I'll give you um Flint Dibble is basically just a he's a um an academic archaeologist who uh went on Rogan's podcast with Graham to debate Graham Hancock's um lost ancient uh pre ice age civilization. Okay. And you know whether there was evidence for it or not and they went back and forth and um anyways there's two uh aggressive camps that are violently attacking each other constantly. And that to me just seems like the Hegelian dialectic. You get one side and you get the other and there's not really any synthesis, but they're both they're both setups and they're both fighting against one another with completely opposite viewpoints on either side of the spectrum when the reality is dead in the center. Like there might have been an ancient civilization. It's not quite what Graham Hancock is making it out to be. Maybe not as old, maybe not as technologically advanced flying around in Vimmana. And there's, you know, the academic side of things where like none of that actually exists and just laugh at them and their lack of, you know, educational. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. It's it's it's nonsense and it's it seems like a setup. It seems like a control mechanism for all of society. So, we can never quite get to the truth of what the hell are we doing here? So, what were you saying about Graham? Graham uh so I've watched his stuff when did he come out? Early 90s at least that I was made aware of him. Yeah. And I've seen him push uh push things and I of course wanted to go find out if what he was talking about was true like Zechariah Sitchin or any of these people that make extraordinary claims. Yeah. And the things I've looked into, the history I've looked into that Graham has also looked into, I've come to completely different conclusions that were much more uh, you know, middle of the road rather than like 10,500 years for the Sphinx. There's other explanations for why the weathering would exist around the Sphinx enclosures, though it's not what the academics are are talking about on the other side. So, it's both sides are wrong, but there's enough overlap that you never really get to the middle of of what's actually going on. I had I had actually Flint on the show and we we discussed Atlantis. Okay. And uh like all the evidence for Atlantis and um one of you the unique things about Flint is his background revolves around his academic history, his academic um scholarship focuses on Athens. He's done all his arch. He's an archaeologist who focused on Athens. Okay. Um excavating all over Athens and in Greece in general. And um he excavates back to the time when there would have been any kind of Atlantis. He goes like as far back as anyone. Um and he says that there's they've they've gone all the way down to bedrock. Yeah. And there's nothing there. Yeah. So like if there is some hypothetical Atlantis or you know or or some sort of crazy super advanced lost city he he seems to believe that um especially according to Plato if you want to take Plato uh his words seriously you know he was a philosopher who came up with hypo hypothetical um ideas like like the cave y so he thinks that that was some sort of another allegory to some sort of like war game between Athens and and Atlantis. And uh that's, you know, one of the things I thought I found really compelling. But like you said, he he also will just outright dismiss and laugh at things like those stone vases that are perfectly symmetrical and supposedly came from the dynastic Egyptians with stone chisels and you know we could talk about copper chisels and stone pounding stones. Yeah, absolutely. Um agreed. Um I've read the Timus the Critius and Tomus Planos and it's allegorical to me at least my reading of it. But there was Did you read the the the English translations of it? Yeah. Old though. I I try to go to things in the 1800s if I can find them before things started being really propagandized. And I tend to find like when uh Ignatius Donnelly started writing about Atlantis is Atlantis, the anti-dolivian world. I'm not sure if you're familiar with I'm familiar with it. Yeah. Yeah. It's he was very it's almost like he was an early disinformation person himself that was pushing things off. It was in every Freemasonic library out there. was very popular among that group became very popular among the uh theosophists and there's not really any substantial basis to that being like historically accurate right but there was historical there were things historically that came before the rest of these civilizations that are being covered up we're finding that with like go back right now things that were like we don't know any history that went back that far you can get down to bedrock all you want but there's other areas of the world that they might have migrated from that completely wiped over so and and I think that was the start of organizing history in a very certain way that we have today. That started around 1900 into, you know, around 1900. Uh late 1800s, early 1900s, they started rewriting the older books that talked about like there were giants in mountains. There were different things that actually were there beforehand. And then you started to see that erased a bit more. So, what do you make of the whole giants being found in America? I think there was uh I think there was cross-cultural communication. I think there were colonies here for Europe. uh Europe, Asia, not the Chinese. Uh Egyptians, the Egyptians had cocaine and they had tobacco in their systems. They found mummies that had uh legitimate like legitimate testing that was done on them that almost got lost the woman her career that found that they had cocaine and tobacco in the mummies. Um that's that's scientific. Like that's you can't refute that. They got it from somewhere. So somebody had to be coming over here and communicating with North and South America getting that. There was a copper trade. there was, you know, trade back and forth. You have, uh, stories about expeditions from Egypt going out to faraway lands that would bring back like pygmies and things that were living in Central America at the time, the the Alouch and the people around the Yucatan Peninsula that are semi- mythological, but the remnants are there, little houses and such for people that are just shorter people, smaller people. The people that were the giants that were here might have been people um, coming over, trading with them that were six foot and taller. Because if you go down to Mexico right now, I'm a giant and you know we're we'd all be fairly large. No offense to anybody. Uh but that's that's what I I see it as. I don't see it as 7 foot, 10 foot, 20 foot people that were, you know, hidden around the world. I think it's just people that were taller that, you know, that that became embedded in the the myth and legend. Right. Right. Right. So you've been following Graham Hancock for a while for quite a long time. Yeah. Yeah. Uh jeez, I think I started looking at this stuff when I was 10 and you know Wow. Really? Yeah. watching like in search of and all the stuff that was coming on TV and I was a kid. But then I started going to libraries when I was uh got into junior high. We had a really good library that a research library for uh they had all kinds of things like Ignatius Donnelly and I would sit there after school and read all these things. So I started early doing like actual research into these things. Have you read all Graham's books? Uh most of them. Yeah. Um I kind of fell off the last few years because I kind of wrote him off a little bit. Did you really? What was the what do you think was the main reason or like the straw that broke the camel's back for you for starting to take not take him as seriously? Uh he he really doubled down on the age of the Sphinx the age of you know all these things being 10,500 years old much older and then I found the work of Dr. Dvivitz in France about geopolymers and how the pyramids were actually created and how he uh replicated pyramid stones and did scanning electron microscope tests on the the se segments and they matched up directly with the pyramid. Um he proved that they were younger actually than 10,000 younger than what we even think that they were made with a completely different the stones in the pyramid the limestone. Yeah. If you go to um some of the evidence he's got is that he's directly replicated that but he's a he's a chemist. So he works with geopolymers and sustainable materials for building materials. And he's uh done some of the work on trying to figure out how these old gigantic structures were made by pouring them. He's found uh things within like the famine steelli that talk about the Egyptians crushing up stone and creating like molds for these blocks and building things out of building stone that never existed before, making it out of mixtures and lomerations of things they were finding in the localized area. And he went back and did it. You talk about the uh the vases and the shist uh discs and all that. And I was just in Egypt just a couple of months ago and I saw these at the Egyptian Museum myself. He's got some sitting in his lab right now that he replicated that are exact replicas of these things with the tolerances that we we the vases. The vases and the the shist discs and the How did he he created them? By by doing what? Making essentially a type of it's a type of clay, but there's several types. There's one that's like limestone based that would make pyramid blocks. There's another type that is um like a ceramic, like a bioceramic that was used to make these things. And there's I'm sure there were many more that they used historically, but he found a few of them that he has replicated and to my mind replicated what the Egyptians were actually out of but but out of granite like red granite and rose granite and the these things. Well, they they're not granite to start with. So the the original Egyptian stone vases that like sure like that when they reomorate them together, you wouldn't know the difference. Um there's there's video I could even send you the video. He's doing a uh he's doing a symposium in July. We're going over to it to actually make these with him. He'll sit there in the lab and make it mix it up together and you you form it yourself and you can make these things with it. And it's just one step further from that to pottery. Right. Right. But the but what I was saying is like the the ones that they found underneath the step period th those were step pyramid those were made of granite. Yeah. But there's there's no reason to think that the granite was mined out of the ground and carved. It could have been made out of an elomeration of things that replicate granite that you wouldn't know the difference. So you Oh, you think they could have recreated some sort of faux granite or fake granite and and molded it? Yeah. I don't even think it he's proven it. He's He's got like I don't know why this isn't more accepted or known about because he's got like a textbook about it showing the how to do it yourself. Wow. It's it's uh what's this guy's name? Dr. Joseph Dvidovitz in France. Joseph Devidovitz, if you want to come over to the uh the symposium in July, just come meet us over there. Head up together. Wow, that's fascinating. But he's he actually did a video. Oh jeez, it's an old video. It's got to be from the '90s now. Well, what do you make of like um some of those giant structures in in Egypt? Have you been to Egypt? Yeah. What do you make of those giant scoot marks they have out from like that that big pregnant pregnant st uh pregnant stone or the pregnant woman or whatever it is? Yeah, you see scoot marks and then also in the um the sorapium. I think they're scoop marks out of the granite boxes. Yeah. So, you'll see that all over the world. You'll see handprints. You'll see all kinds of footprints, things in solid stone. You'll see that in South America. And he's done work cross-culturally to find out what the uh the acidic u there's agents that dissolve, acids that dissolve, and then you can relomerate these things. He found in South America it was like they were using guano, and there was a trade route to go to the coast and get guano and take it up to the highlands and create these uh these Inca structures. It's using the correct acids, you can let it dissolve away. Right. There were there were stories that they found a bird, the pedo bird in South America that would chip away. It would take this uh take a leaf and go up and rub it on the rock, chip away at the rock and create it. It burrows and that's how they learned to do it. But then they took these uh these same plants and they found out, you know, that it creates certain types of acids that could dissolve the rock and make it soft. So, turn it into a type of clay. It's getting hotter than a $2 pistol down here in Florida. And while you may be staying out longer during these months, you no longer have to stink it out thanks to our sponsor, Mando. Unlike other deodorants I've used, Mando lasts as long as I do, keeping up with the gym, jiu-jitsu, and even for long trips. What makes Mando so different? It's a cleansing bar and it controls your odor for 72 hours. And that's perfect for long hours at work or hiding from the feds. It's safe to use on your pits, package, cracks, and feet. And it comes in bourbon leather, clover woods, Mount Fuji, or Pro Sport. And don't forget, this was made by a doctor who saw firsthand how normal BO was being misdiagnosed and mistreated. But Danny, why should I use this over soap alone? 12 hours after a shower, the average man's grundle odor was a five out of 10. After using Mando, the average grundle odor was a zero out of 10. You can literally smell the difference. Steve Mando is so good, you can now get it in Walmart and Target. But for the best deals, go to shopmando.com. Mando starter pack is perfect for new customers. It comes with solidstick deodorant, cream tube deodorant, two free products of your choice like mini body wash and deodorant wipes, and free shipping. And as a special offer for our listeners, new customers get a $5 off the starter pack with our exclusive code. That equates to over 40% off your starter pack by using the code danny@shopmando.com. That's sop-.com. Please support the show and tell them we sent you. Smell fresher, stay drier, and boost your confidence from head to toe with Mando. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. Yeah. So, that's where that's the direction I think it's going in. There's a lot more work to be done in it, but I think that's I think that one makes the most sense. I think they were highly advanced in in chemical technology, making chemicals, and I think some of those pyramids I think it's highly possible that all of the pyramids or if not most of the pyramids, I would say, were involved in chemical production. Yes. Well, I've seen Jeff like I know Jeff from Land of Cam. Oh, yeah. Land of Came Jeffrey Drum. He is fantastic. He's one of my That is one of my I think if I had a gun to my head and I said said pick a theory, I would think it would be his. Yeah. Yeah. Shout out to Jeff. Jeff and his wife really lovely people. Um he's coming at it from the right direction of trying to find like the technology behind it, the science behind it. I tend to agree with you. I'm not sure. I have my pet theory that the pyramids were uh illumination chambers, you know, from the mystery school tradition, but I I agree with a lot what what he says. He's he's come out and I I think he's living there right now, isn't he? And yeah, so he's he knows a hell of a lot more about it, boots on the ground, I do even, right? Um, so you did a comprehensive deep dive on this latest thing going on with the these shafts that were found in the pyramids by the uh the radar the those space what is it called? S S yeah. It's something some kind of tomography aperture radar. radar tomography or something that the the actual technical specifications doesn't go deep enough that it would even be able to pick these up. So, is this all some sort of advertising scheme? So, the guy that did it um his name starts with an M. You'll have to forgive me. I forget his exact name right now. Um but he's an Italian guy and he's with a group of other academics in Italy. You can go check out the video that I put out about it that translates their press conference. So, did you get AI to translate the Italian? Yeah, I know a little Italian to read it and translate it. So I went through and uh I did that and then I I touched up it, you know, through and I tried to get to it as quickly as possible cuz they just released it the night before. Oh wow. So I did that and his reputation in Italy isn't the best. You know, his he's known as like the Steven Greer, the Shyer of Italy essentially selling a lot of nonsense. Yeah. And it's we have Italian people jumping in the comments saying, "You don't know the history of this guy. He's been doing this for years. He's been selling all this." Uh so I don't know him. What's his name? If Yeah. No, if you go to my YouTube page, actually, it's right there at the top and it's got the the write up on it. Okay. Yeah, he'll find it. There you go. Uh, Curado Milan. There you go. Something up on this guy. Yeah, he's he's into all kinds of things, including alien abduction and all this. And I don't know the guy. I I'm I'm Italian. I don't know his material as much, right? But I've been warned against him about his stuff. But without that, just looking at the evidence, it's uh not compelling to me. Not in the least. They did the scans. They publish the scans. They're publishing more of them. But what they're seeing in the scans, and I go into it in my TikTok video about it, that like we know that the King's Chamber exists in the Great Pyramid, right? They did scans on the Great Pyramid, and those scans don't even show the King's Chamber. So, like they they overlay it and you can't even see the King's Chamber in their scan. Yeah, you can check it out on the uh actually the same same exact technology. Same technology. It just it was 2022 they published it. Now, didn't they scan some sort of underground bunker and it was able to detect it? Or some laboratory, an underground laboratory, maybe? I'm not sure about that. Yeah. Okay. So, that might be floating out there right now, but I don't know about that claim. Okay. I do know that this type of technology, unless it's loose soil, it can only get a few meters, but certainly not, you know, hundreds and hundreds of feet under the the bedrock geyser plateau to see these spiral chambers and shafts. And I'd love that to be true because I've been to spiral shafts that exist that are like that. The well of St. Patrick in Italy. Uh the initiation chambers at the Regalera in central Portugal are shaped like that. It'd be cool if there was a you know that's a Templar facility there in uh in Portugal. It'd be cool if there was a crossover between the two, but I don't think there is. I think they they put this through an AI to make a video rendering of what might be there and it's not at all accurate. And wasn't it related to some YouTube channel or something that put it out? Yeah. Uh actually uh I don't know if you could pull up my Tik Tok or my Instagram on that and I I show her. I think it's expedition with expedition with Nicole Chickalo. Okay. So, you could pull that right and and then so she was in charge of doing like the press release for it or what? Yeah. And it's totally like a a woo woo, you know, site. You could Yeah. If you look up expedition with Nicole Chicowo, c I c o l if I remember correctly. Yeah. Find Nicole Chicalo on YouTube, Steve. Um, so so she's like a a YouTuber who just does research on ancient civilizations and talks about ancient civil talked about Egypt. Yeah, I wouldn't call it, you'll see. Uh I wouldn't call it research. I would call it um trying to sell uh newagy crap. Oh, really? Yeah. She's not a researcher. She's not She's not Here we go. Pull up her official. Go to her p her her YouTube channel, Steve. And there she is above the pyramids. So, Expedition with Nicole Chickalo. Click on her bio. What's Oh, it's in it's in language. Yeah, if you scroll down, it's it's a grab bag of everything you could imagine. This is what people say when they scroll through our YouTube channel. That's true. Yeah, mine too. Yeah, I shouldn't I shouldn't be throwing stones here in glass houses. But there's a the guy on the on the right with the sunglasses. That's the doctor that brought this out. Okay. And let's check him out, Steve. I've read a few of his It's not going to be in English. Never mind. Yeah. I've read a few of his papers that were in Italian about multi esoteric things. And I don't necessarily disagree with it. He tends to agree with me about the pyramids being initiation chambers, things like that. Um, but the scans, they just don't add up for me. They're not showing what I think they're claiming they're showing. So, they might have done scans, but questionable veracity. So, how So, they're just the ones that analyze the scans or are they were they the ones in charge of doing the scans? Yeah, there was a a group of them. Uh, there was him. I think he led the charge to do the scans and then he's got an archaeologist and an Egyptologist uh along with him in that press conference that are trying to you know one's the technologist behind the scans and the other one is the Egyptologist to see what that might actually be. He's claiming it's the halls of Amenti which is like uh the halls of the afterlife the allesian fields where you would you know where your your consciousness would go after you die. Um and that was always considered mythological. They're saying that the halls of Amenti are now underneath the pyramids and these big shafts go down to it. Uh, anyway, there you go. Let's ask Billy what he thinks. Oh jeez. Good old Billy. Is it Carson or Carlson these days? It's Carson. Is it Carson? It's Carson. You sure about that? You might want to check out Tucker Carlson. Billy Carson. Oh, don't get me confused. K A R L S O N. There seems to be some some uh controversy about Billy. Funny story about Billy. When Billy was talking I I forget if it was you that I stitched. Uh Billy claim, it was either you or it was Joe Rogan. He was claiming that the uh uh the Moai on Easter Island burned down. Yes. And then I did a video standing in front of the Moai cuz we went there last year and I was like that's not real. They're right here. There's really Yeah, we we were there. Laura's probably watching. Yeah. He was explaining to me how they or some I think multiple people said that to me how there was a fire there and they shut it down. Yeah, there was a brush fire. Uh there's cattle ranching about a mile away. There was a rancher and his it got blown and the brush fire it's only like little like low grass. It's only like maybe 12 inch grass. Yeah. I was going to say how do you burn stone statues? You know, but he was saying that like fuel was taken in tankers and they burnt the place down. His exact claims go. Um and it didn't it went up to the area where they were um mining them out of the the one crater and it it got a couple of them. They actually found one that they didn't know was there because the brush got burnt away. So, they found one, but all it did was was singe a couple of them, but there's hundreds of them on that island. So, it's Oh, wow. They didn't burn down. No. Sorry. Yeah. When it comes to the um the Egypt, those new shafts that they think that are down there, I mean, I wonder how hard like how hard would it be just to dig under that pyramid. It was under the middle pyramid, right? Yeah, it was the center one. It wasn't Chops. No, it wasn't the Great Pyramid. It was the center pyramid. Um, it would probably be really hard to I guess I guess they were all on It was Flint and then uh this guy Jimmy Corsetti and um this other guy Dan Richards and a bunch of guys were all on uh Pierce Morgan debating this god. And Flint was like, "You can't dig. It's sacred. Do not dig under the under the Giza Plateau." They dig all the time. I know, right? They've been they've been freaking blowing it up with dynamite since the 50s. Yeah. Earlier than that, man. the the entryway to the Great Pyramid right now was uh blown out uh by somebody way back. Uh and they're saying this goes like a mile and a half deep. Something something stupid like that. Hundreds and hundreds of feet. Yeah. And then there's big stone coffers, stone chambers underneath of those spirals. And if you look at the this if you actually look at the scans, it doesn't show any of that. No. And you can look at the scans of the Great Pyramid. And the Great Pyramid scans don't even show the King's Chamber. The S scans. Yeah. Yeah. They put out a paper. They published one paper in 2022. I don't know if they published this study completely yet, but what they showed in the uh press conference wasn't convincing at all. And you so you translated the whole press conference, post it on your YouTube channel, so people can watch it. Yeah. Go judge the evidence for yourself. And what what did they did they have like an ultimate conclusion at that press conference of what they believe it is or what their next steps are going to be? They they think that it's the halls of Amenti and it's They believe that. They believe that. Yeah. Oh my god. Yeah. They believe it's it's that and they need to push forward with it and get funding and all of this. Um there I'm sure there's more. There was a it was a two-day thing. The second day I'm not sure if it's been released yet. Uh but the first day their upfront conclusions their you know get to the point conclusions was uh yeah the halls of a menty. Oh wow. Which is horseshit. It's like Plato's Atlantis again. They get right back to it. And I'd love it to be true. That'd be amazing. That'd be Steve find the S scans of the Great Pyramid. Yeah, you could type in his name uh that uh Melanja and you can find his published research on like a I'm not sure what uh repository it's on MDPI or something. Yeah, I guess maybe that top one, Steve. MDPI right in the center. Here you go. Yeah, there you go. Blow that thing up. There you go. You could click on it and get the whole p the whole uh publish. Uh so I don't see so yeah there's it's very very vague. It's extremely vague. Yeah. And they're claiming that there's an entire series of structures in there that just I'm not seeing it. Yeah. Yeah. Steve, if you click on the the link, go to visit and actually pull up the uh the paper, you can get the uh there should be an option there to pull up the whole, you know, download it right there. Download PDF upper left. Oh, interesting. Okay. And that's the actual that's what they actually have. That's the actual data. No one reads this stuff, man. We just like the headlines. You got to you got to be a nerd like me. There you go. Oh, wow. Yeah. Well, that's just an image. How crazy is that? How crazy are those granite freaking blocks in the King's Chamber? They're awesome. Yeah. And it's the the pyramids do something very interesting when you measure the magnetic fields inside. They they basically nullify the Earth's geomagnetic field while you're in there. And it's they it links in with a lot of my other research on videos I put out about Koserev mirrors and the work of Dr. or Michael Persinger of how it could affect consciousness. So that tends to be my pet theory based on what I've been there and measured that they actually do. When I go on expedition, I bring a magnetometer, infrasound devices, uh various things to to actually measure the quote energy of the place, but in a scientific fashion to see if it would have any biological impact on the mind, on brain function as we know that the magnetic fields do like our mindto mind system. There you go. that pulses a magnetic field around the uh around the head and can alter consciousness like the god helmet. If you've ever heard of the god helmet, persinger's god helmet. What is the god helmet? God Okay, so this is a good one. Uh Dr. Michael Persinger actually pull out his research. Yeah, here's his research. Uh Persinger was uh a black ops scientist for the longest time. He was working with the Navy figuring out consciousness, the patterns within the brain that cause things like senses of spirituality, sense to presence, um senses of meaning, um various things. And he mapped areas of the brain like the temporal loes, the hippocampus that correlate. And if you read some of the uh the titles to those studies, he found things like uh entanglement. So he was the first person to I don't know if you ever heard about this to take a person in Canada and take a person in Spain and he put these headsets on them and he flashed a light in the eyes of the person in Canada and picked it up on a brain scan of the person in Spain proving that they could be entangled. What year was this? Did he do this? Just few It's right in there. Really? I actually have the studies. I came prepared. Here you go. Wow. But that those studies came with a lot of other uh findings. The God helmet was something he created. Uh jeez, I think it was all the way back in the 80s and certainly the '9s that they were talking about it publicly. If you're constantly on the move or just tired of skipping meals, Hule has you covered. They are today's sponsor spelled Hue L. And their Black Edition ready to drink is a game changer. It's a complete meal in one bottle with 35 grams of protein, 27 vitamins and minerals, high fiber, and low sugar, so you feel full, focused, and ready for the day. No prep, no clean up, just grab and go. Hule's already sold over 500 million meals around the world. And now it's your turn to try it. New customers get 15% off plus a free gift at hule.com when you use my code, Danny. For me, I'm always on the go and I don't want to have to pick between fast food or starving, so I bring hule everywhere I go. For me, it's easy. I always keep one in my backpack or in my truck. It tastes like a milkshake, but it's not overly sweet. They come in vanilla or chocolate, which is my personal favorite. And after drinking one of these things, I literally feel full, and it's not a burst of carbs or a protein brick, so it's the perfect balance for me. It was designed by experts to provide all the ingredients your body needs for a meal. It's cheaper and more convenient than a burger. So, for me, it's perfect and a balanced choice for a meal on the go. Start saving time and money without compromising your nutrition today with this exclusive offer for new customers. New customers, visit hule.com/danny today and use my code Danny for 15% off your first order, plus a free gift. That's code dan nyhel.com. 15% off plus a free gift for new customers using my exclusive code danny@hule.com. Please see our description below for terms and conditions. Skip the stress, not the nutrition. Try HULE today. Uh that could replicate out of body experiences, sense presences, like you're, you know, sitting there in a in a room, a dark 2015. 2015. Yeah. Well, he's been doing it for he he's since passed unfortunately, but he was doing it for decades. That's crazy. And there's another one in there as well where it's uh they were sharing the experiences of people playing a video game and somebody who was an expert at the video game was giving the other person their ability with the video game through entanglement. Consciously or unconsciously? Unconsciously. You put this around. This is this is the actual device that he was using. This is the god helmet. This is a a small version of it. Paired down version. Steve can Yeah, there's the god helmet. Motorcycle helmet with a magnetic sand. I have seen this. Yeah. And he was making people have all kinds of wondrous spiritual experiences replicating the brain patterns when they're under those experiences. And this is a very small paired down version of it. You put the halo around your head, turn it on, and it's the same equipment that they were using for the entanglement experiments. So what specifically does that when you have two people hooked up to that thing, what what specifically is happening? Persinger's theory was you could consider it whatever you want to call the morphagenetic field, the uh the aosic record, whatever. We have all names for all this field that we live within the conscious field. Consciousness being external of the the body and the brain. But we tap into it. Our minds are our nervous system is a transceiver. It's a transmitter and a receiver. Part of the receiving portion of that is we're immersed in this field and we share our experiences and we can go out and remote view and tap something we have never had physical contact with. We can also do the same for things people have touched. uh he had somebody he was studying that was able to do that with a picture of of somebody. You can also go out and communicate with somebody's experiences and brain and memories and that's what he was proving in these experiments. And this was all it's like he had a coming to Jesus moment later in his so this is amplifying the antenna of the human sort of pretty it's it's blocking the area blocking the signals within the brain that keep you unaware of it because we're always have we we always have it we're always immersed in this but we have something called a binding frequency in the brain and if you block that correctly with a magnetic field over the right uh the right hemisphere it can open up all kinds of interesting things. Wow. Oh yeah. How did he find this? He was working for the government for the longest time and I was about to get to that that he was uh he kind of had a coming to Jesus moment later in his career and released it all. He just went here it is guys. This is what we found. This is what it all is. This is how you build the equipment. You can go out. He did a talk that I actually put on my YouTube called No More Secrets. What would a world be like if you could remote view know what the other person was thinking? If there was no way to keep secrets from one another, what what would that civilization look like? That would not be that would be ugly. That would be interesting, wouldn't it? I think it'd be [ __ ] ugly. Yeah. Yeah. People like Joe People People like Joe Rogan talk about it all the time and he thinks it's like a really good thing. Like he always speculates like what would it be like if we could read each other's minds? He thinks he seems to think there'd be no deception, there'd be no lies. Uh but the people funding that research don't believe don't don't agree with it. They they want to cybernetically link minds together as a form of control to make peace, you know. Yeah. Yeah. The way the way you ultimately get peace in a civilization is to have a cybernetic linkage of all the minds that negates their ability to have violence. That's [ __ ] terrifying. Here, we can talk about that, too. Here's a changing image as a man. That was the the uh Stanford Research Institute uh think tank paper published by Golain Maxwell's father that talks all about it. What? Yeah, have fun with that. Do with that what you will. Welcome to Museum of Terror, kids. This is what I do. Uh, no, that was published back when they were doing the remote viewing experiments. Uh, by Robert Maxwell. Yeah. His his publishing the Peram press publisher Robert Maxwell MC. Yeah. He he personally funded that one. Stanford Research Institute was doing all the remote viewing experiments with Bill Swan, Pat Price, all those guys. Um, and at the it talks about that as how how to take that and weave it in with a new newagy belief system that could ultimately replace all the old belief systems and be used as a tool of control for the new world where everybody's cybernetically linked. They had Joseph Campbell, the mythologist, trying to figure out how to create new mythologies for the world. And that was the blueprint of how to create the new world, the new civilization. And that's kind of it kind of links back to what you you asked me about Graham Hancock, why I kind of fell off with Graham Hancock. I saw a lot of these people that I grew up with and their research weaving in far too closely with that kind of research and realizing, oh [ __ ] that's part of the agenda. Part of the agenda seems it yeah, giving us a far-flung history we could never possibly completely understand and it's all going to be mysterious. Everything's meant to be mysterious forever. You're never make me meant to get any answers to anything. And it's uh it's all part of the control mechanism. It goes way back. What a mind [ __ ] Holy [ __ ] So you you wonder why I in my videos I have different opinions about this. I might look at something and you might look at something and we come to radically different opinions. It's based on context like that that I might have seen something that it goes well the funding came from the same place that funded that and Graham Hancock might have gotten money from here or somebody some researcher might have gotten money from the same place and I go is that connected. Wow. So I tend to be a little more cynical about things because of that. Well, I mean, just looking at where we end where we've ended up today and and like the the the state of the internet and the state of reality really because like even reality itself is so [ __ ] slippery now. Like nobody knows what is real. I agree with you. You go on X and now like people, you know, everybody has their own flavor of the JFK assassination and what they believe is real and you're you're a shill if you don't believe that. And and it's like then you have the people who are like if the government tells me it's raining outside I would have to go out front and check to make sure they're telling me the truth. And oh my god, and with all like the the political attacks from every single side and you know, there's got, you know, who knows how deep that [ __ ] thing goes with with all the different elements of people involved with purposely manipulating information online and and just throwing out tons of stuff and saying, "Good luck picking out the truth." And then like even going back to so going back to what you were saying about this some this theory on tying together people's minds so we can read people's thoughts and there will be no deception. People will be able to communicate pure intention. Like if you look at a writer or if you read anything that somebody writes, people aren't just writing down their thoughts and ideas perfectly coherently the first time. Like there's a editing process that goes through writing and it's slow. When you have thoughts in your head, it's a chaotic cluster [ __ ] of ideas bouncing back and forth, right? and walking down the street seeing something and having a thought bubble up into your consciousness isn't necessarily something you would want to communicate to somebody, right? And and there's also like it's not always the best to just tell people what pops into your mind at any given time. That could cause a lot of problems. Some of which we've already seen with a development of social media to where it is where people can just automatically tweet tweet out what's popping in their mind. At least there's a barrier, right, of their fingers and like typing it in and reading it before you press send. There's somewhat of a barrier. But if you completely remove the barrier of this chaos that's happening in here and teleporting it right to your mind, that that can't be good. I can't imagine. We've seen a massive change in society just since we lowered the barriers to being able to put whatever the hell you want out on the internet. Yes. So like I And look where that's gotten us. Yeah. It sucks. It's ridiculous. So even remove that barrier anymore. Yeah. And you're just going to amplify what's happening right now in the in society, I think, by like a million. I tend to agree with you. Have you watched the uh the new the newest season of X-Files with Dr. They? No, Dr. They. Yeah, Steve might be able to pull this up. He's a He's a character, a bit part character they brought on that was meant to represent that. He's the mysterious they. Then he talks to Fox Motor and he's like, "What's real? Nobody knows anymore. It doesn't matter. You're going to believe what you want, what I'm going to believe what I want." and it's all mixed up where I could put the truth in front of you and you wouldn't even recognize it. There he is. Yeah, it's a great episode. It's funny. He's got this this bit part where he talks to to Moulder about it and he's he's like, "It doesn't matter if you know the truth anymore or if we release it or if it gets leaked because there's so much garbage out there, you wouldn't recognize it anyway." Right. And it's Yeah. And and taking people's mental barrier down to be able to We've linked up with the mindtomind system with some groups that were like You don't want to be linked up with some people that are in certain mental states. What do you mean? You know, you feel it feels schizophrenic. It can. Yeah. You can We do uh we've done the Shambala Initiative sessions. I don't know if you read about that in the the write up we sent you over. It's uh I Yeah. Yeah. I think I read about it, but I'm not familiar with what exactly it is. About two years ago, we started the world's largest open-source uh psychic experiment using the equipment. We taught everybody how to build these for free. I put out uh uh instructions on how to build these for free. We offer a kit and we also offer the pre-made device. We did the Shambala Initiative sessions every week. We did lives where it allowed people to to link up and do psychic testing among one another and among us uh sending something out to see if they'd pick up on it. And uh the results could be very sporadic. Generally, they were wonderful. We had uh a really interesting result where people hundreds of people all at once within the month beforehand saw Trump getting shot at. M so they came with like uh exact details of what was going to happen in right ear different things like that uh where it was very obviously people were sharing the same thought somehow and they were getting it from somewhere and we did multiple iterations of this testing but we've done uh testing on small scales with people at like new age fairs and you're like the person sitting across from you very obviously is kind of kind of out there and linking up with people like that can be like quite a quite a head [ __ ] it feels schizophrenic it Yeah. Yeah, it really does. So, to that point, generally, it's great. It's wonderful and it allows opens things up. We have people that are using this uh they know what their kids are doing at home. They'll call them up and be like, "Stop doing that." And the kids will be like, "How did you know I was even doing this, Dad?" Uh we get feedback from people all the time that like it opened up uh precognition, clairvoyance, telepathy, and like um just an overall sense of things like aphantasia. Somebody who can't see uh visualizations in their head. They don't see uh like pictures like I don't know if you do really like I see like a full rundown like Tesla like I can turn things in 360 in my head. Some people can't see that at all. Called like a photographic memory. Not even photographic memory as much as being able to model like a a hallucination in your head of of a device or a soda can or something like that. And u some people can't do that. And using um certain equipment doing this we've had people report that they were able to finally visualize and see things in their head and they didn't know what was going on. And we thought that was a really interesting, it's almost like it's a rehabilitative effect. Can't make that claim, but we were being reported that and it seems like a very interesting thing that if somebody's opening up parts of their mental ability, their co their consciousness, um, what else opens up with it? Yeah. What else? Do you become a a fully formed human, a real boy? Stop being an NPC. You can actually uh, you know, start to see the world for what it is. Yeah. I just wonder how much of like just modern technology and and society that we live around right now is is suppressing that sort of stuff. Every bit of it, you know, even the frequencies coming over the Have you seen the video on uh the Lily wave? The Lily wave. I did a video called It was on John Lily. Now, people who are into anthogens will know all about John Lily. Oh, yeah. I know about John Lily. He was doing ketamine and he was doing NASA funded research on dolphins with LSD. NASA and Naval Intelligence and he was uh apparently he [ __ ] one at one point. Bad. But the guy that was giving him the ketamine was Lewis Jolly and West from MK Ultra. Oh yeah. And uh he was getting it from Jolly and he uh came up with get get away from his CD background. He came up with a wave that if you pulse it over a 60 Hz electrical, you know, the wiring within a house, it could control the human mind. it could it could basically shut you down and turn you into a walking zombie where you don't have full control of your faculties. And they found the lily wave. Uh Pat Flanigan actually analyzed what was coming through his wall and when Lily was coming to visit him and said, you know, this is coming through my wall. What is that? And Lily's like, "Oh, you found my wave." I did a whole video on this. It's Yeah, Lily I I mean I I didn't know uh Jolly West knew about electromagnetics and stuff like this. Okay, we could get into Jolly and West. Jolly, he was involved. He was part of the the oversight committee for the Stanford research remote viewing experiments and he was doing that with uh overseeing Dr. Christopher Kit Green. There you go. We turn into some interesting things. Oh, really? He was working with Kit Green. He was his mentor apparently. What? That's what I heard. Uh and Kit Green went to bat for him in a couple of statements where people were asking why Jolly did what he was doing. And yeah, Kit Green was involved with that. He's the one that was doing those uh brain scans on people who were getting directed energy weapons uh allegedly shot at them on Skinwalker Ranch. The guy that leaked that to me was one of the guards on Skinwalker Ranch, Chris uh Chris Bartell. Oh, really? He's got He gave you this this book, leaked it to me, and I'm not sure. I I never came public with that because I didn't know if it was disinformation they were trying to get me to run with because I had come out with too much before that. Sure. Um, they put me under surveillance that came along with a PDF that had a virus on it. So, I could only imagine they're trying to get access Oh, yeah. They were trying to get access to my computer. Yeah. So, it's like ah there it's disinformation. You under surveillance. Oh, yeah. Yeah. We went out to Mount Wilson Ranch uh you know where Bamonte went out to. Yeah. And uh we went out with Carl Crusher went out to Mount Wilson Ranch. They tried to get me to kind of go along with their being let off into the left field with their stories. And uh who brought you out there? Uh so I got the invite. So, I released videos about uh the guys that were getting brain damage at Skinwalker Ranch. Uh Bartell was one of them, but you had the guy Tom Winterton that was on the search for Skinwalker Ranch. So, he came with the big goose egg on his head. Um I did a video on that and it triggered the [ __ ] out of the people at Skinwalker Ranch. To this day, I re-released the video a couple months ago and Brandon Fugal tried to do a big, you know, damage control comment in the comments on that video because I released something they didn't want released. Okay. Uh, so then they wo in with a content creator from YouTube to contact me and say, "Hey, I'd love to do something with you. Come out, you know, we can go to the Mount Wilson Ranch. I'm working with these guys." I didn't realize at the time that he was intimately working with Brandon Fugal at the time who owns Skinwalker Ranch, talking to him all the time. And I'm like, "Okay." You know, I didn't know the guy's history. This is Carl Crusher. Uh, don't want to get into that relationship or anything, but we had to shut that down after some seedy stuff. Uh, but they had me go out to the ranch and there was not a goddamn thing on the ranch. Uh, I did a lot of research into what was going on there with uh, there's a company that put the instrumentation in at Skinwalker Ranch, Sarah, Dr. Richard Dickout and Dr. Tim Ren who were putting experiment putting equipment on Skinwalker Ranch and Mount Wilson Ranch. Not equipment to monitor high strangess equipment to [ __ ] with the human mind, non-lethal weapons and psychotronic weaponry. And it looked more and more to me like they had been experimenting on the staff at these ranches. And one of them was uh Chris Bartell. Well, I'm out there and this pops up. They're I woke up. Um we were all staying in the same in Carl's house. I went outside and uh they're looking at this on the computer and it's like, "What is this?" And they're like, "Oh yeah, we'll send you a copy of it, whatever." And they sent me a copy and it had a virus on it. I go looking through it. It looks like it's 50/50 mixed, you know, neuroscience that would hook me in with UFO [ __ ] that I there is no no way to validate whether or not that's real. But a lot of the stuff in that is like a mixture of names I could research and different things I could hook me in. And then the rest was I couldn't validate it. So I wouldn't release that. But I think they were hoping I would go along with it and push that out to the public and push that as like an MJ12 paper disinformation piece. Oh wow. And uh so I I was getting played, realized it and cut out of that. Met met with the guys from uh History Channel uh on an expedition to that ranch. And it was like this is there's they're this is not real. They're pushing nonsense here. So what do what did you mean when you said they put you under surveillance? Literally. They were watching uh all my watching all my social media uh texting me constantly. Tried to put the this u they they had my phone numbers. They were I would get random texts and such when I put a video out to say like hi, you know, things like that. And it was coming from a Utah number. I'm like, okay. Oh, really? So, yeah, that's just games. Just little games. Interesting. And it's going to take a lot more than that to shut me the [ __ ] up. Yeah. Yeah. The uh the Skinwalker Ranch thing. Super interesting. You know, they talk about that a little bit on the Mirage men documentary. Yeah, I watched that coming down on the flight. Did you rewatch it for you? I saw it years ago. We talked about it on the phone when we first when we first spoke. Um but in that documentary they claimed that um they were basically there was some sort of operation where they were doing subterranean nuclear blasts trying to like frack for oil. Yeah. Plow share and gas buggy. Gas buggy. I remember that one. And um I guess they were trying to test for uh nuclear contamination in like the vegetation and the livestock. So, they were trying to cut out specific glands of the cows and uh people thought it was super freaky. Could have been it must be aliens. Plus, they were doing test flights right over the same area and they were seeing these crazy UFOs they' never seen before, which was just like uh the CIA or the Navy doing like secret tests. So, they thought, "Oh, crazy [ __ ] in the sky we've never seen. Mutilated cows must be aliens." Yeah. Yeah. That's So, it was like the perfect right place, right time scop. Yeah. I did a video about uh those cattle mutilations with uh showing the book by Tom Keller who was the guy that was a second in charge at Skinwalker Ranch. I don't know if you when they were doing NIDS there. Okay. So Tom Keller was like their biologist that was working with Bigalow and he did a book on uh it's called Brain Trust I believe about mad cow disease and he's got most of it is about mad cow disease and and CJ uh CJD and then there's a part in it about cattle mutilations just magically in that book. Uh you pull that up Steve too. It's called brain trust by combeller and where he kind of drops the bomb about like are these is cattle mutilation aliens or is this people going out doing clandestine testing to find out if these have pions you know if you ate from that population is it spreading throughout the the natural population. Uh when I went out with those guys uh Chris Bartell actually told me about the the nuclear testing and he was I remember him telling me about the cow that has a a window in the side. They put a plastic window on the side so you can see it's its organs. At one of the museums Yeah. They had a cow that like they were testing on, but you could it was like a public op a public u a public thing where you can go and just check out the cow, see that the cow was doing fine, that it hadn't been influenced by radiation, but it really had and it was just part of a propaganda for that. Um, but there's an there's an I mean there's an aspect of that I don't believe in the the cattle mutilations though I used to. I used to be terribly fascinated by it. The more I look at it, the more it looks like a black ops program. Yeah. special forces guys out the [ __ ] or boines in the middle of the desert and you're like what a weird job to have. Um but it looks like they're they're testing for something radiation or pryions or whatever it might be. Um okay, let's go back to talk about let's let's go back to um Kit Green and Jolly West. So Jolly West was Kit Green's mentor, you were saying. So yeah. Uh so apparently they were both like the life sciences guy within the CIA. So, Christopher Kit Green is like in my opinion, in my mind, he links in with all of this [ __ ] Doesn't Jacqu Valet talk about him a lot? He does. And Forbidden Science. Yeah. Uh linked with UFOs, with psychic research and everything you could imagine up to and including like possible manufacturing of these things with GM. Okay. This is this General Motors. General Motors. This this place this goes weird. This story goes weird. So Kit Green of Michigan, uh they've done a lot of research on this guy. He uh was working with the CIA, working with Stanford Research during the the uh the the continuation of the MK Ultra experiments. That was the Stanford Research remote viewing experiments. Jolly and Wes was part of the oversight committee for that with SIC. Uh and they were they were working together on that. Uh then somehow or another it spins off into UFOs and Kit Green getting involved with UFO groups that Bigalow was starting up. Different things like that. They had the UFO working group, the the Onion group, the secret onion group that uh Jacqu Valet calls it. John Alexander, Colonel John Alexander was involved with that. All these guys were involved with that group. And it kind of spins into creating the entire mythology around UFOs to cover up for other things. Somehow or another, Kit Green retires from the CIA, goes off and works for General Motors Asia division. Uh, doing what? We don't know, but he's still involved with the UFO world. Coming back and then doing interference syndrome. You can actually look at the paper there of the brain scans of people who have been impacted by Havana syndrome. Mhm. Uh, microwave weaponry, directed energy weaponry. And that's what this is showing. It's showing a brain damage that happens when people uh come into contact with the technologies that might be flying these quote UFOs around, right? Uh not not alien technology, human technology that they just didn't do full testing on. He's establishing the ICD10 code so that they could do a medical billing on veterans that have been damaged by this stuff. Wow. Establishing what the actual criteria for, you know, this is an actual injury that comes from directed energy. Mhm. and doing the brain scans on it. And this is what Kit Green's doing. Kit Green and Gary Nolan. And Gary Nolan. Gary Nolan. He's uh side by side. Apparently, this was like a joint thing that they did. Wow. Yeah. So, Gary was tied to this whole thing about the basil ganglia being dense with neurons means you can see ghosts. Kadamin. Kadaman. Yeah. They talk all about it in the paper. Oh, okay. And that goes back to earlier. Is it hereditary? It is. Yeah. It's genetic. uh but it can atrophy under certain conditions what they show in the paper. Um and the original doctor that found that supposedly was Dr. Shafika Caragala who was uh she was working with the MK Ultra group up at McGill University in Canada and she's George Nory's aunt who's George Nory from Coast to Coast AM. Wow. And his aunt Shafika Caragala Dr. Shafica Caragula was a neuroscientist and she apparently found that initial link between psychic ability and the kadi patam and being hyper invated. Yeah. And she did that with a woman named Viola Patit Neil. And if you'd like, we're going to republish their books. Really? There you go. Yeah. What uh how does the kad patamon uh atrophy? Uh you can actually see in there if you if you switch it'll show you densities and sizes. It's like a blue. Oh, here we go. What are the codate and pitamin? Yeah, it talks about it, gives a rundown and then it shows atrophied ones from being u impacted by energy weapons, impacted by microwaves, the fray effect and yeah, so it's like right in the center of the brain. Yeah, it's it's our antenna. Some of us have better antennas than others and some, you know, uh the uh transceiver aspects of the brain, the transmitter and receiver. M um that's that's where this is the stuff Diana Pulka talks about. It is. Yeah. Yeah. Limitedly. She uh she doesn't exactly get into all of it, right? Yeah. She she's very um mysterious about some of it. Yeah. I believe she's part of that group. Which group? The group that that that's doing the studies that presented these papers. Yeah. It's all one group with Tim Taylor and the guys from NSA NRO and Oh, actually here, you know, you want to talk about like Chris Bledsoe and all those guys. Here's his uh NRO mission patch from the uh the satellite launch. This is his How How did you get this? eBay. Crazy enough, there's a dude selling NRO P mission patches on eBay and as soon as the Blitz says talked about it, I went So, he just recreates them. That's cool. Oh, no. I think that's an original. You think it's an original? That's what he built it as. I don't know. It didn't have a certificate of authenticity or anything. Right. Right. But there's there's indication that this technology lady that he sees supposedly. Yeah. And it's a NOL35 National Recon. uh national reconnaissance office launched 35 out of Vandenberg was the trumpet system and that's uh the seven trumpets of doomsday or seven trumpets of the apocalypse of the apocalypse. Yeah. Supposedly and it was the Jeroboam system and we one wonders if the energy weapons that they're measuring the effects from are linked in with this. The NRO they were launching satellites. There were seven satellites. Is that correct? There's seven in this in this trumpet system. In that trumpet system and overall it's the system's called Jeroboam. Jeroboam. I'm probably going to Oh, that's some Greek [ __ ] Uh, biblical. Yeah, it's Jeroboam was the Can you search that, Steve? Jer Jeroboam. Jeroboam. Yeah, I'm going to get a call for this. Like, somebody's going to be like, you're you're [ __ ] guy. What year? What year were those uh satellites launched over the course of quite a few years? You can you can pull them up actually. You can look up the uh NOL launches on YouTube or on Wikipedia. Oh, it's it's Hebrew. Yep. Oh, and Greek. Wait, what? Uh Romanized. He was the cited Jeroboam, the son of Nebat was, according to the Hebrew Bible, the first king of northern kingdom of Israel. He supposedly took the kingdom away from um Solomon and Solomon's sons and led them into idol worship. You worshiping cows. Oh, so the the golden calves and the the idol worship that the you know the Israel Israelites fell for. Yeah. Um or fell fell away from the grace of God or whatever. I'm not into that. Um that was Jeroboam's doing. And you got you got Bledo up here talking about like the lady and Hathau and the cow and you're like okay, you know, and he's showing him the Jeroboam satellite patch and I'm like, get the [ __ ] out of here. You think it's all What do you think's going on there? What do you think? Uh do you think he actually believes the stories? Bledo. Yeah. What What I mean like I don't know what to make of the sto of the crazy stories about like the lady. You can't verify any of that stuff. But with Bleo, the one thing you can't discredit is those orbs that follow him everywhere. Yeah. Have you seen the videos where we summon them using Mind of Mind? No. Yeah, we had 30 of them at once. There's I put Really? Yeah, it's on Instagram. Check it out. Everybody go follow our Instagram and check out Hell yeah. Let's pull that up, Steve. Anybody can do this. It's not You're not special. Credit cards, car loans, and even medical bills, and then you're juggling payments and all of a sudden feeling stuck. But here's the good news. You're not stuck. You just need a reset. At American Financing, they help homeowners like you every day. They use your home's equity and roll that high interest debt into one simple, affordable payment. They're saving homeowners an average of $800 a month. No judgment, no pressure, just real solutions that put you back in control. Imagine breathing again, sleeping again, knowing your future is yours to shape. It starts with one call. It only takes 10 minutes to get started, and there are no upfront fees, so it costs nothing to find out how much you can save. And if you start today, you may be able to delay up to two mortgage payments during the process, creating an extra bonus in savings upfront. Their mortgage consultants are salarybased, so there's no incentive to put you in a loan that won't work for you. And they're ready to help. Take back your peace of mind with American Financing today. Call American Financing at 888995-2440. That's 8889952440 or americanancing.net/jones. NMLS182334 www.nmlsconsumerac.org. Thank you American Financing for sponsoring this episode. It's linked below. Now back to the show. Like this is this something anybody can do if they un anybody can summon these orbs. Anybody can do this. What? So like check it out. Oh my god. We had a group go out. We had five people linked together with these and they were focusing on you know make lights in the sky up here and we had that. There it is. You did it. I got a blue check. There you go. All right. How do we find these orbs? Go to reels. Scroll on down. We got um um orbs. And we scroll up a little bit. Up. Up. Mystery lights. Not as big a deal as you think. Mystery lights not as big a deal as you think. Bottom right. Steve. Down. There you go. There are many people out there posting videos of things they see in the sky that are misidentified satellites, planes, and other normal things. But this is what it looks like when something truly anomalous is going on. If you watched my previous video, you know that a few years ago, we did an event here in Tennessee where we had friends out to an astronomy site. And over the course of the event, we had well over 30 mysterious lights. Call them UFOs, call them orbs, call them whatever you wish. And they showed up over the course of a guided meditation where we were using our mindto- mind technology. And here it is. This is what it actually looked like. cluster of lights just over the hills low on the horizon. Um, but they would twinkle and they'd move on. And as I said, there were between 30 and 40 of them. We were using our mind to mind technology. And this started about 6 minutes in, which would equate to the introductory period that the mindtomind actually runs for before it gets into the working program. So these things showed up around that time. They persisted for about a half an hour and then they twinkled out and went away as people stopped doing the meditation. And so it was happening while they were focused on making this happen. Very obviously these are not planes or satellites and we are thousands of miles away from any Asian country where they'd be sending up Chinese lanterns. I'm not going to sit here and try to oversell you on anything or try to weave in some belief system or tell you that a goddess came down and gave me a message about the fate of mankind because we all know you're [ __ ] anyway. Instead, I'm just going to give it to you plain. This is what it was. This is what it looked like. Anomalous things can and do happen, especially if you're using the correct techniques. So, have you ever got like He gets them to come really close like and they're always right in his backyard. Sure. But what do you think that is? Does he have videos of that as all over his Instagram every day of it of closeup? Anything bes anything tangible though? Anything besides a light? because you had Robert Duncan come on your show and show you that you could do uh you could do phento lasers and create like holograms that hover it and he's he's involved with John Alexander who developed that technology who is Bledo. Oh, he's best best buddies. He's wearing a CIA hat in in a picture with John Alexander. Hang on. Go go go to uh Bledo's I want to show you just what Bledo posts every day. Now I I need to I need to temper this. I've spoken with Bledso's son Chris Jr. and he he seems to be confused by the whole thing. They seem like nice people. I don't have anything personal. They are very nice people. Yeah, I had Chris and his daughter on here. Yeah. Um, and whatever's going on, it's it's real. Like, whatever these orbs are, just click on the latest one. Well, is it real or is it aliens? Is it a thing that Well, it it's something. It's something. It's something. I When I say real, I don't mean it's [ __ ] angels, but it's something's there. It's not He's not doing special effects. Once again, let me Well, you don't know that. You don't know if the guys around him, Tim Taylor and the NRO and SA and John John Alexander are doing it. Like, do you think they're [ __ ] really sitting in his backyard every night doing that? like yeah because he's a hell of a good mouthpiece. He is dis disarming. He's a country boy that people generally like and he was a very good mouthpiece for their agenda and their message. So I think from that standpoint it's a possibility. That's all I'm saying. It's a possibility. Mhm. I I like leaving room for things that could be definitely a possibility. It's definitely far I think it's more possible that that that is true than um them being things from the Bible. I know for a fact that they had tested these. That That one's pretty wild. It is pretty wild. But it might be a Fento laser. It might be a like they did testing on Rendlessham Air Force Base. You heard about the Rendlessham story? Yes. Back in the 70s, I think it was back in England. Yeah. They tested non-lethals to see what the security uh the the security response would be to using non-lethals and psychotronics that they didn't realize existed. They were using these in three space, threedimensional space, using that using u uh drugs that were put out with a mist that they had to to put them in a suggestible state to see these things to see if they would freak the [ __ ] out at a nuclear site using the non-lethal weapons. These have been in use for 30 years and they had there's a video out from the military themselves talking about using these. You can pulse the air around them cor and you can put out a voice from them. They can talk to you in midair and they were using them for security around bases. Shut up. I'm not kidding. Check out uh check out the military's laser that can talk to you and they show up. Oh my god. And and who knows how they are. This goes back to World War II. Uh here's I'll I'll tell you everybody. This is a a world exclusive for the Danny Jones podcast. Back in World War II, there was something called the Battle of the Beams. The Germans figured out that you you didn't have to bomb a factory by with with sight. You can focus two radar beams on over the the Rolls-Royce factory, for example, and they could have a sounder where the bombers would fly and they'd listen to the sound and once they got oversight, it would ping and they drop their bombs. They could do it sightless, they could do it in mist, and they could bomb these factories and the the British didn't know how they were doing it. You Google this. It's a Wikipedia, the battle of the beams. What the Germans also found out that this sighting system that when you converge them, it would excite the air. It would create a light and that light would interfere with the electronics on an airplane. So, fighter planes, bombers, whatever. Those were the Foo Fighters. The Germans were doing this at the end of the war, throwing whatever they could at the wall by converging these things in the sky to interfere with the electronics of the bombers that were coming over into Germany. Wow. And then the British came out with their flying saucer flying saucer party, flying saucer research group. In 1950, sir Henry Tizzard got ahead of this by creating a flying saucer group, the first one in the world through British intelligence to cover this up because this was a viable technology. And it goes back to the 1940s. There you go. Yeah. They had small They had little ones that you could put into the field and you can make foo fighters with. It wasn't a physical drone that would go up. They were converging just like Robert Duncan told you. They were converging uh it wasn't lasers, it was radar that could converge and create an ionize ionize the air and create a foo fighter like uh it's um what did he call it? He called it uh blue the blue beam the the project blue beam where they can Yeah, I don't think it's it's not even blue beam. Like I think that's a I think that's a myth that was pushed out to cover this [ __ ] up. The real stuff. So if you start looking in the project blue beam, you find out there's not a lot of depth there. But this stuff absolutely existed and it's been it's been around since World War II. Okay. I need you to search for what he said previously to this. He said um what did you call it? Military orbs that talk to you or something. Yeah. Look look look look up uh that should come up with that. I did a video on it. I couldn't point it. It was like two years ago. Military lasers that talk. That talk. Oh my god. We just figured out the title of this podcast. There Military Times. the military times, but there's stuff that goes back a lot longer than this. Okay. Okay. Uh beams, uh a flashing light and shouting over a loudspeaker to keep people away from sensitive areas. A new technology is being developed that could allow troops to fire a laser that can form a plasma ball that talks to potential intruders. Yeah, there's a video of it working. Where is right there? Is that this? That's the one. Oh my god. Awesome. Sorry, I know I'm all over the place with this, but there's there's a lot lot to cover here. This is cool. Penton scientists have finished testing on an early weapon that can make laser plasma balls talk. Stop or we will be forced to fire upon you. It's called the the laser induced plasma effect and it's made by the joint, not only the weapons directorate. So, what they've done is basically created a laser that can shoot out to a certain distance and they can pipe in sound sound waves through it and actually make human voice sounds and commands. stop or we will be forced to fire up. Now, where this becomes useful is around an area where you want to keep a perimeter secure. So, essentially, you can shoot out this laser. You can then talk to the the people on the edge of the perimeter rather than sending troops out there and tell them to get away or you're going to shoot or get away or they're going to use other mean to deter them. And that same laser can be used to actually target the individual and uh and and create heat through pin pricks, like microscopic pin pricks in their skin, even beneath clothing. It's extremely uncomfortable and people move out of the way almost immediately. At the same time, the exact same laser is also being used as kind of a an a never- ending flashbang grenade. It can basically with a with a power source, it can constantly create audible effects to deter and confuse and disorient people just like a flashbang grenade that you would have in your kit, but would only be able to flash once, maybe twice, depending on the design. Um, now it's still a few years away. They just finished testing to get the audio portion through the laser in a laboratory setting this year, but they expect to have a fieldable version within the next 5 years that troops could use to protect different areas or put on mobile platforms to disperse crowds or use in anthle. Yeah, horseshit. They've had that for decades. It's very old technology. Wow. But it's cool, isn't it? That's insane. When was this published? Five years ago. Five years ago. Yeah. And the guy that was in charge of the non-lethal programs just happened to write the introduction to Chris Blitzo's book, Dr. Colonel John Alexander, right? So he was that's another crazy thing about him that that is like one of the craziest things about how all the CIA NRO people are just and he even mentions in his book um this elusive uh uh NASA guy, Tim Taylor. Yeah. No, no, no, not him. Um the other guy um Oh, the the bigger guy. The moon guy. The guy who mapped the moon for the Apollo missions. Yeah. Yeah. The one that was his family friend for Yeah. Yeah. What was his name again, Steve? Hal Pavmeer. Pavmeer. Steve will never forget that name. I don't know anything about that. Yeah, you can't find anything about him. But this guy allegedly drove up there from NASA and told him that he was the one in charge of mapping the moon so they knew where to land the lunar landers for the Apollo missions. Terrible father. You if a Fed shows up to your front door and you got kids and letting them in the house, what the are you thinking? I would never let any of these people around a family that I would Yeah. If you don't know anything about this stuff, like you know, you're not paying attention to this stuff. He's just some lucky. I would like John Alexander wouldn't get anywhere near my family. So, no thank you. Why not? He's got them crazy eyes. He does. Yeah, I know he's out there watching. Hey, hey, John. Um, yeah. No, uh, he's, uh, Dr. Death. Really? I don't know. You got Chris Bledell here telling you about he's, you know, I can never hurt a fly. I can never whatever. The lady let me s see this and everything's connected and then he's like he's like lubing up John Alexander because they call him Dr. Death and he was a hitman. I talk about being, you know, skitso. Just my opinion. Yeah, it's fishy, man. There's a lot of weird [ __ ] A lot of weird [ __ ] in this thing. In this whole topic, this topic is so how long ago this started. There's aspects of this you don't even realize about how long the NRO and NSA have been involved with creating fake abduct abductees and contacties. It goes back to like um Shak Vallet talks about a woman named Valerie Ransone who was the Tim Taylor before Tim Taylor. Valerie Ransone and she's out in Hawaii right now. You have I have a picture of her actually in that dossier that Yeah. In the printouts that I've got for you there. You can get Valerie and Valerie was going around with Dr. uh there. There she is. She was going around with Dr. uh um Andrea Puharish uh hypnaric. Yeah. Yeah. hypnotizing kids and uh making them think that they were alien abductees. She was part of that group, the the space kids. Yeah. And it was an MK project. Puharic was an MK contract. We've got his book here. Actually, I brought these forward. Yeah, I read all about Puharic in Annie Jacobson's book. There you go. There's a there's his book about what's actually going on. He had a come in the Jesus moment and spilled the beans and the FBI tried to keep him from publishing that, so we republished it. No way. That's That's for you and Steve. Holy [ __ ] bro. Thank you. That's about his research into Tesla technology. That again Oh, look. It's all in typewriter. Yeah, it it's it's the draft. We got We got it from the woman that lived with him when he died. We got it from her estate. Wow. So, Puharic was also working with Yuri Geller, right? He was he So, Puharic uh So, okay. He was an army doctor. Went to school on the d ar army's dime, went out immediately and was working for the army, navy, and CIA, but also British intelligence. Uh Aldis Huxley was handling him. Sir John Whitmore was handling him. All this comes down from British intelligence, including MK Ultra. Ultimately, it starts with the British. MK Ultra started with the British. I thought it start with the Russians. Henry Tizard started it up with a meeting with CIA brass in Montreal. Well, yeah, it was it started with British intelligence after all this World War II [ __ ] that I was talking about. So, they started all this up that ball rolling. But Puharish was their contractor that would go across the different groups, the different agencies. And there's a video, Steve. This is a great one if you want to see MK Ultra Technology in action. It's uh One Step Beyond the Sacred Mushroom where Step Beyond the Sacred Mushroom. One Step Beyond is the the show name and it's the sacred mushroom. It's on YouTube and it's uh Puhares is there flashing lights in people's eyes, hypnotizing them to make them psychic. There's a portion. There it is. Science is not yet given right there. Keep going. If you don't, it's kind of hard to That's the early photoic and magnetic stimulator that the that MK Ultra was using. Karish developed to put people in their states. Yeah. It's a an American version of the Lita machine from Russia. Lower your head a little bit. A little more. Sounds awful. Does sounds diabolical. Now I see I see so many things I can't tell you. Can't you slow? Lord, now I see like but I see so many colors that are go. Are they pretty in geometric signs? Now they're like great things. They're magnificent is what they are. They're magnificent. I have never been so aware of color. Of color. What is this thing actually doing? After this, he goes off and does psychic testing on him and finds that he became much more accurate choosing cards. So, it's opening up psychic ability. That was the intent at least, but it's putting him in a hypnotic state and try to find and this is his testing. He's doing a dermoptical vision, uh, seeing through the fingers, which is they actually studied this. It's in the congressional record. Yeah. Yeah. I'll tell you about that in a second. Now, when they did the church committee, they asked if they had any open projects still being done. Turn the volume down on the video, Steve. It's pretty unsettling. Yeah. They asked if they had any uh ongoing projects going for MK Ultra. And they're like, "We only have one, and it's a doctor who's testing a kid who can see through his hands in Orlando." And that was Boohar. So, at that time, and then that started the ball rolling with a lot of things. Jesus. This this was all going on behind the scenes. as a portion of the army and navy and CIA's uh projects into uh mind control. There is always a psychic component to it on the side. I did a video about uh Dr. George Esbrooks and the FBI trying to shell his services to the FBI and going back and forth with Jay Edgar Hoover about using Manurion candidates in the 1930s with documents to prove this all out. Really? There's there's there's a paper trail for this. Yeah. As early as the 30s. Do you think they're still doing this stuff today? Oh [ __ ] Yes. They're just more sophisticated by What do you think it looks like today? What do you think? What kind of stuff do you What kind of tools you think they're using today? Tik Tok and Instagram? Yeah. I don't even think I don't even I think an AI like I think you've asked I think I saw one of your podcasts where you asked if an AI could hypnotize somebody or an AI could mind control somebody. Absolutely. It's just a pattern of of communication. Replicate that with an AI and figure out what the person's uh individual levers are to pull and absolutely. We wouldn't even need a person to do it anymore. Have you ever heard of something called the Brain Health Initiative? Oh, what's that with? Allegedly, this is like uh the new MK Ultra that's based in I think it's Mexico or somewhere in South America. And it was put together by Obama. If you search Obama brain health initiative, I'm not familiar with it. And um essentially it has something to do with how all of the tech devices that we have from our TVs to our phones to our computer screens have um this specific uh frequency of blue light and it's not and it what it does is it like hijacks our circadian rhythm and it and our dopamine system and basically turns us into like dopamine slot machines. Yeah. We went to Target last night. You got the blue lights around here in the parking lots. Blue light carries more information than than any other spectrum of light. And that's part of it. Could be part of it if you flip the switch on it. And I also believe it was during the Obama years when they banned uh full spectrum light bulbs. I think it's incandescent light bulbs. They ban because they're not efficient enough. That sounds about right. But that's Yeah. Yep. Yep. It's a There was a lot of work that went on. We were republishing some of the works that we translated from Hakabo Grimberg. I don't know if you've heard of him. He's kind of an internet meme as well. He's the Mexican Puarish basically. Oh, really? MK Ultra guy himself. And uh how do you spell how do you say his name? Grinberg. It's it's Grimberg Zilber, but it's Hakabo. J A C O B O G R I N B E R G. Jakobo. Okay. Jakobo Grimberg. Yeah, we pronounce it that way. And he's the uh he did a ton of research into this. He did the uh Persinger experiments connecting mines between Mexico City and India in the 70s. So Persinger was recreating research when he was doing um uh the correlation between two minds. So that's old research from the 70s that Grimberg was doing first. Grimberg was uh Israeli dual citizen questionable if he was MSAD came up ended up going uh escaping to the United States and disappearing and uh but yeah he's got he's got some interesting stuff. He was at conferences with Puharish and John Keel and uh Jacques Valet in Costa Rica for some of his work. So he was involved with all the groups as well. And they were doing star star kid research. So the uh Valerie Ransone that I showed you who was working with hypnotizing kids to make them think that they were star kids that they were contacties whatever you want to consider that he was doing that himself in Mexico City running the same kind of experimentation on kids. Have you ever heard of um I'm sure you have. You've heard Whitley Streer story? Yeah. And he was uh you know where he grew up. He grew up in San Antonio, right? He's got stories about how he was being taken to one of the Air Force bases in San Antonio. Yeah. Uh between 1940, late 40s, early 50s, that era, but the era he says overlaps with when Jolly West was the head of psychiatry at that same base. Yeah. So, he also talks about he was sent to Mexico to some secret place that he hates to talk about, but he did he did talk about it on one radio show back in the day where he says that him and a bunch of other children were shown footage of dead people or people being murdered and told that they were responsible for the murders to induce some sort of trauma in Yeah, that's part of creating a an altar, splitting them off into somebody that you you create a partition so that you don't remember the bad things if you're a little kid and that that bad stuff is still in the subconcious. And that could be used to create that's what Esther Brooks was doing with the FBI. He was doing it at civilian conservation corps camps during the Great Depression. He was driving around hypnotizing people and creating altars that he could hypnotically induce and come out and they could remember information. Just the menurian candidate story, but he was doing it 20 years before they were talking about it. So how does that work? I I I I'm not smart enough to understand how you can induce like some serious psychological trauma in a kid and you you're saying that they create a split personality. one that they one that they suppress. Yeah. Kids got to go off with its life and have a healthy happy life and try to be, you know, somewhat functional. And if you give them enough trauma up front like they're they got to partition that somewhere and that partition part becomes a different person for all intents and purposes. It's a different consciousness that can be programmed as a different fully functioning person that could go out and interact with the world, gather information, come back. And the pisser about it is that one doesn't know the other one exists and it doesn't remember what happened to the other one. and h and how do you so I'm assuming that the the the goal behind creating this separate person um is to get them to work for them to do like secret secret [ __ ] for that's you'd think so that's that was the offer to and it wasn't just an offer they took him up on it to Jger Hoover that I'm going to hypnotize three people create an altar within them send them off to FBI headquarters because they want to work for the FBI their normal personality were work will work for the FBI and their altars can go off and infiltrate uh organized crime or be double agents that we can then mine afterwards and get information about those crime rings. And how do they manage which person they are and and what time they turn into what person? Just a hypnotic induction. It it is as simple as leading somebody through hypnosis at its core is is is a organized fantasy. You're having somebody come along into a land of makebelieve with you by talking them through it. Mh. And that can be extremely powerful. We we think we think it's not something that could partition people off memory wise and all that, but absolutely can. And it was figured out they figured it out in the 1700s. There's Marquita Poise figured it out in the 1784. He published a book about how to hypnotize somebody and have them remember things in their some novelistic state and not their right waking state. And they've been doing it ever since. Oh yeah. Whoa. 200 years. The bridge. So they It's almost like that severance show in real life. I never watched that. Is it Is that what it's about? It's about basically these people that there's this huge company called Lumen where these all the employees agree to have a brain chip installed in their brain to where they go to work, right, as their normal self. They get in the elevator. As soon as the elevator goes up to the severed floor, it flips a switch. It goes to another partition to where basically essentially when they leave work every day, they get in the elevator, they go down and then their their next memory is right back in the elevator going to work again. Yeah. And then their home life is completely se separated from their work life. That's exactly what I'm talking about. Only that is real. That that literally exists. They they were using it James but without a brain chip with some sort of hypnosis stuff talking to people just hypnosis. So what it was was back in the 1700s you had uh uh Mesmer France Anton France Anton Mesmer and he was doing mesmeriism and we think that that's silly and hokey and old timey. In the 1840s they changed the name from memeism into hypnotism. Dr. James Brad and he was using it to do surgery and amputations on people where they wouldn't remember them being their leg getting amputated in a war or something cuz they didn't have the medical facilities where he was deployed out I think he was in the uh Southeast Asia for the British. He could hypn hypnotize a person, do the surgery, bring them back and they wouldn't remember the hard part, the bad part where they had their leg cut off. And it worked and it continued on literally from the 1840s as part of medical medical hypnotism till the 1920s and 30s. But there was always another layer on that that when people were in their subnabalistic state, they had psychic ability. You could take a person, sit them in a chair in one room, take a person to another room, another town, another city that they were doing it in France to other cities, change the time on your pocket watch, and they'd know what time you were changing it to. It was a form of remote viewing. And this was going on for 150 years before we even knew any of that. And Esther Brooks refined the technique. He used it in World War II for the Marines. He he has a book where he created altars for the Marines in World War II. U actually it was a magazine article where he admitted to that. He has a book that's a fictionalized version of that. And there's a a document trail where he's doing it for the FBI in the 30s. Wow. So at least until then it was being covered up by the Society for Psychical Research in Great Britain where they were studying these things as well and they were trying to figure out what the what the true potential of a hypnotized person actually was. Uh it wasn't all spiritualism and table tipping and all that [ __ ] That's a cover story for what they were actually able to accomplish. There's a ton of research in the old books about [ __ ] that we are just getting to right now like Stanford research remote viewing and uh psychokinesis stopping hearts you know different things stopping hearts stopping hearts one of the lines of research in Israel was they were they found out you can influence muscle tissue by focusing on it you can cause it to contract and they thought that they could turn that into a weapon to cause a heart attack. Jesus. Yeah. It's it's it's crazy how much is It's right there under the surface. If people would only research a little bit deeper, it's all right there. It hasn't been hidden except by neglect. People just don't look that far down. It's so crazy, man, because it doesn't even It's like the crazy thing the crazy thing about it is it doesn't even have to be hidden. No. Like, it could just be out in plain sight and people could run with it and people still wouldn't know what to believe. Full circle with our comments earlier in the podcast that they they don't even know what is real. As long as there's like 20% fake stuff out there, you know, the rest of it can be real and no one will never know what to pick. Yeah. Hide it behind a curtain of the giggle factor. Yeah. Jeez, man. That's crazy. I got to take a leak real quick. Go for it. Cool. We'll be right back. I probably need to as well. So, I wanted to talk to you. I wanted to ask you about those goggles that you that you created. What What What are those and what's the history of those things? Okay, so the history is uh back a bit ago, the Museum of Terror wasn't a thing online. It was my personal collection and I was, you know, selling overflow from the collection on eBay and all that. Yeah. And and I like to collect weird things. Radionics machines, psychotronic devices, basically things that interweave with what we've been talking about in the the in this podcast. One of the things that I came across on the internet was this mysterious dyanin and these mysterious goggles that could allow you to see demons and entities and all this. And I wondered how much they were overselling this, right? So I went to try to find some. Couldn't find it to save me. Um they nobody was making real ones anymore. They stopped making them in the 80s. Strangely enough, the guy that was making them last was a a Naval Intelligence uh outfit, Mankind Research uh Unlimited. Um we can get into that, but it wasn't available anywhere. You can find it. So, I had to go get antique pairs and try to back engineer and then acquire the chemical and get into manufacturing for that as well to see if these things were even real. I did that. I made some initial pairs for myself and had a couple left over and I put them up on eBay and Etsy and I sold out immediately. And one of the people that I happened to sell them to had a million followers on TikTok. Thank you. Shout out to uh Dr. Parkinstein. He's fantastic. And he talked about these and we got blown up and said there must be a people want these so let's sell some more. Check them out. So what's the story behind these? The story is back about a 120 years ago. Dr. Walter Kilner in Great Britain medical doctor. He was a medical imaging specialist. So what we would call a radiologist today, right? And he uh de he started using various forms of colar dye derivatives, new dyes that have been on the market to see if you could see things around the human body, energy and such to do medical diagnosis. He found that this uh dicyanin was one of the chemicals that allowed him to see things that were actually going on. If somebody had cancer around the pancreas, it'd have a dark area around the pancreas, things like that. uh and he put them out into the public for the medical community to use. They loved them. They thought they were great. And then the theosophists and the newagy and spiritual people jumped on it and started saying, "Oh, this is the human aura. This is finally proves the aura." And it it took on a life of its own in those circles and continued on, like I said, until I think it was the early 1990s when they stopped making these. Uh but for the longest time, they had pairs of these out there and available through Great Britain. It makes everything very dark and purple. Yeah. Yeah. And if you go outside, uh, it acclimates your eyes to a different spectrum and you'll start to see a halo, two halos actually. One around your fingers a little farther out and a darker one closer up and you'll start to get the, uh, the effects. You could Yeah, there's actually a good one. If you see the one with my fingers together, a little closer. Keep going back. Let's see. You might have to go to the to the uh the regular Yeah, go to the regular dion or goggles, not the research kit. And I have a picture of the the cobwebing between my fingers showing them. So yeah, just the one on the lower right there. Lower bottom right. Yep. And yeah, the first second. Oh, no. Do I not have that on there? Uh, go back. So, what's the story? How how is it? Is it a real What? How do you explain that that lighter color around? There's a there's a full page for dice and that actually uh gets into it. But if you go up to our toolbar, there should be a full page for it. So there it is. Yeah, you see the cobweb between my fingers. Okay. Is there a conventional like explanation for this? Yeah, but in the west they don't like talking about this in in Russia. They they have a full theory of bioplasma and bio energy that is uh well established and well uh well understood within the psy circle. So certainly psychic research and and not psychic research. Psychic research in Russia is integrated with normal science. They they see it as a life science. They don't see it as blew out. Yeah, it's even today. Even today, that's that's what kicked us off trying to catch up catch up with them. We actually had been ahead of them. The Russians seized upon the old research from the early 1900s and went beyond us. And then we had to catch up in the 70s supposedly and be because they treated it like a real science. They had the best minds at it. Uh we've got a a book out by Dr. Vasilv in Russia, Alena Vasilv, talking about their strides up to 1960 of what they actually figured out about all this stuff. and it was always integrated and they didn't partition one off and say that's silly that's you know ridiculous and they were able to get farther ahead with it. So and this is this is part of it bioplasma and bio energy is and so what is the deal like what's going on with that chemical that's inside the glass there? Well it's coated on these ones the old ones had a gelatin layer that was impregnated with dicyanin or pen penosyanol between two glass pieces and it would degrade. You couldn't see it would last a couple of months and it would start to get cloudy. You couldn't see it through it. Okay. So, we had to come up with a lens technology like a telescope lens that was coded with it so it wouldn't degrade anymore. So, that's one of our that's one of the things that we established that nobody else has got out there. Wow. What it does is it just shifts the light to that correct spectrum. There's no there's no real magic in it. Unfortunately, like people like to say that like it's they live. You're you're able to see the aliens, you know, you're able to see the obey on the sign above you. That oversells it. But there are things people will have different energy around them. They will have dark areas around them when they have a health issue and malady. It absolutely does happen and you can see it if you're if if the lighting conditions are correct. So you use these when you go to like ancient sites and you look at them and you can see so so some things have more of this light purple aura than other things. And traditionally those have been the areas that people would congregate to to do ritual work or you know sacred work. And we also found that a lot of these areas um correlate with like having lower magnetic fields for the area. So we we'll find areas like methraams where the local magnetic field for that area in Italy or wherever it might be is usually 40 and we go to those areas we go to the underground site and it's zero it goes to zero and it kind of inverts some of the cathedrals do this it's it's a magnetic anomaly that is in these sites or created by the structures of these sites and this corresponds with other research we have for koserv mirrors and such where we find that people have better psychic ability better you know clairvoyance telepathy things we could actually test when they're in these sites and the magnetic field is less and it it goes along with Persinger's research as well because everything was magnetic based within the brain. No [ __ ] And it's crazy. It's like an integrated theory where we we wanted to make a visual where you can go to these sites and see it, but we can also test it with a magnetometer and infrasound and we can see what's actually there with the quote sacred energy about these sites where, you know, we're not just there, you know, dowsing. Can I take Can I Can I take them outside real quick? Absolutely. I'm just going to go out that door real quick and take a look. Yeah. Yeah. Give your eyes a second. Yeah. As your eyes acclimate to it, you'll it'll become uh we we recommend people put these on for 15 minutes, let their eyes adjust, and then go out and do that. And then then you could see it. Yeah. And that's how Kilner was doing it as well. That's wild. So, how did you get that photo? Do you just put your your like camera up to the lens? Yeah, pretty much. Right. Yeah. Huh? Do you know what what nanometer range it lets through? Uh yeah, I could pull that up for you. I did a specttogram u on this when I was initially doing it. So, but it's in u a violet range. So, and it's people talk about like blue and red. Blue and red don't exist. There is no red daisy and there was no blue daisy. It was like a magenta purpley red color. And you see this spread around the uh social media a lot because people take something that's wrong and run with it. There were no red night vision goggles in Vietnam that allowed people to see things. Uh that's that's an urban legend. Or else I would have bought one already, replicated it. They had a lot of crazy [ __ ] during Vietnam. They did have a lot of crazy [ __ ] A lot of really like high-tech stuff. A lot of it didn't work, but a lot of it did. That's when DARPA was like on fire during Vietnam. Yeah, it was still ARPA, wasn't it? I think was on it. Yeah. Yeah. They had that u all that stuff they were doing on the Ho Chi Min Trail and Yeah. Those nerve agents or was it? No, that was Agent Orange, wasn't it? Now, you were talking about um you know, bio energy and you know, if that's been established. Yeah. Uh they found there was a Marine Corps contract back then for dowsing that they could find the Vicon tunnels using dowsing and it was an actual thing through the same through that mankind research that did these uh and then like dowsing rods dow they had special dowsing rods for the Marines that they could condense up and you know fold up and put in their pocket. M and it was uh it was through this same company that had these last that did real ones the last uh mankind research and Carl Schliker. Dude, I'm reading this book right now that's blowing my mind. It's called I forget the name of it, but it's um by that one lady we talked to, Steve, that uh Travis recommended. It's called something Scorpion Bombs and like ancient weapons. It talks about like um the the the ancient Greeks and the ancient and the Romans and the different uh biological and chemical weapons they were using for war. One of the things that they would do was like they elephants were used for war. So they would light pigs on fire and send them at the elephants in hopes to like make the elephant go crazy and trample all over all their people. Interesting. And it often went really wrong because they didn't they didn't uh you think they Yeah. Greek fire, poison arrows, and scorpion bombs, but there's a newer version of it. This is the old version. That's funny. And uh by uh yeah, Mayor, she um one of the things they didn't account for when they lit their pigs on fire is they didn't they couldn't control where the pigs ran after they were lit on fire. And they often ran back into their own army and like [ __ ] up a lot of people. Why would a pig that's lit on fire run where you want it to? That's exactly right. A little shortsided. Okay, we're going to light you on fire. You're going to run that way. Yeah, there's there's theories going around. Even the black plague was a form of biological warfare between kingdoms where they were poisoning wells. There's indication that people were poisoning wells. They were. Yeah, there were lots of water supplies that were poisoned in Egypt and all over that area. Y and um yeah, it's fascinating stuff like just what what we were able to do back then. Like we've been using chemical biological warfare forever. Yeah, we've always been wacky. Mhm. That's That's a bit much. And then they also had uh they would fill bags full of scorpions, like the some of the most deadly scorpions, and like throw them throw them over walls at people, and it would just like take out tons of people. They were uh some of like the earliest some of the some of the earliest uh the um the Mythraic people were were dipping their arrows in viper venoms. Wow. And using that to to kill people. It was crazy. Who was a poor son of a [ __ ] that pulled scorpion duty? It's like, right. How do you get all those [ __ ] scorpions in a bag? I'm sure a lot of people die just doing that. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. God forbid the wings coming at you and you toss Yikes. Yeah, man. It's crazy. And then like also um a lot of the things that I've been learning about recently is how how much stuff we got from the Nazis and how we like took that and like expanded on it, you know, with Warren von Braun and some of those paperclip scientists. And I think even Whitley Streamer, I think a lot of the paperclip scientists were working on him when he was in Texas. So a lot of that is is a myth. Um MK Ultra was not German. It wasn't paperclipip scientists. MK Ultra specifically. I'm talking about the mind control within the CIA. It was not It wasn't Germans. They We had Craft. We had Horton flying wings. I don't know if you saw my video about the Roswell Horton brothers. Yeah. Did you see my Roswell video? No. It's about two years old now, but it's about Roswell being a Horton flying wing that crashed and the they had a I believe that. I I I think that makes the most sense. Yeah. There was a Northrep training uh uh landing strip that was the longest one in the world. Nobody knew about until I talked about it in the video. That was where they were testing these and it was pointed right at Roswell. So, who who knows? Uh but it's a it's a better story than aliens getting hit by a windmill, right? Yeah. Because they they would want to be getting intelligence on our nuclear sites and on air sites like Area 51, right? Soviet Soviets. Soviet I I think there was a lot of interaction at that time where Soviets I I think the Cold War was a hoax. I think at I think What do you mean the Cold War was a hoax? The Cold War was a hoax. There is my my my powerful stance here. I had a guy on here once that told me the military-industrial complex is a hoax. It it certainly keeps society moving in a certain direction. Yeah. What it looked like to me is that we were allies allies allies and then one day we weren't. And even though you look at sigh research and you look at psychotronic research and all the Soviet scientists were allowed to go back and forth between the west and talk with them all the time and share research, this was happening at the highest levels of their secret sciences. They were still allowed to talk back and forth. So how partitioned off was it? What it looks like to me is that you run a scam on society. You tell one side the one side of the the coliseum that those people are the enemy. You tell this side that those people are the enemy. And then you you get the best out of them to create the best technology like NASA and put [ __ ] in orbit that can control both sides. Really, it's what it looks like to me. Just a long-term development kick in the ass for society to create things that they normally wouldn't create like non-lethal weapons that could be used to control the entire herd and not just one side or the other. So, walk me through uh what you believe Roswell was all about. Roswell uh I believe it was a Horton Flying Wing. I I know that like what was the what was who was behind it? Why why did they do it? Yeah. You don't want people Well, it became the the stealth bomber, you know, decades later. The Horton flying wings became like all the B2 and the F-17 and all that. You wouldn't want people to know about that. So, you you put a a hokey story behind it. You know, UFOs from the Henry Tizzard days in Great Britain where we had the Battle of the Beams that were the Foo Fighters that were actually beam weapons like they had the earliest beam weapons. They had to cover that somehow. So you create this this hokey story about aliens and foo fighters and you see all these little green men cartoons coming out around that time. Yeah. And Bugs Bunny and all that. Mhm. And then if you had physical craft that nobody knew about like uh like Afro Canada who was recreating some of the the flying pancakes shaped disc craft and if you had these different groups that were working on technology that you took after the war, you wouldn't want anybody to know about that. Kenneth Arnold. I have the first issue of Fate magazine where Kenneth Arnold brings out his story about the flying discs, the flying saucers. And they weren't saucers. They were Horton flying wings. If you look at the pictures, I think Georgiani was telling us about this. Yeah. Yeah. And it's it's very obvious that we were flying these things around and had to put down some kind of wall around it. And I think it just served a purpose and they kept it going for decades. Yeah. So, you know, people don't ask you're going to get laughed out of a room if you bring up aliens. I mean certainly a decade or two ago now nowadays people can talk about that. Have you heard Andy Jacobson's theory on it? No. What is it? In her book Area 51 she uh she interviewed a top level EG&G engineer and um when she was interviewing him he was really really old. Um this was like she interviewed him I think maybe 10 years before he died and um he basically said he was working for ENG EGNG and he confessed to her that the Roswell incident was a a Soviet controlled drone remote controlled fake flying saucer with um surgically manipulated children to look like aliens by Mangal Minguel and um they crashed him here to basically so sort some sort of like chaos, some sort of like world the worlds type thing in the US. And she asked him like, "Okay, well, if the Soviet Union surgically altered children and crashed them in New Mexico, why wouldn't we just say they did that? Because that would make them look terrible." Yeah. Right. Why would we keep that a secret? And this EG&G engineer responded to her and said, "Because we started doing the same exact thing. Honestly, I think that's a [ __ ] story. And they always have a they always have an explanation for things. Um, thanks for telling me. But yeah, that does that just doesn't ring true based on what I know about the rest of how it all kind of fits together. I mean, you talk you bring up like EG&G, like they still have a vested interest in keeping the truth. You know, Department of Energy, EGNG, Area 51. You want to go back to uh Miragemen and Benowitz. What did Benowitz actually see over Kirtland Air Force Base? He was seeing balls of light and stuff moving that were faster and they go into mountain sides and all this stuff, right? So they brought out Dodie and Dodie doied them and went crazy. What did he see? Well, there was a laser facility testing, you know, these balls of light, these lasers right on the mountain on I think it's called Coyote Pass or Coyote. That's it's a it's a Department of Energy laser facility there that nobody knew about. And they still want to keep that [ __ ] secret. They I mean they still haven't let these out of the bag. just now hearing about the talking balls of light and I know for a fact they were using that [ __ ] as early as Rendleshim and and the NSA literally parked right across the street from his house and they were like beaming stuff into his house telling him that they were aliens from another planet. They're coming here because they ran out of water and they're going to be here in a couple years. Yeah. Yeah. And they were uh there's indication he was getting injected with things and all that. You know, it's you when he was in the mental institution that like there were other groups. It wasn't just Air Force Dodie to play devil's advocate for Dodie. might have been the psy, you know, got Benitz going. He got integrated with him, but he might not have been the guy that drove him crazy. There might have been other people like NRO, NSA, whoever, another Valerie Ransone or Tim Taylor coming by that really did the job on him because it was still beneficial for them to kind of turn Benowitz into a useful asset that could put out disinformation or be a warning. You ask me what I think of like Chris Bledsoe, I think he's another Benowitz. Yeah. And that that makes sense. I think so. I think, you know, from the way the Mirage Man documentary posted it though, the the way they portrayed him is as a conduit of disinformation to poison the well of the UFO community to throw off the Soviet spies. That's possible. Yeah. That were embedded in the UFO community. The worst part is I'm a guy. I'm just a dude. You're you're just a dude, I presume. I don't I don't know if you're working for anybody. I don't care. You're a nice guy. Yeah. Yeah. I know. Yeah. Um we'll never know. We'll never know at the top level what's actually going on at the or NSA. You can never you can never scratch that itch, unfortunately. Yeah. So, could it be? Sure, it could be. It's But it's not aliens. I mean, that doesn't look anything like aliens to me. And you told me something about how that documentary had something to do with British intelligence. Yeah. Uh, yeah. Did you Did you check that out when I sent it to you? I couldn't find it. You couldn't find Okay. So, did you send it to me? I did send it. Yeah. I I followed right up on that. Yeah. Okay. I never saw it. Okay. So, um, there's a guy in Great Britain, Richard Dehal. He does a a program called Rich Planet, and he exposed that the guy that did, uh, Mirage Men, uh, there's two guys, I think it was Lunberg and Pilington. Lunberg was working with British intelligence, he was living in a British intelligence, uh, paid for house and flat, and he was doing um, he and Pilington, I believe, both were doing uh, fake crop circles. And that had been a project through their their circlemaker site that this was this was a thing being br fun funded by the British by British intelligence and it was integrated somehow with air force intelligence as well. Their servers some of them were like on air force-based areas. So how that goes together I have no freaking clue. But I know these guys have ties to intelligence. And then they come out with Mirage men the the book which I have and read and then the documentary and you're like what game are they playing? like what's what you know spy versus spy thing are they playing here with this? Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. But it's ultimately the UFO stuff. The first UFO book came out in it was a British book came out in 1950. The first UFO like documentary came out along with it like a media propaganda campaign that was named the same thing called the flying saucer. And they came out after Henry Tizzard and the British you know British high royalty admiral te whatever the freak they considered at that time. Yeah. um needed to do disinformation to cover up what was going on with the German technology they had gotten. And then later, I think it was a year or two later, Tizzard came over to Montreal, kicked off MK Ultra by meeting with CIA and Oman Salant from Canada. And that's when you get the Miguel University CIA study or Miguel University MK Ultra studies. It was a joint project. It wasn't just the CIA. It wasn't German. The guys that were running u MK Ultra in the CIA were Jewish. Sydney got Jolly and West were Jewish guys. They weren't Germans. They weren't They weren't coming over as part of Project Flap Clip, right? But how does it all integrate and weave together up to British intelligence? We don't I you can't get that high to know what the actual overall was about it, but it's been going forever. Have you read Chaos by Tom O'Neal? It's good. It's real good. Documentary is good, too. Yeah, that that is I haven't even seen the documentary yet. I need to watch that. It just came out. Good. Yeah. Yeah. With uh who was it? Um Errol Morris was the one who put that thing that thing together. You're a British guy, right? Uh I don't think Arrol's British. Is Arrol Morris British? That's uh Hamilton's dad. He's in a lot of really good documentaries. Yeah. Yeah, I like that a lot. It was uh uh they had was it is it Tom? Is it O'Neal that did Tom O'Neal is the one who wrote the book? Yeah, I read the book, the original book. He's got a lot more detail on Jolly how far he got with things. There was that uh the one guy at his base that they that he made go off and kill a little girl. That was a Jolly West op. And then the timing of it was that this guy goes and does psychological work with Jolly and West a couple days before that goes off and is found walking up from a quarry where a little girl was killed. They arrest him for it as whatever. And then Jolli West magically gets all the the leeway and funding he needs right after that. It was like a proof of concept. It's sick. And he found and Tom found out that that uh Hate Ashberry Clinic was directly a C was funded by a CIA cutout. Yeah, it was it was Jolli and then he had his crash pad there as well. And they were doing some all this testing with psychedelics and inetamines together. Yep. With these people with Manson and bringing those girls up there all the time. He was doing it all over uh he had he was a mover and shaker. He was involved with things all over the country. You want to know something really cool about Jelly and West? Again, exclusive for Danny Jones u check out LA78 uh Nike Missile Silo. LA78. I think it's LA. Nike missile silo. Nike missile silo. I think it's LA78. Should pop up on Google. This is good. This is worth it. Okay. Is this it? That's it. Battery site Los Angeles. Yep. If you pull that up, actually, you could probably pull that up on Google Maps and get like a 3D view of where that is nowadays. It's supposedly being used as a firefighting facility. No, they don't even have it. I've got a I've got a view of it. It's in the Malibu Hills. Jolly and West petitioned Stubblebind who was You can find it, Steve. Oh, Stubble's the guy who offered uh um um Greer like $2 billion. Go with this. Stubbleines, I believe it was his brother, was the head of California like human health and services. Jolly and West petitioned him to get use of this Nike missile silo as an underground MK Ultra facility to bring in runaways and uh prisoners and people from various walks of life that wouldn't be missed and test on them in this Nike missile site. And now it's being used as a a firefighting facility. But I believe that same Stubblebine was the brother of General Stubblebind who is the Greer guy who was the head of Inscom and who was John Alexander's uh you know daddy and started off all the [ __ ] with the Monroe Institute which is another continuation of MK Ultra. Bob Monroe was mentored and took the technology from Andrea Puharish who was his buddy. Wow. It's it all weaves together. Everything we have out here in pop culture about these subjects weaves together in some really effed up ways. Yeah, some of the stuff Greer says is so crazy and he's like a guy who he's really easy to dismiss. See, we I've got that printout papers there for you. Which ones? It should be below the rain sewn stuff. These. Yeah, if you want to pull that up. But like I mean he's been on this stuff for so long. He has. And he's never produced anything of actual worth. There you go. There's a good one. I thought you might appreciate that. Maybe May may may not be something you want to put. Emily and Steven Greer. Uh Hifa Israel. Emily Crom Kramer and Steven Greer were married Saturday at Bahi World Center. The bride is the daughter of Miss Douglas Kramer of Palm Beach, Florida and the late Dr. Kler Cromler. She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in occupational therapy from Boston University. She was employed by by the Peace Corps in Barbados. Uh the the bridegroom is the son of Mr. Mr. and Mrs. James Greer of 1201 Princeton Avenue. He attended the Appalachian State University and is employed in the information processing department at Bahigh World Center. After a trip through Israel, the couple will live in Hifa and work at the Baji World Center. Y that's the original marriage notice. Bahigh was regarded as an intelligence gathering operation for MSAD. and Steven worked for these people and he worked for them. He started with those people. Then he got this is before he was a emergency room doctor. You know, I've done a lot of research on Steven Greer. I don't want to make any claims to get me in any kind of trouble about Steven Greer, but it doesn't look to me like he had enough time to even do medical school and a residency. And certainly the old newspaper articles don't refer to him as Dr. Greer. He go it's like he goes right into UFO stuff. So if he worked there's there's indication he worked for a very short time at a small hospital in western North Carolina and then went directly into shilling UFOs for Rockefeller. Holy [ __ ] Now if you go to the next page, that's one you might not want to Don't say it. No. No. You don't want to see it. Why can't I say it? Okay. It's your podcast, B. Rights of Homosexuals, opposite opinions, the National AIDS Hysteria Awareness Test. Okay. We thank you for publishing Associated Press coverage of the October 11th March in Washington for gay and lesbian civil rights. However, as part of the R75 marchers from Asheville, we would like to correct the important inaccuracy. Okay. So, what is this about? So that's a that's an op-ed piece that Steven Greer wrote about uh himself and you can see the the highlighted portions there. Oh, the highlighted abortions. We feel that the struggle for our civil rights as gay and lesbian citizens is intricately linked to all struggles against racism, sexism, and anti-semitism in the country and worldwide. Uh we have fought and died for this country. We are its doctors. signed signed by Dr. Ste or Steven Mg Greer MD of Asheville. Now, I have absolutely nothing against homosexual rights, anything like that. I completely agree with the premise. But if someone's living a a double life and doesn't doesn't bring that out and own that in this world and you want to be believed about briefing the CIA and the president and all these people on UFOs, that's a little his early life doesn't add up to me. this. Yeah. Look at the date on that versus the marriage. Is He's not Jewish, is he? I don't know. It It maybe Well, yeah. What's the date? Where's the date? Oh, October 16th, 1987. And when's the marriage? The marriage was You have to think you put it down. The marriage was August 30th, 1979. Wow. So, so what's what's his story? It doesn't add up if you go through old newspaper archives. That's all I can say. I don't want to editorialize it or give my opinion about but he has never presented anything that worked out. The little adakama alien the the the you know any of that. He has been saying the same [ __ ] for decades and being given a platform almost like a behavioral rec a behavioral conditioning program. Every one of his podcasts does millions of views too. Is it is it organic? One thing I've noticed with social media it might be but it might Yeah. I a lot of bots. A lot of bots. Lot of bots. A lot of media companies that will push you and make you look like you're bigger than you are, but it's it's hollow hollow engagement. I've been noticing so many of these bots lately. There's like um I feel like lately um I don't know how else to say this, but it seems like anti-semitism is in vogue right now on social media. Certainly. Yeah. I watched a video um a clip from the Joe Rogan podcast the other day and it was like him and a bunch of his buddies talking about the JFK files or whatever and then one of I think I forget what it I think it was Arshafir maybe brought up uh all like the the Israel connections and the JFK files that just came out. Sure. And then Joe said something else or whatever. And every almost every [ __ ] comment in that episode was like essentially like if anyone ever mentions JFK and doesn't bring up Israel, I don't believe you anymore. And it's all like Joe's anop because he it changed the subject when this guy brought up Israel. It's like Israel is behind everything now. Yeah. You'll you'll see a lot of hateful stuff jump up in the comments that looks like, you know, you look into the the person posting it and they don't even have a real account. Yeah. It see my my point is is it feels it doesn't feel organic. No, it feels unnatural. You can't not look into socioeconomic and and world global issues and not see the facade in some things. 100%. Of course. Of course. But that is not to take it into everything. It It's just Yeah. If the data is not there, then you shouldn't be looking for phantoms just as a a boogeyman to look for. But certainly was into a lot of [ __ ] that they shouldn't have been, including uh He asked about Puharish and uh Yuri Geller. Uh Puh Harish went over to Israel and met with Yuri Geller at the behest of a a MSAD colonel. Met him was hooked up with him to bring out and bring over to the United States. Uh James Randy, there's indication that he may have been part of a of two sides to that same op that would go back in and forth back and forth on one another in the media to discredit the whole thing. But Puh Harish came back and started doing his testing on children the same week and that was after his trip to Israel. It's like somebody gave him the green light and it's like who the who the [ __ ] is running this? You know my mind is always going overdrive on this on this Israel stuff too and it makes me wonder this about this sort of like deep state war if you want to call it that over Donald Trump. And if there's one thing that we know is absolutely true is that the CIA hates the MSAD. The CIA and the MSAD do not get along. Is that is that like obvious to all of us? Because it looks to me like they're two sides of the same coin. It's it's pretty obvious to me talking to a lot of former CIA operators and when I ask them about Israel and I ask them about the MSAD, it's just constant [ __ ] frustration with these people. It may it may be. Yeah. I I I hate thinking that the CIA are traitors. I I would love to believe that there are actually patriotic people within these organizations and that they're as frustrated with [ __ ] Epstein as we are. I don't know. I don't know. Bamante, you know, I don't know any any of the people you've had on the podcast. I couldn't tell you, but like damn, it's a it's a dark world where you think that you need to look over your shoulder even at your own people that are supposed to protect you. And I don't know. Yeah. And anyways, like so based on that, like based on just the the feedback that I've gotten and what I've learned about the this it feels like just a a hatred combined with like an annoyance of the CIA and the MSAD because the MSAD is admittedly by a lot of CIA people way more advanced and way more effective than the CIA. um for whatever reasons. Obviously they have a history and you know they want to ensure the survival of their race and you know a lot of it for good reason but it is argued and it's you know legitimate that at times they've gone way too far. Um, and if you have this sort of sort of intelligence war happening behind the scenes with Trump and you have it what it seems like coming out in the news now with people like RFK and Trump being like highly funded by Israel with like the Adins and all this blackmail that they have on everybody. And you have that that document that came out, I think it was in 2020 where all it was like 40ome CIA agents signed off on Donald Trump. Uh what was that about again? It was um there was like 43 or 47 CIA agents signed off on the the the um the Russia the Russia Russia gate thing that it was real or not? That that it was real. and it was proved proved later to be false. Or maybe maybe they signed off on that. Maybe that was the Hunter Biden laptop story. Either way, I I think that has something to do with with some sort of internal CIA versus MSAD thing. It may. Yeah, I have no perview into that. I know like Virginia Guy just went into a Oh my god, that's crazy. Yeah. It's like, well, okay, that's that's one. Isn't that interesting the correlation with that and when the Epstein documents were supposed to come out? So, Virginia Guayright just got hit by a bus or something and she apparently has a couple days to live. Can you find this article, Steve? Happens all the time. Nothing suspicious about that. I don't know what the [ __ ] to think about that, but that is completely bat [ __ ] What it looks like is somebody got an early version of the Epstein documents and then they decided to cover or they decided to do some cleanup. Yeah. And then you had this alleged leak of these Epstein files that were supposedly all brand new. No one's seen any of this up before. You have these people, these influencers standing outside of that building like with their phones ticking. about how they have this, you know, all these Epste. Yeah. And it's it's funny cuz like I'm wearing the shirt. The shirt's a joke, everybody. The shirt's a joke. Make conspiracies great. Again, I don't vote. I don't I don't believe in either side. I'm like George Carlin. I have, you know, divorced myself from elections and all this. Yeah. But it's awfully interesting that it goes back to Maxwell's daddy who published that book and the the plotting to make that make that come true. If you read that book, I'll leave it with you, man. You can just have it really. Um yeah, absolutely. I'll I'll just print another one. Um if read that book and anybody else that wants to read that book, Changing Images of Man, go to my website, go to our blog. It's uh the PDF is up there absolutely free. And it's a it's they're laying it all out. And it was Maxwell's father. But Maxwell's father wasn't just Israeli MSAD. He was British intelligence first. He was like it it all is MSAD is Israel acting as a proxy as a as a cutout essentially for British intelligence or are they doing their own thing? Is this one big unit that they're all doing this because they were interacting together for MK Ultra with the CIA. It was all connected or are they truly at odds? Is is Israel do they have strings? Are they Pinocchio? You are they are they a little puppet for for Great Britain? It started with the Balffor Declaration. And it started with uh you know being given the land down there. So I don't know what the uh the motives are. I don't know how they interact with the CIA. I'm not Bamonte. I I don't know any of this. Yeah. Um all I know is it is hyped up a lot on the internet to your point. It is there's a lot of there is a lot of anti-semitism and there is a lot of like the the the Jewish family down the street doesn't have a goddamn thing to do with any of this. They never did. Yeah. A lot of the I think a lot of these people like don't have any Jewish friends or didn't come up in a place like New York or like some of this stuff like I said it just to me it just feels unnatural. It it seems it doesn't feel genuine some of the stuff that you see and I'm just talking about comments too. I'm not talking about like real people I talk to. Yeah. No, I I completely agree. I I think most I believe the dead internet theory. I think most of the interaction as a guy who built bots uh like I literally worked building AI bots and interaction you know that was non-human. Um, most of the internet just stinks of just being bots, especially on I'm not going to name the app, but you know, it's got you know, you you're on there following me. We we follow one another on that app. I can't name it because they already shadowban the [ __ ] out of me. Really? Oh, yeah. Oh, our stuff is horribly messed with. And our viewers have been like dead for like a year and a half. It's been straight across like we should be much talking about YouTube. No, not YouTube, not Instagram. But I'm not going to say it because they'll just [ __ ] take the the account down. Really? Yeah. And they uh people will follow us and they'll have to they'll pop in and either we'll get an email or a DM and they'll say I followed you and then I had to refollow you because they removed my follow. I get that all the time. Yeah. It's like come on. Yeah. Well, Google was quite literally created and incubated by the CIA, which is crazy. Yep. Absolutely. And it was like DARPA technology. The page rank system was DARPA technology and like Sergey Bran was getting visited by CIA and NSA people the whole time when he was developing that. meta as well you know there's there's lots of ties there um I don't think any of it ARPA arpanet you know it's all it's all fed it's always been fed it was that was always the point is this cybernetic linking of people together to control them and it's going to go one step further now that we have the neural link neural link is old technology you don't need a brain implant anymore but they're going to pretend like it to get you to adopt it they're going to pretend that this is the next development even though it's old the guy who mapped out the human brain for the Navy was working for Sarah SA. His name was Dr. Richard Dickout. He was working with John Alexander. They put in the equipment at Skinwalker Ranch and he was mapping brain um brain patterns to map out like um speech and such like if you're talking to yourself in your head, like that's a brain pattern and internal dialogue. Yeah. And they figured out how to how to back engineer that this Dr. Richard Dick out in Albuquerque and that's a that's a technology they've had and this was like the 80s and Jock Valet talks about that. John Alexander talks about it himself in his own book Future War. Like they've been developing this for a long time. The ability to get in your head. You had um Robert Duncan on your show not so long ago. Yeah. You listen to that one? Yeah. And unfortunately he passed away last year. I heard I saw that. Yeah. He was What do you make of that? He was here. A lot of people were telling me that that was fake. That he wasn't really who he says he was. He might not have been his his email. He was emailing me before we did that podcast and his email was a harvard.edu email. Yeah, I mean that would make sense accord fake that if you were like really technical. No, if he's still involved with the university possibly. Um he might not have been. That's that's I've gotten that hint as well. Um but I he was saying some real things. How much of it is mixed 8020 with [ __ ] and the truth? I don't know. Right. And it's it that's I mean that's the tangle that we live in in this uh in these subjects unfortunately. Yeah. But some of the stuff he was telling me was absolutely correct. They are getting in people's heads that the technology the the chain of the document chain that goes back decades is there. They've been figuring this this out forever and and admitting to it. Where do you think all of it goes into a linked cyber okay I'll give you my grand unified theory of all this [ __ ] Okay. MK Ultra was being done on one side and on the other side you had the John Calhoun uh National Institute of Mental Health rat studies. Are you familiar with the mouse utopia? No. Okay. Do Dr. Calhoun with NIMH. It's the old uh secret of Nim cartoon that they had when we were all kids. You ever see this Mrs. Frisbee and the Rats of Nim? They made it into a cartoon. Dr. Calhoun did like 40 years of research into this, building these specialized mouse utopias enclosures for tons of mice. put them in. Steve can look this all up. Yeah, look up John Calhoun. That's the the vid. That's I don't know why why they came out with this, but but the real the research. Yeah, look up John Calhoun NIMH or or mouse utopia. This is this is important for the world for everybody to understand this. Okay, there it is. Okay. And there's Dr. Calhoun uh living working in his his mouse utopia, a giant. Look at that thing. Yeah. Yeah. And he blow that up. He'd bring up generations of mice within this and study how their behaviors would change as they interact with one another more and more often. So, as the population would grow, he'd find out that if he provided all the space they needed, all the food they needed, accommodated everything they needed, simply by interacting with one another on a prolonged basis, always being up one another's asses, they would develop things like social autism, they would develop all these behavioral changes that were lasting. And eventually a generation or two later they led to the die off of the of the mice within that enclosure and then he'd have to restart the experiment again. This was being funded by the CIA. NIMH was a CIA outfit. They were being funded by it along with MK Ultra. I wonder at the top of it if somebody at the CIA CIA saw our society going to the point where we're integrated with all this technology up each other's asses just like the mice developing all these behavioral issues the inability to to mate and procreate correctly together without all this constant headbutting without all these constant problems and the be the behavioral issues that come along with it autism ADHD neurode divergence all these things just like the mice were exhibiting I wonder if somebody saw that coming a mile away and tried to come up with ways to save humanity from that happening cuz Calhoun's uh estimate was 2030 to 2035 we would have a a full-scale societal die-off because of this it's not just population growth people misunderstand that it's interaction within those dense groups of population that cause these problems and then eventually something comes out it's like a switch is flipped biologically and we all die off and I think they were trying to keep it from happening and in If that's the case, I agree. Maybe they didn't do it right, but something needed to be done about this. But look into the work of Calhoun. It's terrifying and we're at the end stages of it already. And it was and it was CIA funded. And you think some of the research was to sort of mitigate this from happening? Yes. I would I hope I hope I hope it's not just sociopaths in charge of all of this uh that just want to control everybody because you certainly need a large population to be a powerful nation state on the world stage. That's a huge that's a really important. We're not overpop populated anywhere. There's there's space everywhere for people. But the interaction with people, especially with social media, your phone, you know, internet and all that. That interaction, those constant shitty comments, the constant interaction with this, the constant somebody's giving you a call you didn't want to talk to, the constant have you, you know, do you need a warranty on your car call, you know, it it rubs away at our nervous systems and creates these problems, especially generationally. You you'll have kids that have these problems and then they're lasting if it's born into them. And Calhoun's research was terrifying on that. He thought we could turn it around in the 80s and we didn't. Interesting. Yeah. So, I I think these are mitigation strategies. Yeah. You I mean, you certainly see it. I don't know. I haven't been to a ton of other countries and studied their their culture or their social interactions, but it certainly seems like the division here has been like gasoline on fire with social media. Yeah. And just like there's no there's no sort of like national identity here or or any any sort of thing that like binds us all together with a with a specific world view like some other like like Israel has or some other countries may have. Um, and I think a lot of that probably has to do with foreign foreign intelligence and and foreign countries trying to use their warfare to try to changing image of demand. It's a it's a it's a how-to guide to make that happen to get us to go away from old-fashioned cohesiveness into something where you you see it even among like u the stuff that we talk about like witchy esoteric spiritual kind of beliefs. Okay? Like the Judaism is coherent. Christianity is fairly coherent. Okay? Islam is fairly coherent. Spiritual, as they lay out in that book, is a grabag of everything. There's no cohesion, right? And you present something to somebody, they might go flitting off onto that. It makes uh it's just like Dr. They, you know, you don't know what's real. And and you can lead people wherever you want them based on whatever the stimulus is that day. Yeah. That takes them in a direction and they're not going to be beholden to like their upbringing as a Jew or a Christian or an is a Muslim. they're going to they're going to flit off and that's what the new spirituality seems to be about for me. Have you noticed or seen any of the uh the the recent articles on how Silicon Valley is trying to there's like a new movement in Silicon Valley to map Christianity onto everything that's going on there? No, I haven't seen that whatso there's a huge Christian movement in Silicon Valley and it's mainly um being driven by Peter Teal and um the guy who is the head of a company called Y Combinator which is it's like a Silicon Valley kingmaker um and these guys are holding conferences spiritual or not spiritual but but basically Christian conferences uh and um there's a huge church in Silicon Valley people are going to and uh and this is I I think I don't know what it is, but Teal I mean Teal I mean just think of Teal. He's a he's a a gay Christian billionaire. And I think I think his theory is that we need like some uh American like a united religion. And when you're when you're in Silicon Valley and you have and you're developing and innovating some of the most advanced technology in the world including AI, these people don't believe in anything. I mean I mean Silicon Valley the history of Silicon Valley has been anti-Christian for the most part or anti-religious. So the fact that there's this this movement to really push Christianity in Silicon Valley to me is really interesting and especially when you tie that into a lot of these huge companies that are um military contractors. Yeah. Yeah. It's so what was the other one? Anderil I think it was Ander. Yeah. I've heard. So I had a lot of experience in Silicon Valley. I used to fly down there and consult all the time. I have interaction with all these companies. Google, etc. Um, they do have a spirituality. It's just not cohesive. It's spirituality. It's not it's not a religion. It's a spiritual. So, to turn that into, I don't know, what was he doing? Beta testing with Scientology to create the new cult that he would push out like what what is what has led up to that? Did he just come out with it, you know, out of his ass or No, I think I think this has been something that has been percolating with him for may maybe for a while, but I these articles have started to come out like in the last year or so cuz he's another Fed setup. You know, in my my opinion, he's another Elon Musk who has a fake background that just oh, he just kind of showed up and made a couple billion dollars out of the blue and, you know, doesn't seem to even run his companies. Um, is that a setup? Is he is he pushing what has been given to him to now he is the figurehead for this? Do they or does he does he believe that impregnating Christianity into Silicon Valley and into American culture will improve national security? Against who? I mean, so against against some sort of in his mind against some sort of uh woke one world government maybe. Yeah. So what all this seems you know if if if that idea of you know this extreme left woke uh one world government world economic forum takes hold and if you want to use your imagination and extrapolate that to like if they start imprisoning people for uh for violating climate change laws or something like that right maybe that could be one of his fears. Sure. Um is the World Economic Forum even real? I remember when you nobody ever heard about it. Nobody heard about Klaus Schwab. He just kind of popped up one day and everybody's he's the big bad guy and he speaks with a German accent. Oh heavens. Are they swinging a pendulum back and forth between these two different stimuli for this generation back and forth to woke to Christian to woke to Christian to come up with a synthesis. The Hegelian dialectic synthesis or thesis and antithesis become a synthesis in the middle of what they actually want. But they swing it to extremes so that they can push that that center center thing more and get people to adopt that more where wokeism and you know far far left and far right coagulate in the middle into something that they can control. It doesn't none of it looks organic to me. I mean you asked me about this. I don't know Theo. I don't know his his motivations. If he's got all the money in the world, he didn't just get it cuz he got it. He got it because he was given it. He was led to the top like everybody else is let to the top. He's got it from somewhere. He's pushing an agenda. Is he just acting as, you know, the right and the left, you know, going back and forth, the two stimulus that'll come together into a into something that is more like the changing images of men. I don't know. I I wish I did. Um I wish I had the answer to all this [ __ ] The politics right now are it's what we talked about. It's as maddening as you don't know what is real anymore. You don't know what these motivations are. All I know is that for decades they have been coming up with ways to control your mind while you're being fed it. They're scary [ __ ] [ __ ] The lying signs and wonders that they have come up with to get everybody to accept whatever the stimulus is is it is terrifying. Yeah, it's it really points to like humans not having any real free will or agency in their own lives anymore. It's uh Yeah. I mean, what do we do? What do we do? We got to move to the Amazon. I have no [ __ ] idea. No. No, no idea. Um, try to tell people, get out here, you know, make myself a target on camera to tell people as much as I can about it. I don't know if you saw the uh Elon Musk clip that was going around about like somebody asked him about world peace. And he gets really sullen and he goes, "You have to be really careful. You don't you don't want what has to be given up to get world peace. You might not want to give that up." And what that is is your your agency and your free will. So, it's this the cybernetic linking of everybody so that you can't fight anymore is the neutering of the world, the neutering of society, and that's what we're looking at. And it'll be technological, and he's part of it. He should know. He's got he's heading up the companies that are going to do it. What do you make of uh Greer's theory or uh he doesn't call it a theory, obviously. He knows it for a fact. Of course, he does. that there is like some rogue uh militaryindustrial private company um that basically is its own has its own autonomous air force, navy and military that is basically has such powerful technology that they've figured out with like anti-gravity or who knows what that um they're they won't even let the United States military see it or know anything about it because it is more powerful than every single military on the face of the earth combined. mind. Uh um okay. So I am I am all for I know that Rockefeller funded Greer and Bigalow and all the UFO group. Um Scott uh Scott Jones, CB Scott Jones, he's funded he funded Linda Molton. How all these people to go out and spread this UFO message. Who funded Lynon? Rock Rockefeller. Lawrence Rockefeller. Larry Rockefeller. Good old Larry Rockefeller. Um there's there's pictures of him standing at his ranch with him. Hillary Clinton. I seen the the picture of Hillary Clinton with the what was the book she had. She had some UFO book. Yeah. Was some kind of like, you know, cosmic civilizations collide or whatever the hell it is. Um I would think that that was him pushing his because he he was involved with all the aerospace companies. So if he's got a, you know, if Northrup or McDonald Douglas or Boeing or somebody has like this technology and they kept it in those companies so that you couldn't freedom of information request anything about it, you couldn't like so the military couldn't find it, but they're they're intimately linked. Um, so the public couldn't find it by going through the military or government. You you put put it into a block a black box. Um, yeah, in that case then those companies do have that technology. Skunk Works does have its own air force. We just don't know about it, right? And then could they but my point is like if they got that technology and and they advanced it so so far that basically we could s tell the mil they could tell the military [ __ ] you and hold them hostage. I don't think they have to because the people that sit on the board of directors for those companies run the military and the government. Oh [ __ ] I think it's above that. I think like it doesn't the money people that were funding puh hares and MK Ultra were the aers and the bronzeman's and like British high society and eastern uh the eastern establishment of of old money. Um it wasn't even military. It wasn't even government. It was funded above that with like all these old families. Yeah. But they're but they're all on the boards of all these different companies. Yeah. It's like there's there truly is a partition between the two. The government, the military are a dog and pony show. They're a show. They're They're just a show for the people who really have the power above that. I I just don't believe that they actually hold the power. They think they do. They're always I've seen letters go back and forth between like high command and militaries to like Rockefeller saying yes or no, sir. Just acting like a little [ __ ] Like, don't you have the guns? What are you talking like this guy? He's going to ruin your career. Oh, okay. You really want that pension, [ __ ] That's a that's that's like traitorous to me. Mhm. Um, but the power is with those people. It's above above the It's the money. It's the money. So money is the root of all evil. I can do it. Greer would know. Well, no. I mean, control. It's like you would want to control the herd. They've been controlling the herd for hundreds of years. Um, Greer knows better than anybody because he's been in bed with them forever. Yeah. He's been in bed with Rockefeller. He's been uh in bed with Bootsie Galbrath and all these people whose names people don't even know. um the a like Puhares and the Aers and all these like they were always funded by somebody who was like he Puharish died on the estate of R.J. Reynolds the heir to the Reynolds tobacco fortune and he was doing mind control research on RJ Reynolds private property that was his that was R.J. Reynolds doing the research with Henry Belulk who owns Belulk department stores. MK Ultra work separate of the government, separate of the military. So yeah. So is it above that? Sure. Do I think that there's some rich son of a [ __ ] in Dubai or you know the Great Britain that has a flying around in a UFO? Maybe. Yeah. Sure. Yeah. Whatever. Good lord, man. Crazy [ __ ] Yeah. Brent, thank you for doing this, man. This has been incredible. crazy deep dive into this stuff. I I didn't know about any of this stuff, frankly. Yeah. Yeah. You uh I kind of go in some different directions, don't I? You are are very a unique individual because the reason you stand out to me is because you actually do the hard work and like actually dig into stuff that seems like is so easy but nobody wants to do. It takes a lot of time, a lot of effort. Fortunately, I retired so I I did well enough that I was able to put money and time into this. where I might have a leg up, most people don't. I can spend eight hours reading through some document store. Um, but everybody can find it. Everybody can look and you could look at what I put out. I don't want anybody to believe me. I'm not a Greer. I'm not a big a Chris Bled. So, don't believe my story. Look at the data I'm presenting you. That's all I want. And uh, Danny, thanks for the opportunity, man. Fantastic. Great talking to you. What's uh, what's your YouTube channel and your uh, other social medias that we can link across all platforms? It's Museum of Tarot. Museum of Tarot and Museum of Tarot.com if you want to check out any of our products that you can't get anywhere else that have been suppressed and our books and all that. Beautiful. Thanks again, man. I appreciate it, my friend. Good night, world.