Hi, I'm Cliff Geppart and this is Conservative Grounds, the first conservative coffee shop in America. Welcome to our books and Arizona asked the six police officers to leave. My friend and I decided let's start a place that's welcoming to everybody and would never throw anybody out. So it took about a month to formulate our concept and then we filed our corporate papers. A month later we signed the lease and about five and a half months later we finished completion on conservative grounds, which is hopefully one of many across America because there should be a place that everybody can feel welcome to come to and speak their mind and give whatever political opinions they want to give. really important to pop. I'm the governor. this first great teacher and very proud to say that so we are definitely Republicans. And when you can see this place like this on all of us and one mind and one who's spirit come together, Republicans believing in what is right for our country. It's a wonderful thing. When all this problem came about building the wall, should they do it and should they not? I said, you know, that would be a good title for a song. I've got to build that wall. I've got to build the wall. This is, this is United States of America. We have freedom. So don't like it, don't come find another place to go to. We've got to build the wall. That's the right thing to do. Families don't know fall. We know that the street come back legally. We're welcome. We're welcome. You with open arms. We built this country with blood and grit. We never backed down. We never quit. We've just been God. We've built the flag. We honor our fallen heroes. We got to build the wall. That's the right thing to do. Crime is going to fall. I know that it's true. Come back legally. You know what it's really. Actually, my folks came here first and I had seen a new story on this and I just figured this was a great place for like minded people to come around. Good God. Loving freedom. Loving people to come and enjoy some good coffee. Is anybody in line military police officer first responder? No, because if you know anybody here, they can sign our wall of honor in there. So all the reasons we did conservative grounds. This was the most important one. When the police officer were asked to leave Starbucks, we decided on that day that that should never happen again. So we came up with this whole concept. And then we came up with this, the wall of honor, which has now become the hall of honor because people are signing both sides. And anybody who is a first responder in the military is a veteran, is able and allowed to sign a wall of honor. We've got multiple World War II beds that have signed it. Navy seals, green borays. This is probably the most important thing of this entire coffee shop is this wall. Well right now we've got two or three nice. A lot of the girls are buying stickers and then the flags are kind of popular. Hats are kind of like 50-50. But mainly a nice for the guys. Americans have stand up for our president with all the problems that we're having today. Yeah. And people trying to get him out of office. And this is the man that came to save our country. I honor this gentleman that opened this shop. And I just really appreciate everything he's doing. And we need more Americans standing up for our country. And I think this is the year. I think the next four years when President Trump gets re-elected, it's going to be phenomenal. And it's because of people liking him. And it could make me cry because I'm so patriotic. This is America. We're going to get back to the olden days, saluting off lag and no kneeling. And it's terrible. And I play with parents. All the professors in college, everybody's for the Democratic Party. And we need it back for the people. We can't keep greasing the pockets of politicians. Defending the borders, defending the unborn. Exactly. He's a true American. He's a patriot. And I just love that. As well as I love all our servicemen and our first responders. And we've got to get back to honoring these people, not looking at them like they're a problem to society. We need to bear arms. I wanted to donate to the facility that is actually good for all conservatives. It's a wonderful establishment. I'm sure he'll do well. The food's good. The opening's good. The building's good. Exactly. Come here with my Trump shirt on and my Trump hat. Not that y'all that are picked at. And we have to worry about somebody being offended. And just be with people that I have a lot of people. I have a lot of time in with. There's three years of things in the world. And after you've gone to all life and liberals, they don't have to infinite everybody anybody. A big time Trump supporter. Somebody finally came to the senses and stepped up and give Starbucks if my brother finally. We are here to support this awesome cafe that's just opening up. Delicious coffee. We just had donuts, delicious. And we love that he is a strong Trump supporter. We can wear our Trump shirts in here anytime we want. And hopefully we won't be hassled like we have been on the streets when we were home. Personally, I look over here and I want to say I wonder how many of these people support and Trump are on welfare. And my guess is it's not a high volume. I've seen it on Facebook. And I love the concept. Patriots and come here and be peaceful. And this is great hang with like people. What is this place in the University of America? Land of the free. Capitalism. Good coffee. It means to me that people who are of conservative values, do have more of a place in the mainstream than a lot of people might think. A lot of places where I think we don't feel quite as welcome around others. It's good to see conservative folks getting together, being welcome here. For that matter we welcome folks even who aren't conservatives as well. Hey guys, I'd like to thank you guys for showing up today. And this is awe-inspiring and I'm unbelievable. The response we've gotten, I just want to say thank you. And just so you know, we're going to be selling coffee tomorrow too and other days. Okay, we're going to let you go. All right. Ready? Thank you guys. People have been talking about the silent majority. We don't have to be silent to be in here. You can come in here and you don't have to be the silent majority. You can just be who you are and talk about whatever political vein you want to be a part of. You are silent. You are silent. You are silent. You are silent. You are silent. You are silent. You are silent.