Good to see you, Danny Jones. You're in your lair now. I love this shit. Yeah, man. It's good to have you back. It's been about four years. Yeah, four years since I was on here, and then we did the Fed Fest a couple times. But I haven't seen you like in, we talk every day, but I've seen you in the flesh for the last two and a half years plus. Yeah, we do podcasts pretty much every week over the phone, but now it's nice to be in person, right? I know. We're going to get you and Joey D. Turning you guys into Florida men. We're going to get you guys some vitamin D. Get you guys a little tan before sending back up to New Jersey. Bro, I'm telling you last year, and he had the same thing happen. From September to October, we went down about 12 shades of tint. Like we were tannest. And then overnight, it was like we went into Norway with John Snow. Like it was just done. But it's nice getting a little vitamin D. We've been whacked this whole winter, man. Snow, snow, snow, snow. Snow, snow. It's crazy. Bro, I haven't seen Snow since I was like eight years old. Well, I can show you some. But you've been killing it, man. I mean, I know we always talk about this on the phone, but like to be here in the pyramid that was supposed to be at thehedral, but I like that people are calling on the pyramid. It's a mixture between a pyramid, a cathedral, and that room in the movie, Dune. Yes. There's only one disappointing part of this whole place. What is it? Yeah, you know. Well, the fake stone. The fake stone. Well, what are we going to do? I thought it was real. I thought you really did it. It was real. And you know, well, then we did a place in Egypt. Then the set designer did his job. He made Julian Dory think it's real. Yeah, it would. But it's like, you're like, hey, it's like we're in a real medieval cathedral right now. And we got Lord Farquad. On the show. Thank you. Give it to my mind. It's got a crazy fun quad. The Jersey Farquad. I'll take it. I love the hair, bro. That's a new look for you. Yeah, I took a little too much off like two months ago. I'm using another two months to grow. Oh, you're going to longer. Yeah, because it's all can cut up here. So I look favorite. My favorite look of all time that you've ever had was in the beginning of your show when you had it coming out the back of the hat. Yeah, it was down the here. You had it coming down the back, bro. It was literally down there. That was legit. It was like, it was like kind of a kid rock look. like a Burnett, you're like a Burnett kid rock. Burnett kid rock. But with the, you didn't have the same hat. You had the fillies hat. He didn't wear a fillies hat. He did not wear a fillie. No, you're on fire back then. And you're still on fire. I'm trying. I'm trying, man. It's, I mean, you know what it is. You just got to keep comping every single week. It's like you put one out and you're on there the next one. Yeah. But it's a fun job. Yeah. It's definitely, uh, definitely a lot different. A lot of different doing so many podcasts. You know, it's like you don't, especially, I mean, you're doing like three a week. I'm only doing like two a week. But still it's just a just rinse the whole rinse and repeat aspect of it. I've just been showing up and trying to stay in this zone and have conversations with people. It's like, it's the only thing that keeps me sane. It's like it keeps me, uh, it keeps me accountable because I have to be accountable to the people that are coming on the show. It was like, I got to show up here and I got to be somewhat awake. You got the star waking you up all night back at home. That's the problem. I got a full 40 minutes of sleep last night. 40 minutes of full 40. Well, you got the zero caffeine, whatever, to not help you out apparently. Yeah. No, I got my wife made me a beautiful espresso and orange juice. There you go. It's espresso and orange juice. That's some, that's pretty cool. Dude, it's the move. I'm telling you, look at how, like, look at the filtration that too. No, yeah. It's getting down low and high. If you leave the espresso, if you pour the espresso early, when it's too low, it's low, if you pour the espresso early, when it's still cold. And then you dump the orange juice and then put the espresso on top. It leaves that little line there. It makes it look fun. Yeah. Yeah. Cool. So he's been, the middle kid's been waking you up every night all night. Yeah. No, he, wait. We put him to bed and he's back in our bed. We put him to bed at eight. He's back in our bedroom at nine 30, maybe 10 at the earliest. And then we put him back in his bed. He'll be back in our bed at midnight. It's hard. It's high maintenance. It's how we're in two hours, bro. He's high maintenance. It's okay. Both the other kids sleep like angels. It's just the star. But that's my retirement plan. Yeah. When he's 18. Yeah. I'm lucky. I'm taking him out. He's going to become a great actor. We're doing all these agents. This kid, if you have not seen his middle kid, he's got the dome up there. It's like the 10th planet. He's growing into it. Yeah. I mean, he's growing. And he's got main character syndrome. He's got issues, bro. He's got issues. I mean, every middle child has issues. You don't know. You're an only child. No, but I have heard that at the time. The middle kids are the ones that get the least amount of attention because the first ones are like they get so much attention. They're they're the real stars. The first child. And the second one, it's like, okay, we've already fucking done this dance before. Then the last child is like, oh, I got it. It's our last it's our last baby. We got to cuddle this one. She's going to be we got to cherish the moment. And the middle child gets fucking left out. And that's him. So he's experienced the trauma of that. And that's going to be useful later. That trauma? Yes. And Hollywood. Yes. That's going to be no Hollywood when he grows up, bro. When he grows up, it's just going to be fucking AI hell. Everything's going to be fuck dolls everywhere and AI everywhere and social media, bro, social, like the social media we know today is going to be like a forgotten thing. We're going to be tapped in with our minds. You're right, man. I don't know what it's going to look like, but it's going to be very, very different. We're not going to be able to we're not even going to be able to to think our own thoughts anymore, bro. It's just going to be we wake up and then we're going to have just fucking news headlines piped into our heads on a subscription model. Something it's going to be. Like an hour length just pounding it right here. Yeah. I don't know. Dude, it's just going to I can't imagine it's going to be good. Well, I think now's the moment where people are more aware of that potential type dystopia thing in the future than they ever would have been in the past. You know what I mean? Like, and it's the time right now to shine a light on the people who want that. And I mean the bad people, the bad people in charge people we see in that Epstein class, the people that are in charge of the technocracy and all that. And I do feel like this can be a real fulcrum point rather than like this giant holy shit, everything's fucked, which it's easy to feel that way. I certainly feel that way sometimes looking at this, especially since no one's in prison for things like the Epstein stuff. But like, you know, these people used to be able to do all this stuff strictly behind closed doors now. You know, you got citizen journalists harassing them outside places as they should, you know, appropriately don't don't punch them or anything. Don't give them what they want. But you know, certainly ask these people what the fuck they're doing. Why are you trying to take technology and invade our privacy? Why are you using the politicians that you buy to legislate in things very quietly in the middle of a bunch of other legislature that's going to lead to that potential fucking future where you're waking up and you're chipped in the head like you're saying. Yeah. I feel like the more headlines I read and the more Twitter I scroll, I just feel like the more my brain is fucked. All the news and all the headlines. And it's all about another fucking country. Some shit that we're so disconnected from like are we supposed to give a fuck about that? Are we supposed to give a flying fuck about some like religious extremists fighting with some private industrial like war companies that make missiles and people that are getting paid to do all you get. So it's too much, bro. We're not supposed to pay attention to this kind of shit. It's not it's not healthy. It's not healthy. It's not healthy. I don't think it's fucking healthy. I just don't at least not for me. When people make it the entire meaning of their lives and you know, they do a job that's completely separate from that. I think that's unhealthy. But I think some of the awareness, even if it's like a whip a morale here to where people went from living in a society where you weren't aware of any of this stuff to now like holy shit, I can't take my eyes off it because I can see it all the time. Like that's not healthy. But if you can kind of pull it back to a place where you know what's going on, you know what you're voting for and you vote probably doesn't really matter that much. But you at least know what's going in there and how things are affected around the world. And more of the average person understands that maybe the future will be slightly different. Maybe you move that, you know, estuary possibility that could go this way or that way and you just slightly move it off this way instead of the bad way. I don't know. I don't know. We're fucking podcasts. Where we gonna do about it. Yeah, I don't know, bro. I was listening to this thing this morning. I was like, I was sitting in the sauna and I was listening to this LeBron James meditating and the creation app thing. And he's talking about, he was talking about a, remember in when they were playing the fucking, it was, he was on the calves, 2015. They were on their way to the finals. They were, I think it was a second round. They were playing the bulls. I think it was game four and they were down two to one. And LeBron, did you walk that series? I remember all those years. I'm trying to remember this series though. I can't play so. And so that's the d rose long after he blew out as a Jimmy Butler's the guy now. Jimmy Butler's the guy. And it was, they were down two to one and it was game four. They would have lost this game. They would have been down three to one. And there was like five seconds on the clock or whatever. And Dela Dela Dova was passing it in from out of bounds. And LeBron did that thing where he fucking sprints across the court, tries to lose Jimmy Buttler because Jimmy Butler's on him. And he fucking catches the ball and he sprinting down that little gap between out of bounds and the three point line. You know, where the bench is, he's like sprinting down there and he's like right inside the three point line and he just fucking jumps up and throws it like that. And it goes in. I feel like I was there. I remember like it was yesterday, I was because that like, and they wanted by one fucking point. And that came, that was the same year that they beat the, the gold state warriors when they were down three to one. So that they came back. And they came back. I'm not 2016 then. That was no, I want to say we went in 2016 for sure. I know that Golden State won their first one. That was 26. That was 20 Golden State won in the 2014, 2015 season. They beat the calves for it. I think this was the 2015. So they may have lost to the, to the, to the gold state that year. Like I get the point I was getting at now, like was it like that time at that point in history, I was not paying attention to anything but fucking sports and NBA and, and the only the shit in my life. And that's the point I think I was probably the fucking happiest. I mean, kids aside, the kids, my kids make me happen or anything, but like at that point in my life when I was tuned out, I was tuned out to everything. It was just fucking watching basketball, like doing my own thing, having fun with my friends, surfing, skating. And like it wasn't until after that, I got woken up to all this crazy shit. What a pandemic happened. And that changed the world a couple years after that. It changed the world in every way for all the things that came after it. The technically I guess had nothing to do with the pandemic, but really everything kind of has to do with that. And I think there is something to be said for that. The other end of it is like, I mean reminiscing. I mean, I miss that part of my life. But that's what I'm saying. Like one, one end of it is like all right, well, is that just bread and circus and we're not supposed to pay attention to anything. The other end of it is like, is that healthy? I think it's healthy. I love sports. I think it should be amazing to be able to escape from something. I can't stand when you go on Twitter and a fucking sports games on and you got all these retards on there commenting about whether or not someone did something that they liked or where it enraces and fucking tag on their jersey. I don't give a fuck. I'm here to watch something, he's something he's thump boom. I don't want to think about it. I'm with you. But at the same time, you know, we're at that moment in the fourth turning where there's just a lot of shit hitting the fan and it and it does suck. But I think like the perspective for someone like you, like looking at it in your seat, like you got the great things in life figured out. You got the family. You got the kids. You're happy. Great marriage. Good house. Bill's paid. You've made your own way completely self created from the beginning, being a great filmmaker and documentarian, eventually also becoming a great podcaster and building that. You built this from the ground up. That's a pretty fucking amazing thing. A little bit of money from Israel helped a little bit of money from Israel. You got your $7,000 check every week, but still, you know, that's not much. Sheaps the lights on, you know, it keeps the lights on. But like now there's times where in the course of your job, like, you know, it's kind of like that Tommy G. Quota, we say where you can't boil the ocean, but you boil your pot. There's a part of it where you're boiling your pot a little bit where you're covering things that really fucking matter. And you're not going to be perfect, but you try to do the best jobs that a people out there can decide for themselves. I mean, I think that's I think that's a pretty cool thing. If there's one part about the job that can get somewhat serious sometimes, like sometimes it's those really, really big stories like that. And there's a lot of us in the industry who cover it. Yeah. I think if you're getting totally wrapped up in it and you're just waking up every morning and thinking about who the fucking president of the United States is whether or not you love that or hate that, you should probably prioritize your life a little. If you enjoy watching our show on Spotify or YouTube and you want to be more involved, I encourage you to please come check out our Patreon community. Not only does our Patreon community get every episode you see on YouTube early, fully unsensored and ad free, but we're also doing patriotic exclusive episodes as well as live Q&As and you can get your personal questions answered by our guests every single week. For me, being able to collaborate and communicate back and forth with our Patreon community every week has been huge. And this is my way of saying thank you for the cost of a cup of coffee a month. Now back to the show. There's a guy online. I forget his fucking name, but I clacked it maybe like three years ago, I want to say. And basically like his thing is he's an ex conspiracy theorist. Now he went hard the other way, meaning he believes anything now that like the government will tell him and everything that's ever happened is not a conspiracy, which to be clear I completely disagree with him in that way. The reason I clocked it and started tracking it to see what it was is because I think it's an interesting pattern in that there are a lot of people over the last to, you know, in different tranches, if you will, different things push different people down the lens of like really looking into things. But over the past five, 10, 15 years as the internet really, really grew and became the thing, there are all these people who suddenly really got completely wired up to where the whole meaning of their life was every fucking crisis that was happening that like the Illuminati was personally taken care of and doing their thing. And while on some of those cases, I mean, it's clear we can see these Epstein emails, like they're right to be very clear. It's gonna end up happening. I think with some people, and this is what I saw with this guy, why I'm bringing him up, is that they're gonna get five years down the line, 10 years down the line, they're gonna be stuck in the same job or a worse job. They're gonna hate their wife more than they did 10 years ago if they have one. They're gonna be fucking miserable because the word about things that aren't like the happiness source of their life so much that they have no control over at the end of the day. And they're gonna be like, I gotta check out from this shit. So I think like at a moment like this, especially where there are so many things that are being proven true that are objectively horrific in every way, we also gotta be careful to not just fucking fire Elmo meme it and just be like everything's doomsday. I need to worry about every single thing. The Benjamin Netanyahu said since seven o'clock this morning. And if I don't, my day's fucked like, yeah, you can't totally be like that. We are in an industry where we cover that more. It's a little bit of our job to know a little bit more. But right. You know, even with us, like I'll speak for us like, you know, I'm fucking sick of it, dude. I'm so sick of it. I wake up. I look on Twitter and I see some post about Trump in the Iran war and I want to throw up. I want to talk about, you know, I want to just make dick jokes for three hours. I'll go back to Ben Malefuck and yeah, I do want to go back to bar stool days. Yeah. Yeah. I want to go have a video camera and go videotape some bums behind Circle K. You know, or go fucking, you know, maybe I'll get, I'll go work with Tom Tomy G. He'll make some documentaries. I'll be his fucking camera man or something. Yeah. I need to see that. I need that in my life. Oh, come Tomy G. Did I have any time to do that guy's incredible. He's awesome. He's the greatest guy ever to. But like, Tomy G is personally branded. Like, he is a one of one. You know what I mean? Yeah. He gets genuinely so fucking excited. Like you can, you can feel the blood rushing through his veins for every story. He does. He does all this different shit. Right. And one day he could be like covering whether or not a pack's paying off fucking Chuck Schumer. And the next day he's in the middle of the hood selling guns to crack dealers. Like it's the greatest like range of content. Who were those dudes that you had? You had Tomy G on your show with these two guys wearing like ski masks. Right. Oh, no. Tomy wasn't on that one. He knew those dudes who did the documentary with him or something. Yeah. It was five guys wearing ski masks. They were the swim team from New York, the most wanted drivers. So squeeze bends who was not on the swim team. He was his own separate thing. He was not there. They called themselves the swim team. The swim team. Yeah. Now what when I first met Tomy, it was when he was in town filming the first part of that back. And we hit it off right away. It's just great fucking guy. at March 2024. He came through, did my podcast and then went and filmed with them. And it was the most viral documentary he ever made. But these guys basically, I don't know if you can pull it up Stephen, but, you know, they're not drag racers. They just do it for the love of the game. You know how like Dick Cheney bombed the Middle East for the love of the game. These guys drive between 120 and 161 70 through New York City and do wheelies and shit for the love around pedestrians and the people. And that's why I listen to be very clear. I do not condone it at all. Like, and we had a very frank discussion. I did episode 248 with them. And it was, you know, I appreciated their honesty and like, they're really off camera like there were great guys. I got along with them really, really well. And a lot of them don't even really have a ton of vices. They just do this. But I'm like, what happens? Obviously, like they're very talented drivers of them talking objectively. Okay, fine. But what happens the day, you know, you cut over two roads and you hit a kid in a stroller. Right. You think I'm going to fucking the thing? You get fucking out of here. It's insane. It's out of these kids. These cow, what are these kids? I can't say because they're okay. That's classified. Where's the where's the footage? Oh, there we go. No, this is an animation. That's an animation, but here's Tommy in the car with them. So some of the guys in the car right now, two of them were two of the guys in the studio with me and they're all undercover and we had the change. We had the change with the party. We had the change their voices, obviously. So the whole episode they're like, oh, that was one of my most memorable recordings because they're talking like this, but I don't hear them like this because I have to do that post at it after the party. I post that it I ever did it. I wanted to kill a small. Fuck in 32 hours to do it because I had to get them all on one audio track. So I had meaning I had to go cut every time someone went to say something different and I had to cut my voice differently. So I wasn't talking like that. Oh my God, it was fucking brutal. But we recorded it like 11 30. This isn't that crazy. That part right there wasn't. Oh, yeah. What about someone when they really when they really pick it up? Like I don't know how we added this B roll of his playing soccer. I don't know if you saw. Well, this is, oh, you know what? Cause this isn't the original documentary. This is an interview with them. So if you go to Tommy G's channel and just type in New York's most wanted drivers, there's one with 13 or 14 million views. It's as big as few. You just go to popular videos and it will come up and you'll see more of them driving. But like at popular Steve, there you go. That one right there. So this was almost, this was, this came out like almost exactly two years ago. But you see at the beginning, like he's driving with squeeze. Yeah. That's right there. Give it some, you got any audio on there Steve? Oh, Tommy Jang and a copywriter, so we'll, but I could talk to him. It'll be alright. But basically that was a memorable recording. Like I was saying because we recorded for like two hours, 10 minutes. It's me at the time, unless he was still in the studio with me, not Steve. And I got five guys in glasses and ski mass. So when I'm talking or like cracking a joke or something, I can't tell if they're laughing or glaring at me. Right. That's right. And I'm like looking around and they would, and you just see like them move like this. And like was that a laugh? Or is he about to knock me a fuck out? But you know, and then like it's just wild because yeah, you got to get them undercover and everything. It's like kind of like this secretive recording and then downstairs. It's a Saturday night and you know, all the fucking bars are popping and people have no idea what's happening. Yeah. But yeah, highly recommend this. He did a second part, put it out in June 2025. Like kind of an update. Was he going to start going on the fucking front lines of wars and shit? Dude, he wants to. I bet he does. Oh, he's nuts. Tommy's, Tommy's got a screw loose. I mean, I'm hearing, I'm hearing, Tayron. My boy, Arab was in Tayron right before they attacked. Really? Yeah. Who's that? Yeah. It's at Arab on. Arab. Okay. On what's he doing? He's another one like Tommy. He goes around the world and gets stories. He's the one that was kidnapped and Haiti for like three weeks and they tried to have a ransom and he like livestream the whole thing. Oh, I didn't really know that. Yeah. Yeah. No, Arab's an interesting guy. But he, I think he first like blew up when he was going down. Yeah. When he was going down to the favelas in Brazil. Hmm. But I don't know if we can see it, Steve. If it's a recent video, it should be very recent inside Tayron during the war. Like I think he was there like in the week leading up to the war. When was the post date? The published date? Go down. Well, the war broke up. One month ago. The seventh. So let's hit more. Holy shit. See, bro, this is what I always talk about. This is before. This is what I always fucking go back to is like people like you and people like me and everybody else on the internet that do all these podcasts. We don't we don't know Jack shit. We don't know. You don't know fuck all. I don't know fuck all about nothing. All we do is read and listen to people talk. That's right. These are the only people that know what's actually happening. And unless you can take a video camera and go show it and talk to people and do all that stuff, you really have, I mean, even only then, just watching the video, you're going to get a lot of it, but you're still not going to get everything. And when you just to still it down to fucking text and words on a microphone, you're getting like a fucking thin ass layer of reality, bro. 100% and that, but I also think that's like my favorite part about the job because we get to have people come in from across the world. And obviously you got to make it like we got to make a judgment in this chair and everyone else there out there has to make their own judgment. Listen into it as to who seems more credible or comes with more evidence and facts and whatever based on things. But these people from around the world doing everything from fun stuff to like very serious stuff, even when they're having fun with it. Looking to cigarette. I don't know about that. That's a cigarette. Might not be a cigarette. No, you pulled it out of the pack of cigarette. Maybe a joint. But either way, like, you know, we're trying to hear about we get pieces of the world coming into our studio, mine and fucking good old Jersey and yours right here in good old Florida. And we get to hear first person like what their, what they're finding and what's going on and ask questions. And so I do think we have a chance to get more informed through that. But you're absolutely right. You can't know the full context until you go through the fourth wall yourself. You know what I mean? Like I can make, forget AI. I'm not even there yet. I can make a video do whatever I wanted to do or make the context. Whatever I want. If I'm, if I'm an Arab, I haven't talked to him about this documentary yet. But maybe I interview 25 people for that documentary and let's say Arab wanted to do a a hatchet job and he doesn't do that. But like let's say he was a bad guy and you want to do a hatchet job. If five of those people were shitting all over something and that's the angle that he wanted, but 20 of the people told the truth and said, no, it's actually all fine or whatever. And that's the angle he didn't want. You'd never know that he cut the other 20 people out. You know? And so I do you've never been. You've never been. You've never been. You went to a place, but you've never been. I mean, as a rule, I don't talk about a country until I've gone that when have you been to Iran? That's the best thing to say when you're losing an argument. That's been. You've never been. I remember just being like, oh man, that's an L for the fucking academic class. It's a tough one. Dave Smith is on fire. Dave Smith is always on fire, man. And his thing, whether or not he's right or wrong on a given issue, whatever it is, man, is he fucking great at presenting it. He's got Moxie. And if you can't accept that going into it and understand that that is what you're dealing with and you better fucking bring the goods and bring it in a way that is digestible and entertaining to everyone. And that's your fucking problem. Yeah. That dude's got Moxie. My favorite is when he called that one guy. I have it. The parents and the parents and guy. He's like, what are you talking about? You **** it. I'm a fine. I'm not. Well, I didn't do a favorite now is called man, called men, Hughes body bag. You. Oh my God. The DVD guy. Oh, that was that was deep ruin my day. And you showed me that interview that debate. It's like you need to stop what you're doing. I'm like, I'm not stopping. I'm doing it. I'm making thumbnails. We have an episode of 12. He's like, well, you need to put this on. And I was like, put on what? And he's like this guy debating Dave Smith. And I was like, that **** in headphones meme where you're just like, oh, no, because they didn't even win. That was the one debate. They didn't even say anything. People see what the **** is there. He's like, it's like shat in short. It's **** smoking a **** whatever. Black and mild and saying, look right here, man. Oh, God. That was tough. Tough. I don't know what was worse that or the post game with him and his daddy, PBD. He's like lecturing him and on live, on his live show, he's like, Adam, we need to have a talk here. The reason I'm doing this live is because I love you, man, but we have to have a talk. If you're just going to go doing debates without me knowing and looking like this, she's like, we're going to have a problem here. He's like, yes, sir. I know. I'm sorry. I'm not going to. And it was like, dude, like his no self awareness zero. That, yeah, that guy, I mean, Adam obviously doesn't have a lot of self awareness and is taking some hours and he deserves it. But like, I don't know. This is just me and maybe this is just like what my dad told me growing up. He's like, have really difficult conversations behind the scenes and, and take hard actions sometimes if that's what it calls for. But you handle it behind the scenes. Yeah. You don't **** enroll over on people in public. He did it in public to save himself though. That's what he that's that shows you. Not tells you. But why do you have to? I don't know. I don't know why if you're talking about PBD there. I should like I don't I don't know what the, what the logic is there. But like, what he said, he goes the reason I'm doing this live is to cover my own ass. He said that he said something like that. I'm not like, that's what I'm saying. Like exactly what he said, you know, I guess people could be like, when maybe these sending people is not sending their best. You know, maybe they could say that about it. But I don't know. I, I just think that's something you handle behind, behind closed doors. But you know, he did get shoved into a locker and swirling through the **** bathroom at the same time for sure. Yeah. Sorry if that was like old PTSD, Steve. Oh, yeah. I heard Steve go like, Oh, what the Swirly. You think Steve got Swirly's? I didn't think so. I think Steve was like beating the shit out of people in high school. That's why I was surprised. Steve grew up in **** Texas. Yeah. Yeah. He he didn't have a toothpick and he was just ****. I think Steve was like beating the shit out of people in high school. That's why I was surprised. Steve grew up in fucking Texas. Yeah. He didn't have a huge toothpick and he was just fucking rolling through the whole way. But I mean, I guess, relax. Maybe that was the piece of Texas. Mexico border, bro. He was running with the cartels. He's like, yeah, I was doing that shit. People all the time. I grew up picking mushrooms out of cow patties. That's right. That's right. And fucking taking them. Interesting picture of ball back there, bud. Yeah, you like that? No. No, but it's an interesting thing to look at. That Steve's desktop background. That's your desktop background. That's nice. Of ball. Awesome. Is it ball or was it B.A.A.A. on what's that? Oh, that's bathroom. What's the difference? What? A.F. a minute in ball. I don't know if that's included. I thought that was the same thing. I have no idea. It's a bull. It's like a bull guy that eats chicken. Right. It has like the goat fucking horns. Or the goat head with the horns and it's a human. No, no, no, that's not ball. It does something with the hands like that. No, that's different. The goat head with the horns, that's supposed to be the god pan. Right? Pan or pan? Pan. Like two ends. Pan like a frying pan. Okay. Yeah, pan. Does it get pan? And pan also plays the fiddle. Are you playing the wire? It plays a lot of free people. Oh, that one has titties. That's the goat of Mendez. The goat of Mendez? Oh, bathroom. I was wrong. The goat is bathroom. That. Yeah, that's my bail. Bail. As Kurt Matsker would say is the is the bull. Oh, very similar, right? A little bit. You had Hurricane Matsker roll through. Yeah, dude. He was here. I enjoyed every minute of a dude. He's he's he's the most epic rants. Oh, that's great. I have no idea what he's saying. Have to tell me. But it's nothing. I have no fault clue. He's that. I just got to keep up. Who is that our second fucking category five podcast with him? Hmm. First, I'm going to be like laws. He went through there were three on camera, but he went through six and like two fats flip smoked up the whole kitchen right before because you know, I don't have the I don't know, Danny Jones square footage in my place. So, Dief and me just rolling there. We're highest fuck. I mean, he's ribbed this fuck too. So you're like a half a step behind the whole way too, which doesn't help. And then just for whatever it was two and a half hours, just boom, boom, boom, boom. And then he just hit you. I don't know where these thoughts are. I don't know. I don't know how he fucking absorbs all this information. Where does he get it from? Less than the time. Kurt's that's a great question. He can say a lot of things about Kurt. You disagree with certain opinions he has for sure, but that's not a dude who's not looking into it. He's he's he's fucking he's lasered in. I mean, he's like autistic kid in algebra. He's got God. It's what it is. He ain't. Yeah. I didn't even realize either when he came in here, they used to be a Jehovah's Witness back in the day. Yeah. I think that's what like black, build him or you know what I mean? What the fuck is this? That opened up his world. Yeah. I'm like, well, these people they're going door to door. Well, the best was when he called he had this one hit where he was talking about less wexner and he's like, less wexner was like the James Bond of Israel. The difference is James Bond actually said his name before he fucked you. Less wexner's like, roll back baby. Let's go Jeffrey on and ride it. He's just like, where is this clock? It's just like there's songs coming around all over the place. Yeah. But I was scrolling through because I needed B roll for some separate thing for the discovery channel thing. Yes, that was fucking hilarious. So Discovery Channel is executive producer for that show. They did the episode on what Andy says, hey, can you just record these dirty to 35 seconds or whatever? It's just these basic lines and it'll be like you're in your podcast just in case we want to use like the voiceover or whatever and then cut to that and roll it into part of what's in the episode. I'm like, all right, sure. So we had like two minutes to do it. So I'm like, our defense stick this inside 72 font. Just sit it where the guest is and like look here and like kind of do it line by line. So it's like four lines or something, which means there's four breaks. We're like, all right, what's the next line now? Let me get the frame. So afterwards I'm like, well, I got to I got to find some guests that I'm putting the B roll in on. So I went through. I'm like, well, I just had curtain. I got first of all, I go through the full timeline of Kurt. It's very hard to find a spot where he's not saying something like he's talking the entire time. If I'm talking, he's talking too. And then I find this one spot where he's got the glasses on the pipe right here and he's just ripping a claw and I just cut back and forth. The first one I'd say like a really serious line. I'm like, the crazy thing about this Heptian case is that after all these years we still don't know what happened outside the cell. And it just like cuts the cart like this and then like drinking a claw and putting it down. And then it keeps cutting back to him like with the with the fucking pipe like this. And I'm like, they're never going to. I'm like, this is funny, but they're never going to accept this. I send it over to this every channel guy right away. He's like, I love the white claw. That's great. And they fucking took it. That's amazing. The episode, but it was funny as fuck now. I love the way he drinks white claws. He drinks him so aggressive too. He's just like, yeah, no, no, no, he's slamming. He's fucking, he's pounding for sure. Oh my God. I forgot about that thing you did with with boost of Monte. So you guys today, what was it you try to recreate? He recreated the whole jail cell that Epstein was in. And then maybe you did like to put out that picture now some people have seen it. So this some of this I can talk about now is the first. or like, yeah, we're right up at the episode, but there's some of it I can talk about. And Andy, a guy who the first time we talked to him with Jimmy D was like, I don't even think he was doing blackmail. He wasn't even in the room. He wasn't even like approaching the walkway to all the shit that's come out. And now like he's already fucking done a full tour and he's left the building. Yes. Which is making me think. Is it my way to minute? Are you trying to pin the entire thing on my side now? What would be FSCIA is that what we're doing? We know my sides at fault, but like CI has got some fault in this matter too. So I don't know, you know, because like I've always had share the opinion with you privately and publicly that like of course I think Andy's still working with him, you know, remember the team if you will. So you got to take certain things he says with an enormous fucking grain of salt, a boulder if you will. I mean, yeah, totally. And so, you know, I was like when he asked me to do this because he's doing this new show and they're doing a different episode on a different totally different topic each time. He's like, I'm doing one on Epstein. I'm like, oh boy, okay, I'm gonna fly up the Colorado and do it. Like what are we even gonna talk about? Because I'm thinking he's gonna be like, well, we don't know. He's a black man. He's like, he's like, no, no, there's some shit here. Just come out and do it with me. I was like, okay. So he's like, we have some other people doing the episode too. Like it'll be fun. Fine. I'll do it. When I get out there, he hadn't told me what we're talking about as a release of the case at all. So we go down into his like TV studio layer that they built. And for like an hour, we have this just general conversation where he's like kind of interviewing me about Epstein. I was actually like pretty good, but they're gonna use like two minutes of it because it's TV. And at the end of it, he goes, all right. So when I was looking at this case, I was trying to think what I was most interested in investigating. And I still just can't get over this guy's death. So I'm thinking that's what we should really be looking into. And in my head, I'm going really like, this is the most stereotypical part. Why are we looking at his death? And of course I didn't think. And also a distraction from the real shit in the big picture. Yes. Like doesn't matter. It really doesn't fucking matter if he's done it or alive. That is what I was thinking. And then things took a turn after that. And it was a little like, I don't know how it's gonna come out because I'm still processing it, but I had to process it all that day live. And I was having, I mean, I called you like halfway through like what the fuck. But he's like, yeah, you know, we're gonna investigate his death and just like you own thing. I'm like, all right, come on. I know we didn't kill himself, but like what are we really doing here? And he goes, if you look to your right, you see that door with caution tape on it. And there's this giant, I didn't even notice this. There's a giant prison door behind me with the caution tape across just like they had in the picture. The DOJ report and he goes, pull up the, pull up the DOJ report of crime scene photos of Jeffrey Epstein in 2019. And then let's pull up at, every day spies Instagram because he took pictures. This is why I can talk about this. Yeah. You can keep going. He'll take him in the next. I'm like, you rebuilt this cell and he goes bar for bar work for work. I'm like, you're said something like that. And I'm like, okay, so he's like, let's go in. So we go in and bro, he had the pill bottles like in the same spot. No shit. He had to have a little books in the same spots. He had all the, all the orange, you know, torn up sheets and shit in the same. So it was creepy. And I'm not going to go through all of it now because like it's not out yet. And I'm not really supposed to like go through the whole thing. But basically it very quickly moved from yet. No shit. He didn't commit suicide and Andy went into full mode and proved it with it dummy and everything. You see the work he did and it was like so into it as well. He was like, fucking throwing this dummy around and shit, doing the physics of it. And then I was like helping him with the physics because I'm like, oh, he'd have to do this too. And we demonstrate that. And we're like, that's yeah, a fucking 50, 60 something year old guys can be able to do that for sure. Right. But like a 20 year old LeBron James is going to be able to find the photo of the door with the caution tape. Yeah. And there's the top was at the top. And so yep, right there. So he had clicked that one. That's perfect. So basically he had rebuilt this. So if we go to his Instagram now, go to everyday spy on Instagram. You'll see the, you'll see the inside of it. But he starts going through that. And then it very quickly moves from once we roll out suicide to Andy very clearly trying to demonstrate that he's demonstrating to me and I didn't know if he was fucking with me at first. It is go up, go up, go up. See it right there on it. See. Yep. So there he is in the cell with that's that's the whole production team that was doing it. Okay. So they literally rebuilt it to scale. And there's a part of the episode that I'm not that didn't involve me that I won't talk about where they were. Let's just say he was able to verify all this shit about what the cell looked like. Not that he needed that, but it was pretty wild. What he was able to bring in there to do that. But I started to realize quickly that he was trying to get to the hay as he did. He was like as a legitimate question. And yeah, I mean, you and I, we've known Andy forever and we're like, come on. Yeah. You're playing it up buddy. And he missed her. Don't ever what's the line. Don't ever leave up to conspiracy will be complained by stupidity. Like get the fuck out of here. You know, I'm thinking Andy's trying to start with this guy. I'm going to stop him. He's raising. Right. Andy's trying to tell me this guy's alive. And then I don't know how long it was. But after a little while, I'm like, oh, he's serious. He's dead. Unless there's going to be like a giant he fucks with me once we get out of here, which was possible. And like he's dead serious. So I'll just say this, there's something in the cell that is exactly what the cell was. That on the literal official schematic of the prison that was always there was not on it. And it's the only cell that was like that so much so that in one of the reports, what you saying was not on it. There was a, there is a put you'll, you'll see it in the episode. I'm sorry to blue balls people, but it's like, come on man. We want to come. There is I know I understand that. I understand that. But you know, I got to do my, my, my little part, I promise here. But like there is a part of the cell that when you look at, if you're looking at like a construction layout of the prison that the official prison had prior to the day that Jeffrey Epstein died and may still have today, I don't know. Sure. There's a part of the cell that is not on that schematic and it is the only cell that has something that is not on the schematic. And basically it is a very useful part to prove to this. Oh yeah. Okay. Yeah. Completely so much so escape hatch. Because that one of the, at least what I can't remember off the top of the head, but at least one of the reports because he had, after we left the cell, he took me outside and went through every single government document that was written about this. And you had them all on the table and binders and we were just ripping through off camera and then on camera. I was like, holy shit. And I think it was on the FBI one. They literally had a picture of a different cell. It was not his cell. Probably. I remember because I remember if you remember this photo, the original photo, they took of the front of the cell when the story first dropped. It was not and then the FBI dropped the footage from the little corridor of the other cell. That wasn't his fucking cell. His cell was down the stairs and around the fucking corner. And the FBI literally released a tape saying that was his cell. Here's the fucking 24 hour footage of it. I mean, if that, what do you like basically? It's insane. Basically, the same. The same. The lies are insane of course. And Andy, you know, he's now get a screen grab of the footage, the FBI released of the front of his cell and look how different it looks. I'm saying I even saw stuff inside where Andy proved that the foundation was all different and it wasn't his cell. Right. It was even worse than that. It wasn't just the outside. Yeah. So I started to, I'm like, oh my God, he's dead serious. And he basically started very matter of factly, very matter of factly explaining exactly how to get him out of his prison and how like I think he used the word how easy it is. And how it doesn't require many people. And so when we went out and talked about it, I was having like a, what the fuck? Like I was literally, we, it had gone from me being, you know, jump being having a good time, whatever to like. Like you were speechless. And he's like, so I brought you here to see if I'm crazy. And I'm like, Andy, in this moment, as I'm just digesting all this, maybe later I'm going to laugh at this and be like, how did I miss this or how did I miss that? But like in this moment, no, I don't think you're crazy. And I think this guy might, I think, I think he's a lot. Mm hmm. You know, we know there was all kinds of fake images of him online and people want Palm Beach Pete be him. I love Palm Beach Pete, bro. I love, you see who's on the call on the call bear show? Was he really? I fucking love him. I can't believe it, dude. He, he is a superstar overnight superstar. Could you imagine? He's loving it. Find the Palm Beach Pete on the Colbert show. I hope it's real. Why is that? He's giving him a, like there you go. You know, because Jeffrey was meeting. That's not it. He met with a face transplant surgeon like the year before he got arrested. Like if you're in that level and you go to get a new face, you're getting a new face. You're not getting like a build a bear, you know, knock off face of your own face. Yeah. And that's what fucking Palm Beach Pete is. Uh huh. He's a poor man's Jeffrey Epstein. Maybe it wasn't Colbert. Maybe it was, it was not a late night show. Just type in Palm Beach Pete late night show or something or like interview, interview, maybe. He was definitely on TMZ. I saw that and he was on some fucking podcast. This was like, my wife thought was showing me a Tik Tok and it was like of him on one of the, like the television late night shows. Go get that shot over there. Hey guys, it's Palm Beach Pete coming to you live from Palm Beach. Yeah. He's really trying to ride this thing. I'm not Jeffrey Epstein. You see the one I've been in front of the private jet too? No. There was one of him. I don't know if it was it. That's probably. It looks like the same as the Lolita. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh man. It's a little club and you ain't fucking. But a lot of that's the thing that another thing that Kurt was saying to me, he's like, dude, I've been to a lot of places. I see a lot of people. There's not much of as much of a variation in people that you think he's like, there's a lot of people that look very, very fucking similar. And Palm Beach Pete and Epstein were obviously. What he knew. Oh, there you go. Jimmy Kimmel. Did you see that? He knew him. He knew Epstein shot out. Oh, he admitted to do. No. Yes. He's like, yeah, I was at a few parties with a month. I didn't know the guy. Yeah, he did. I swear to God. Give it volume. Do people actually mistake you for him? They give me the double up, but now the double up. Viral Jimmy. Oh. It's nonstop. They want to take pictures of me, my autograph. I'm just Palm Beach Pete. I'm not Epstein. I'm just Palm Beach Pete living my life. Is he on cameo yet? And please say hello now, but Palm. Oh my God. Is he on cameo? He's got to be on cameo. He's got to be banking off-camera right now. I don't know if you can find it, but like Palm Beach Pete knew Epstein. He liked talked about it. I think it was TMZ where he's like, yeah, it was at a few parties in New York or maybe Palm Beach or something. You know, I'd see the guy on the couch. I didn't really know him. We got to get it. We got to buy a cameo off- It's like maybe Pete, you don't admit that one out loud. Maybe that's one you keep off the camera or off the interview. No, nobody needed to know that. You want to, you want to come here. You want to order one? I want to watch one of them. Play one of his cameos. You want to watch one of them? I want to watch one of them. I want to see like what? I want to get one. I'm definitely going to order one. Yeah, you should order one. How about this anniversary? Yeah, let's watch the anniversary. Hey everybody. It's Palm Beach Pete and I'm pushing the green beating to Max and Dylan. Those parties were great. I want you to enjoy your life. The utmost Palm Beach Pete smiles and enjoys his life. So I want you to enjoy your life too. Always talking and very, very nice to you. Just keep on doing what you do. Shut the fuck up and playing. The Otis GD. It's Palm Beach Pete calling back from Florida. Happy, happy birthday. I want all his followers to get him up to a really great number. So continue to follow OG Otis GD. Otis GD continue what you're doing. Be a good person. You're a good person. We're fucked. All right. Humanities fucked. Oh man. Nothing like a John Kiriaku camera. Over night, stardom for looking like an international file. Yeah. Yeah, I would be a little. A lot of less excited. Then pop. Not just a file, but a literal somebody who whose sacrifice is children. Yeah. You know, I want to look at the shitty ingredients like Christoph Waltz and fucking glorious bastards. He's like, let's a bingo. Oh, he also has the similar voice. It's very similar voice. A little bit higher pitched. Yeah. They got the same Florida tan. Yeah. That's so fucking crazy man. Yeah. I would go away. I would. Yeah. I'd be I and he's apparently really rich. Yeah. What do you need the money for? I might even like sue the guy who took the video of me. I'm just just to like out spend his lawyers just to be like, don't you ever fucking do that to me again. That's is that what you do with fuck you money? Oh my god. Like isn't that what you do? You just buy lawyers and great hearings and shit. You just create fake fucking suit. You sue people off bullshit just to scare the shit out of them and just shut them with the fuck up. Yeah. Look at how it tells. That's what a guy who tells. Life does. Look at them. I know. I know. I know. Oh, yeah. John Carriaku is the number one person on fucking cameo right now, dude. It's amazing. It's incredible. Like the world just keeps coming to John Carriaku. He does nothing. He over. He just continues to be himself and the world just hands itself over to him. And it's incredible to see. He's blissfully happy in his own little world and it needs to remain that right. I believe this. Wait until you hear what happens to me. I don't know. It just happened. I'm gonna give you an example. I'm not gonna get you an example. I'm on cameo the other day. Do you know this app, Danny? It's great. I met the CEO. Good guy. Someone calls me up and they're like, wish my wife a happy anniversary. Here's $400. Danny, look at this. I have 85 plus cameo requests right now. I'm going back to my hotel. I'm gonna be up till three in the clock in the morning. And you didn't tell me. Good morning, cameos. You didn't tell me it was staying at the same hotel. I would have fucking recorded a fucking cameo for him. Holy shit, man. Where's Misty each other with you? And then with Matt, like back to back. Uh-huh. He was right there. God. Oh, yeah. Then he went on match. The best, the best edit of all of them was the one from Diary of a CEO. Where he's like, so she accepts lunch and then I go in and I'm like, oh my God, you accept lunch. And my boss is like, oh, listen, I want you to fall. It's like, I can't do this. I know, I know. But were the good guys. So, all right. I'll do it. It's like, dude. And where he, like, what's one of the comments on Black Twitter that went really, really viral because Black Twitter loves John. I was trying to explain Black Twitter to John. He's going in one year out the other. But I'm like, just know they love you. And if you roll up in the hood, you don't have to stand on business. You're good. You're good on either side. The same for sure. But they were like, there's more of a dog. And he never told a joke in his life. He'd have funny as dude online. Like, he just says things. Like, in that same clip, he's like, this woman was the ugliest woman I've ever seen. And then he goes like, and you can see like his brain is picturing it from his life. And he's like, it was as if you reached up onto the side of Notre Dame and pulled down a car. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's like she came straight off the side of Notre Dame. And then he explained what a gargoyle was. And I'm like, that's cinema. Yeah. Like, I could sit. Deepen, I could sit in a room trying to write a script all day for some fucking movie. And we would not come up with a visual of that perfect. No. And he, it just comes right to him. He's gifted, man. He's gifted. I love the CIA. I'm glad he did. I'm not sad about the circumstances for him of how one day it will. Yeah. Hopefully he gets his pardon soon. You know, if you want some good PR Trump, that's an easy W. I mean, people like him. So I mean, you know, they're part in fucking fraudsters. You see the guy they part in the other day. We talked about it with John. It was the guy who had a, he, this guy had a fucking nursing home. And he had people suing him because their fucking grandma's were dying because he was giving him the wrong medications or feeding them the type of like foods when they shouldn't be eating foods and shit. And like, there was at least probably a half dozen lawsuits from family suing this guy because he killed their fucking grandparents. And it was some sort of class action lawsuit. That dude was in prison. Trump just fucking parted him. Pardon them for whatever reason. This guy. And made paid lobbyists and lawyers with ties to president Trump's team and walked free. Others are following his blue, but it's not always clear who can deliver. And this guy is getting important, but yeah, guys get a fucking pardon. Just a hundred grand, man. And the guy who illegally, by the way, pushed for John's illegal prosecution is Trump's arch enemy. That's where I don't understand. John Brennan's the guy who made the whole thing happen. There's no one on this earth that Donald Trump, Donald Trump like John Brennan did what? He's the guy who sent John to prison. If I really, yes, the FBI investigated John for a year after they tried to make him the fall guy and that they were trying to set him up and can't talk about the paper equipment and all that. The whole bet. And then they got people new like the actual backstory that was talking about. I can't. I can't. So anyway, so he goes and he defends the same people that he was shredding behind the scenes like a good loyal guy, which, you know, I'm sure he regrets doing that. But like that all happened. And then the FBI came and investigated him for a full year and they literally apologized to him and he hates the FBI and they hate him. Like he always talks about that. He's been talking about that since the very first podcast he did with you. Like you never got along with those guys. But at the end of the year, this is like, oh, eight, they come to him and they send him an official letter and they say, hey, there's nothing there. Sorry for the inconvenience and everything. You know, I hope you understand we're just doing our job, but we're not filing charges. Okay. Great. And then he ends up working for John Kerry is the fucking, you know, chief investigator for the foreign for the Senate for intelligence committee and then he finds all the poppy fields in Afghanistan. They're like, no, not that kind of investigation. No, no, no, no, not like that. No, no, no, no, now get back here. And then there's a bunch of emails of John Brennan hitting up fast and furious holder. Pun intended about like you need to make a case against John Kerry, Ochoo and Eric Holder is literally telling John Brennan like we already looked at that. There's no case and then John's like fine one. No. And they hated each other back there. That's fun. And so that's why I do that's why I really don't understand why Trump hasn't poured in Kiriyaku because Trump don't like Brennan. Oh, he, he fucking hates Brennan. Why? Oh, I mean, where do I begin? Brennan was like the chief architect of Russia. Eight and start with that. Oh, yeah. Brennan's also just a lie. I mean, you know, it's professional liar, but like a liar to the extent that like he's a fake person. He's a, he's a, he's a fake person. He's literally a cutout of a person. And I remember there was a documentary on Showtime that dropped in 2015. It was like around Christmas time. So right when Trump's like becoming a like, well, maybe he's actually kind of they dropped this documentary called like CIA spy masters in the crosshairs. And it's every living former director or acting director of CIA being interviewed. And then, you know, like guys like, who's a Rodriguez? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Brennan at the time was the active CIA head. And it gets this dramatic part where they're asking every single former head and John Brennan is the current head separately about whether or not the United States should do torture. And John Brennan gives this response like I just feel like we live in a country where we need to be above that. And we, we shouldn't, we should not engage in torture. He's a fucking guy. I wrote the memos. How to create it. Right. Saying that unironically. And it's like when you see things like that and then when, when the average American sees something like that, they're going about their day and then they find out about this John Brennan guy because they're looking into it a little bit. And they go, you know, the whole thing needs to burn down. I get it. I'm like, Hey, I mean, fuck man. Yeah. The stench is at the top. I mean, like, just tell the truth about the torture shit. It's not even half bad compared to all the other shit we know about now. As crazy as that is, as you're 100% right. Like say, tell the public, look, we're going to torture people who we think are terrorists. What's the big fucking deal? Like there's a lot of, it's not in K ultra. It's not blowing the president's brains out. Yeah. You know, yeah. It's not a fucking international file arms trafficking ring. That's right. On the list of priorities. It's like, it's like the line. You make that deal. I make that deal. I make that deal. I'm doing a deal. I'm doing a deal. I'm doing a little give the people that one. Again, we brought out a bucket with some water a few times. What are you going to do? Yeah. They could have, they could have just. We'll give the people that one. Again, we brought out a bucket with some water a few times. What are you gonna do? Yeah. They couldn't just, what are you gonna do it to America? And it would have been over three weeks later. People wouldn't have cared that much. How crazy is it that they literally hired psychologists to come up with that torture program? And one of the dudes lives right down the street from here. Yeah. Like an hour. Like an hour. To the tune of $82 million. 82. Yeah, the guy lives in a fucking mansion. James Mitchell. I think that's his last name. Yeah. Yeah, there's a great video of him on vice where he's in a canoe. He's like, oh, do your interview, but you're gonna do it on my canoe. Tommy G would have surrounded by gators. Tommy G would 100% on that. Oh, yeah. For sure. Oh, he don't give a fuck bro. He'll put an alligator in a fucking rear naked choke. Yeah. Yeah, he wouldn't shot it like clavicular either. Mm-hmm. Yeah. I would like to I would like to give that guy some truth serum. That guy Mitchell and get to the bottom of it. I would too get to the bottom of it. I would want to know beyond just like him being hired as a contractor. I forget his partners name, but like the two of them being hired. The other guy was the Mexican dude who lived in North Florida. Not Mexican. He was like Hispanic dude. That's the name. You're not talking about Jose Rodriguez. Maybe I'm talking about him. He was the guy at CIA. I'm talking about the two consultants. It was Mitchell and not Mitchell and Ness like the hack company, who was Michael who was who were the two consultants who came up with the enhanced interrogation program. Yeah. And so psychologists. I would want to know not just like, oh, everything they got wrong and why that was all bullshit. I'd want to know that. I'd want to know once they got in there and we're in some of these rooms and then someone like actually powerful, not some bullshit consultant like them. Turn to them and said, you like your head. Yeah, you ain't saying shit pal. Bruce Jansen. Bruce Jansen. Yes, and, you know, Bruce Jansen. Jess and, Jess and Mitchell and Jess and Mitchell and Jess and that's a great name for a law firm. It is. It is. You know, but there's a, but that's the thing like on my list of like things I would want to know is like a fly on the wall. That's actually pretty low on the list for CIA. Like there's a lot of people. It's very low on the list. There's a lot of things I would want to be the fly on the wall. I mean, I would love to just be the fly bit like sat on the back of Sydney got lead suit without him knowing it for like 10 years and just like live there. Didn't bite him. You know, I was just like, I'm just going to park it right here. You don't know. I'm just watching what you're doing fam. You know, what was he doing? He a lot. A lot. What about not a forget Sydney got me. What about Jolly West? Oh, yeah. I mean, he was fucking every. That's like Mary own Luigi bro. He's kind of like more like the tip of the spear or not Jolly West, but Sydney got me. But Jolly West was literally the guy who was like in Jack Ruby cell. He was fucking at the clinic where Charles Manson was going. Yep. Also on the set of 2001 space Odyssey, the dude he's like, he's like fucking forced gump of CIA mind control 100% look at that. There he is behind Stanley Kubrick and who's the other guy again? Uh, Stanley Kubrick and who's the Kevin Costner looking motherfucker. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know who that guy is. The Jolly West dude that guy was. He was an evil motherfucker. You know, both of his children and his wife committed suicide. What does that say about that dude? You know, the tragedy of lineage in thoughtful decisions is a tale is always time. I don't know. Details of that. I don't even think I was aware of that for that one. But you know, that's I think about that a lot because like, you know, I don't know wherever they always shit like this, but in life you're going to make good choices and bad choices and you just try not to make the bad choices on purpose and you try to make a lot more good choices to bad choices. But like the things you do affect especially the people who come after you as well, if they're really huge mistakes. You know, and that's to me when I look at the story of all these guys, you know, launch OSS and CIA and created this apparatus. I don't think those guys ever thought about that. I think they were so hardcore and actually believing through their power that they were the good guys. That no matter what they did, it was somehow holier than now. And there's no one that that comes through clearer on than the dullest brothers and then in particularly Alan Dulles, who ended up running CIA. But like, you know, those guys go back to fucking literally the treaty of Versailles. You think about all the things that those two fucking poison ivy shrouds touched. It starts there probably earlier, but like it just for Sega argument here starts at the treaty of Versailles and ends effectively covering up the Kennedy assassination after the getting them. And it's like you wonder if there was ever a moment where a guy like Alan Dulles looked in his fucking vanity mirror and his torch town fucking townhouse and was like, fuck, I'm the bad guy. I don't think that moment ever happened. We'll never know. I don't think it ever happened. I think he legitimately thought he was the good guy. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's what happens when you get surrounded by people that never fucking challenge you. And you don't have honestly like a good spouse, like a good wife or a good husband, if you're a woman to balance you out because that's what you need to be humble and wise and not turn into a complete sociopath asshole. I couldn't agree with that more. But I never great man. There's a there's a greater woman. That's like one of the truest things ever. That's one of the that that's, you know, when you see people like that fucking jolly West guy or in this other people, they might be married, but their families are completely disconnected from them. They never fucking see them. And you know, in his case, the wife and the kids end up fucking killing themselves. Yeah. Like you're just a completely abandoning these people. And I'm sure that has some sort of a negative feedback loop with him, which makes him super depressed, makes him super angry, maybe makes him hate himself. And you know, on the other hand, this guy's out doing his thing, making money literally surrounded by people who are probably just, you know, telling him everything he's doing is great. And he lives in this fucking delusion and he has no one to balance him out or tell him him he's crazy or keep him humble like that. I think that's probably, I think that's probably like the bane of human existence. And that's what makes people go down those dark spirals where they turn into fucking monsters like that. Completely agree. And that's why, you know, when you're living, we're always living through history where it's been created every day. You would like to think that you learn from the past and you spot the same patterns right there when you see them. And it's on a whole nother level. If you are those people where you're in these positions of power and you would like to think you'd be able to spot it in yourself for the people around you. And the fact of the matter is when you look throughout human existence, yeah, the circumstances change, the technology changes, the who's against who changes and all that, but the human nature never changes. And the human nature says that people are, will you will get people in positions of power who go down that spiral. And that's what it is. And I've talked about this before. It's like one of the weird, I don't know what's the word I'm looking for. It's one of the weird paradoxes of life. But like when you look throughout human history, there's why I'm an optimist. Things get progressively better. Good wins out. It does. We're objectively, we're in a wild moment right now. I'm not saying sometimes we don't think all stuff back to think, first that forward. One small leap from mankind or whatever the fuck they said on that set. But either way, like overall it goes up. The quality of life goes up around the world. Yes, and when we have access to more information, we see more suffering than we ever did. we think that that's the total rule rather than a smaller part of the rule than it was following the whole process. Yeah, we have more access to share now. And that is what it is. But like the wild thing is that also throughout human history in the short term, in the short term, evil can beat good. It's this weird thing. And I've talked about this with you. Evil can beat good in the short term. Isn't that what Netanyahu just said? That was so funny because the way he put it was like disgraceful. And he tried to invoke Jesus like, it just fucking scumbag city. But the point I don't know what his full point was there or what he was getting at like over the long term or whatever. But what I'm saying is I've talked with you on the phone about this for years. It's like if I put 100 people in a room and 99 of them are good and one of them is evil who's willing to act surreptitiously through evil in the short term, the evil could win. Right? Like think about, think about the dark night experiment where the two boats don't blow each other up were good wins because no one hits the bomb. All you needed was one person in there to hit the bomb. And if I ran a simulation of that same exact moment 100 times, nine times out of 10, one asshole is going to fucking hit the bomb. And in the short term, Kaboom, everyone blows up. And it's evil. Correct. On the contrary, if I have 99 evil people in a room and one good person in the room, that good person really has no chance. I mean, they fucking killed Jesus, bro. I mean, it's like, you know, you in the short term, you don't have a chance. The beautiful thing about life though, and this is why I think this is abbienning, is that when you look at things as they develop over time, removing yourself from the 100 person in one room, making one decision experiment, the good wins out. It does overall. It doesn't mean that we don't still have genocize happening in the world and things like that that are objectively like the worst thing ever. It doesn't mean we don't have things like fucking, I don't know, arms, dealing sex traffickers, working for multiple governments and selling kids around the world and getting away with it while everyone laughs and creates a fucking war and a rant distract from the problem. It doesn't mean that that shit doesn't happen. I love that you're doing a solo right now. Like I'm just saying, I'm just saying to any Jones over the long term, humanity finds a way to get better and better. That's why I tried like even as recovering like there's two stories this year that are fucking insane and they're not positive in any way, shape or form, unless you're the CEO of Hermes. But other than that, like literally if you know, you know, or Palm Beach Beach, or by black. I don't know how bad it is. But like when I'm looking at this, you have Epstein and Iran and they are negative to the core. People dying, people get it, things getting covered up. They're going to be crashing and people losing their jobs around the world, you know, chaos, etc. But like we can be at a point where very bad things may come out of this in the short term and sure as shit, they already are. But 10, 20 years from now, we can improve from this. And then we'll have a new problem, but that problem would be a little lesser. Right. That's really true. That you know what I mean? Yeah. And I think that's the beautiful thing about life and that's how I try to look at it. Even when I'm covering these stories. And like, we, even I have been covering it in the third episode every week with the solo episodes and all that. And like, you know, you still got to, you have to know when to be very, very serious about parts of it for sure because life is not all one big joke, even when you want it to be. But like you have to have fun with the chaos as well because that's how we, that's how we talk our way through it. That's how we deal with it when fucking no one's going to jail over things like Epstein. They just fucking get away with it, right? You deal with it through dark divine comedy, if you will. And I'd like to think that there will be some lessons learned from this. And I do think I think the average American needs a lot more credit now than, you know, we would have gotten five, six, seven, eight, 10 years ago as to like there are more people who are aware that like some shit is fucked. You know, and there's a lot of people who are aware of that because they've taken the time to be aware of that. And they maybe don't even really have that time to look into that because they got bills to pay families to take care of and stuff. But they're still getting somewhat informed. What you were talking about early on either before we started right when we got on air, you know, I don't know when the cameras are wrong. But like I think when you take that way too far and it becomes the whole meaning of your life and your whole life is doom and gloom, everything's fucked. I don't know. Fire me. Well, that's a no. You can't be like that. Yeah. And things are becoming more exposed now. It's harder to keep secrets now. Secrets come out easier. There's way more people out there, there's way more access to information and secrets. Don't inherently encourage good behavior. That's right. Secrets, I think, enable bad behavior. So that just goes to your point that if people are it's harder for these, the government or whoever and companies, people like, you know, these billionaires that are running around with impunity can't keep secrets, then they have to sort of fucking, they have to act better. They have to be on their best behavior because they're not going to be able to get away with shit anymore. And that does give me optimism about all those shit. Yeah. But I do think the other side of it though, like Joe Rogan talks about this a lot, been talking about this for years. You think no one can keep a secret, but it is possible for larger groups than you think to keep secrets. And even today, where you're right, you can shine a light on the darkness more than you could in the past. And it's harder to keep a secret. That doesn't mean that there aren't things that, you know, a hundred people keep a lid on. Of course. You know what I mean? Yeah. And that's what's wild. And I hate them for it. But I also like damn respect the, uh, the discipline. I don't know. Yeah. But it's like you got these things floating around all day. They're fucking recording everything we say. Yeah. I imagine those guys like they follow to our friends. Yeah. Yeah. Shabbat shalom. Shabbat shalom. Yeah. Who is it we had in here the other day who was telling, oh, it was Glenn Greenwald. He was, he was saying, uh, I would rather be an enemy of the CIA than an enemy of the Mossad. Uh, lesson in a chance. Oh, man. He did, but bro, he was kind of saying, well, we were talking about a few weeks ago with him. I told you, I'm like, dude, I, I think I texted you and deep this like four weeks ago and then Glenn, who's actually like no shit was talking about this. Yeah. But I was like just objectively speaking, nonpolitical statement here, the next president of the United States, if he runs and if they don't kill him in the words of the 10 out of rain, those are two big gifts. It'll be talking to Carlson. Yeah. Because he's got the three things you need. He can run to the left of the neo cons to the right of woke and he's got celebrity charisma. Yes. I mean, that's, that's the holy trinity of politics. Right. I'm fucking moxie, bro. Yeah. And again, if he runs huge if and if they don't kill him, not the big f, but yeah, and it sounded like Glenn was saying he's privately like, I come on. He's privately saying no, he just laughs at it. Yeah. Which I hope is true. I hope that me too. It's a paradox. It's a paradox because you, the type of person that wants to run for president is not the type of person that you can really trust. Here's the thing about talking to Carlson, man. He's got some very different politics from me, but he's a, he's a brilliant guy who will tell you what the fuck he thinks regardless of how it sounds to you, regardless of whether you're going to agree with it or not. You know where he stands on things. And I, I think there's a level of genuine nature that comes through on that and he's willing. Maybe sometimes he goes too far with things because he gets a little pissed off and he talks about that. Like, you know, sometimes his emotions get the best of them, but like he's willing to go ask questions that other people are afraid to ask questions on. And that's getting the respect of people across the spectrum. I mean, I saw he did a podcast with Alex Gibney the other day. Did he really? Yeah. And Alex, could you imagine that? Alex Gibney did the BB files. Yes. Could you imagine Alex Gibney going on Tucker Carlson's show on Fox five years ago? No, it's so goddamn. He's very left, but like there is some common ground on things. That's wild. And that is, that is fascinating. So just because like, I don't know, that's one. You don't have to change your politics to go from left to right. You can stay the perfectly in the same, the same. You can stay exactly where you are on all your points that you believe in and the whole system will do a 180. And it's doing it again. Yeah. That's the own dude. All I ever think in life is like, it's just don't. Oh, you made an assumption on that. You fucking retard like don't assume anything. Assume you just wrong about all of it. The only thing that I can think of in my life that I've felt some zen on in the last nine years that has not shifted in any way, shape or form is when I figured out that like it's all a sham politically speaking, like the left and right, it's a joke. Even without me knowing about the super government idea and all the details of the Epstein files, nine years ago, I didn't know shit about that. But like now it really makes sense. But I was just like these aren't, it's not real. It's all in act. It's all a unit party. They get dinner at the same steak houses and fucking DC. It's an inside job. It's bread and circus for the masses to fight over the things don't matter. And then, and this wasn't around in 2016, 2017, but one of the most common stories I tell on my podcast, I've probably told it, I don't know, 45 to 50 times over the years, is about one of your podcasts during the height of the pandemic was Stephen Kinzer. Stephen Kinzer basically explained it through a personal anecdote story so perfectly. So I'll repeat it now. But he was talking about when he was like the bureau chief for South America in the early 1980s and Carter had left the presidency. He knew Carter from being a journalist when Carter was in office. He was maybe a year out of office and he found out Carter was going to be coming down to where he was in South America. So he reached out to his team and said, I'd love to get a beer or whatever. Carter meets up with him. They're having a drink. And he's like, well, it's been long enough since he left office and maybe I can ask him some questions about what it was like. So he starts asking him what it was like to be president and all that. And Carter's like, oh my God, it's fucking insane. And I just get in there and they're like, here you go. He's to the kingdom. And now Kinzer's explaining that he's feeling a little confident. He's like, okay. See how he approached this thing. He goes, what you do was look like the first thing he did when he got in there. And Carter's like, I called every living president that still existed and I met with them individually. And Kinzer asked him even Nixon. He goes even Nixon. And so Kinzer's like, I fuck it. He gave the best advice and Carter gave a big shit. And he goes, and Kinzer goes, why? And he goes, because Nixon didn't bullshit me. And I'm paraphrasing here. Go listen to the episode from back in the days of concrete. But he didn't bullshit me. He came in and he was like, Oh, Congress is bullshit. The master politics you can't do anything. He's all controlled by the Jews. That's not what he said. Hit that. But he's like, they're going to fight 5% for health care or some bullshit this way. That way you can't really move anything. There's nothing that you can really do. But the farm policy. Now that's where you got some fun boys. And what he was saying is behind the closed doors. While everyone here is finding it, no Kings protests and shit like that over whether or not they're paying $700 a month or $600 a month for fucking health care and whether or not they like Trump or not. There's things happening behind the scenes that now we have more awareness on. We've been talking about this throughout the episode like the average person does, but like things that happen outside the borders in other places with treaties and deals and backroom, whatever and wars and death and not even the stroke of a pen sometimes. Sometimes it's just, I'll make that deal. Drop a fucking bomb on a wedding and nobody knows nothing. That's where the real pattern. That hasn't changed. So that only added to how I thought about this because I'm like, it's all bullshit and the politics comes back like you were saying perfectly a few minutes ago. The politics comes back 180 again and again and again. I've just I've seen the movie too many times. I was like liberal when I was in college. I was like a Trump conservative. Whatever that is right after college. And then I was like a fuck all of them by the end of 2017. I've been a fuck all of them since the end of 2017. Well, the worst in Churchill quote, if you're not a socialist when you're young, you have no heart. If you're not a conservative when you're old, you have no brain. And the Julian Dory quote is, and if you're either by the time you're 30, you're retarded. Exactly. Exactly. It's just, it's a little harsh way of putting it. Sorry, but like that's just it's like the one thing that all the crazy, all the things I've had to change my mind on when presented with way better evidence that maybe I'll change my mind on again when better evidence comes from somewhere else. It's the one thing I haven't seen better evidence on. I've only seen stronger evidence over time that that's what it is. It's all just a game. And I think I do think if there's one critique I have of society that I've had for a while, I think it's that people put way too much certain people put way too much faith in like some individual wearing a suit asking for their election vote on a Tuesday and November. Yeah. And they really even have the power to do let alone the desire to do for the people to vote. Right. And that's the set. That's the cynical way of putting it. But that is one boy's where I'm pretty cynical. I think one of the good things is like 10 years ago, maybe maybe a little bit more. Yeah. I think 10 years ago is a safe bet. If what was happening right now with Thomas Massey and Mary and Adelson, if that happened, she would get away with it. Yep. And I don't think she can get away with it. I think she can spend a trillion dollars and it would just be Streisand effect. It would just be more people would know about it. More people would be calling it out. And I think it's going to work in the opposite. The fact that she's funding people against this guy, you know, I don't care. I mean, maybe I'm wrong. Maybe he's the boomers of the ones that vote, the people on Twitter who are seeing all this stuff. Maybe they don't vote. Maybe it's a statistic thing. Maybe it's the fucking people like my parents and your parents that get all their information from Fox and CNN. There are the ones that are seeing all the commercials that Mary Madison is paying for and they're the ones that actually vote. People mean you. We don't vote. Well, I used to vote, but not going to vote any longer. Journalists to get that right. I do. I do. I do vote. But I write in the book. Yeah. Of course, journalists. Journalists to get integrity. Fuckin loser. But yeah, I wonder if that's maybe I could be wrong about that. I'll say this. I've never been to Kentucky. I've heard great things. I've heard it's a fucking beautiful place. I'm sure there's people out there from Kentucky listening right now. Hope to hear from me in the comments and confirm that. But from the little bit that I do know about Kentucky, I do feel like there aren't a lot of people in Kentucky who are waking up every day concerned about the well-being of Israel. I don't think there's a lot of them. I think they're more concerned with, you know, it's a bold take. Pay, yeah, very bold, I'm saying the well-being of Israel. I think they're much more concerned with how much groceries cost, like a normal fucking person is, or, you know, whether or not their grandkids are going to have an opportunity to live in a better country than they live in right now. And when they have a representative who has also been extremely public in trying to be one of the lone people exposing one of the largest scandals bipartisan scandals I might add in both directions by partisans of people who are guilty and by partisans of the voters who want to see the fucking truth about it, something everyone agrees on for the wrong reasons or the right reasons, respectively. Like when they see that this guy who's trying to expose all that is the one that they're trying to run out of office. Yeah. I think that's a real black pill moment for the literal average person, including the older, less technologically inclined fucking boomer. I want to think that too, but I, that's the point I wanted to make. But halfway through making that point, I realized I'm wrong because I've had this argument with my dad and people with my dad's age, the boomer class about this. And it's like talking to a brick wall. They don't hear it. They don't hear it. It's that George Carlin thing we should play the yesterday. The George Carlin thing where he's talking about, remember the clip I texted yesterday, he's talking about people with their ideas become their identity. And then when you start to attack their ideas, you're attacking who they are and their identity. And then it just just dissolves into, you know, a dumber argument. So I think that's what it is. I think I think the, the older folks or the people that aren't tapped into like independent media, it has become their identity. Yeah. Watch that. I agree with you. I think there's just more percentage in the past where it's not that way. Right. And there was two years ago. Right. You'd click the audio. You're glad you said you should use officially screwed yourself because now it's not just an idea. And now it's you. Now it's you. It's challenged. You don't hear disagreement. You hear an attack. Yeah. What do you do? You build a bubble, a nice soft padded little bubble where everyone agrees with you. It uses the same words, hates the same people and claps at the exact right moments. And you will defend that bubble at all costs, even if it makes you sound incredibly stupid. Facts don't matter anymore. Logics gone, humor dead because admitting you're wrong with being admitted, you are wrong. And that's unacceptable. So you double down louder and queer. Dumber. And that's how you end up defending nonsense like it's sacred scripture, not because it's true, but because without it, you'd have to actually develop a personality. Yes. No, he's like, dude. He's spot on and it's like, I'm telling you one of the most freeing things ever is being able to say like, wow, I've seen better evidence I was wrong. You're not any fucking and I do it publicly. Yeah. You know, it's I'm not just some fucking private person behind the keyboard that no one knows what it is. Like when you're wrong, you're fucking wrong. And you can dig in and fucking stamp your feet and be like, no, no, no, I'm right. But like after enough time, people are going to be like, well, this guy's a fucking moron. Cool. Look at Ben Shapiro's views. Hmm. People have seen through it. Yeah. Cause he won't have made it wrong. I have no, I have no sympathy for that. Have you seen the, um, on the subject of Thomas Massey, there was a thing on Twitter the other day where he was fighting with Dan Bongino. Oh, and then he showed the time stamps and times. And maybe. Bongino was an Israel. You can't make it up. What happened to him? You can't fucking make it up. He looked like a broken fucking person. Yeah. Yeah. Like split down the middle. Like just completely cracked. Like you just watched. What do you think they did do when he got in for the first day? Oh man. But something and like I said, I never liked the guy at all. Not even a little bit. I always made fun of him. Yeah. But like I respected when he went in there that here, you had a guy who was making millions of dollars, ranting, raving about the future of America to a bunch of people, a little bit too close to the camera in that way for being that fucking angry with the vain at all times. And you know, he gave all that up for at least a short time to go make $100,000 or less or whatever. And do a job where you're going to be constantly attacked because allegedly he wanted to walk the talk and he both I didn't, I wasn't really sure. less or whatever and do a job where you're going to be constantly attacked because allegedly he wanted to walk the talk and he both I didn't I wasn't really sure what his qualifications were as it pertains to FBI he was a secret service guy but like I was like all right he's going in there and he's trying to clean up some of the system he's complained about for so long and I respected that and then he looked like a hostage while he was doing it every time that they would come out into these interviews and he'd be sitting next to cash who's it's a whole separate issue but you know he would literally look like he he looked like that meme of the kid who literally is about to explode with the vein in the forehead you know and I had said I said it with my giggling episode 351 back in October I'm like that's the guy I'm watching because he's going to leave there I didn't know it was going to be two months later but I'm like he will not last this full term he's going to go back to private life and I want to see what he says when he does and man as he completely let me down yeah because first of all he blocks everyone I've never added congratulations you got blocked yeah he blocked me I've never added him in my life I just learned how I suppose name like a month ago but like you know watching him simp for these outcomes and then you see this latest one where he like tries to expose Thomas messy it's like dude what are you doing like forget privately even publicly this is one of the few people who's trying to expose the largest known fucking file intelligence arms dealing trafficking ring known to man and that's the shit you used to complain about all day right justly so on your show and now you've gone behind the big blue you've come out from the other side and you're going after this guy read the room and so there's just the cynic amigos some happen to someone said hey ain't nobody want to see these pictures of you that's not me in the picture it is if we say it is mm-hmm I don't know who those people are I don't know what they're doing it for that's all speculation but I wish I ran with hack that guy's hard drive they got cash you see him doing the fucking the kooka racha yeah but I'm never gonna they I'm never gonna go after someone for what's on there what I will know what I will go away after is how the fuck is the head of the FBI getting like right exactly like it's just like and he's winning every Vegas odd there is everyone's thinking he's got to be the first guy getting fired from the cabinet now we're like two down because no him got fired and now Trump's a pair pretty no I heard a bond he's gonna get fired now that's what I'm saying bond he's now at the time of this recording reportedly about to get fired cash is still fucking swimming now why would they fire bondy I mean the doubt the doubt the doubt is she had to grab her notes is that 50,000 she wanted to say dollars it's not dollars on you know and she stopped for something there's a 50,000 it's not it's not dollars I've seen you rasp and you're a great trader from what I hear like shut the fuck up and bow you're an attorney general this is a fucking attorney general we don't claim her all right the Italian half of me then I'm sure my 100% of time people out there like we don't claim her you know like I should do some interest in church Scientology back in the day I heard well she took money from him just saying but we need to give her an extra system over yeah like what are you doing it's just in you know the last administration would bite him was a global embarrassment literally top to bottom I mean it was like it was so in your face embarrassing that you were certain it was a play you're like this is giant joke on everyone and we're getting to the point for for different reasons they're different and the context is different but where I'm getting the same feeling with this administration for wildly different reasons and different manifestations of how that happens but like like who the fuck are these people right and I'm not sitting here like yo I got the solutions you should have hired this guy that I don't know that's not my lane I'm a fucking youtuber but like even my dumbass can look at this and be like you know maybe the lady who's gotten a new face since 2018 isn't the person you want to be running 45 fucking homeland security commercials yeah they turn they turn you into a lizard person when you get in there they do something they inject you with the lizard DNA and there's no turning back that's why I don't think it's a good idea for Tucker Carlson to run for president nor Joe Rogan nor anyone we love don't wish that upon them yeah the president the president of the United States is not someone that you are ever going to revere and if you do if it's someone who's a good person you have to assume it's going to turn them into a bad person yes that's the way you got to look at it just look at the Dan Bongino cat model look at the Dan Bongino model everyone fucking loved him he was calling out all the right things as soon as he went behind the curtain and he came back out he was a fucking demon and I think the same thing would happen to I don't think it would happen I mean I want to I want to believe that it wouldn't happen with somebody like Tucker because I don't want to believe that he's that type of person but if you actually becomes president you got you can't give him that you can't give him that that leeway who yeah who exactly you can give it to anyone who's to say you don't get fucking you know opposite date when you get back there right or they inject you with it and it's like the spongebob everything's the opposite yeah you know like that's it's it's just and it's all projection with these people do and it's just it's really disheartening you know and then you realize that it's a house of cards yes exactly two dollars watching another one of those Adam Curtis documentaries they're done I watched it for the second time the the hyper normalization where the beginning of the beginning of the documentary it sets it up talking about New York City in the 1970s and it talks about 1975 when all the middle class had left New York City and it had become just overrun with homeless poor people pimps prostitutes corrupt cops and the politicians were having these monthly meetings with the banks issuing bonds in exchange for loans to help pay all the expenses to run the city and eventually one day the banks didn't show up they had a nine a.m meeting with the banks press was there the politicians were there they're all waiting nine a.m. comes the banks aren't there so they go oh we're gonna reschedule for 11 o'clock 11 o'clock the banks don't show up they go oh sorry we're rescheduling we're rescheduling for four o'clock finally at four o'clock the banks can't come in and they say we're not giving New York money that's when the banks took over from the politicians and that's when the banks took control of New York City and that's the same time Donald Trump came in and took advantage made a deal with the banks to basically take all this overrun all these overrun buildings and where what he used to do with his dad was basically turning out apartments doing section eight that kind of stuff for like normal everyday people like people who could actually afford to live in like a modest way middle-income type people he said I'm gonna take all these things and I'm gonna turn them into luxury buildings hotels that kind of shit so that was the moment explained in the documentary for what it's worth that it went from being what it was before 1975 to what it is now was when the banks took over and and then also Trump got like a one of the biggest tax breaks in history at that point was worth like a hundred and fifty million dollars because he worked out a deal with the banks to redevelop New York into this high society hub and redevelop all these buildings and like everyone that was living there was in such despair and now the same the same poor people that were living there in New York were now surrounded by like all this crazy wealth and fucking luxury resorts and hotels and shit everywhere but like they were somehow stuck in the middle of it and it didn't reflect their real lives and it started to become hyper normal and he made that comparison with what was going on in the Soviet Union before it collapsed how like everyone in the Soviet Union knew that society was falling apart the government wasn't real their economy wasn't real everything was fucking coming apart at the seams but they were just trying to get through the day and pretending like their lives were normal until all of a sudden it wasn't in 1990 when it was 1991 when the Soviet Union fell and it's so crazy because they draw that comparison with what was happening in Syria with Assad how Henry Kissinger went over there and basically made the deal and then he lied to Assad and then that whole thing happened and like basically created like the modern day terrorist and it like that's what it feels like in the United States right now because it feels like all the stuff that's coming out is like it's too crazy to be real but not really I mean us too yeah but even although we are talking about it it's our job which is very unusual but most people are going through the day like trying to like ignore it because you have to how else do you get to the day how else do you go to your job and take care of your kids and you know feed your feed your baby whatever whatever it is you do you have to ignore it there's no way to be sane and function in the society but this same exact thing these same exact things that you have to ignore are the long term kick in the can down the road over and over again problems that have created the bad realities that we have right now that are short term trends that we have to fix that need to not become long term trends whether that is the fact that people have to make a fucking financial decision to have a child today which is disgusting that that is what it is but that is a reality we need to get Julian Doris some kids I look forward any takers out there we got us we got a sperm donor right here with great hair we need some kids I don't think we can't go too much longer we don't need Julian Doris getting a robot fuck doll in the year 2027 we need as a wide range of robots fuck doll not having kids but yes I look forward to having a lot of kids with the right one good chains you know the whole bit but it'll be good for you got all set these jeans that's hard that so you know either way like having kids should not in any way be a financial decision it is right the college system being set up as it has been in sold in the way that has been sold and inflated in the way that it has been inflated to create this never ending fucking uncanceable debt on so much of society that could have avoided it in many ways or did not at the very least get the value out of it that they deserve to get is fucking crazy the expenses of everything whether it's a house that you bought like like my grandparents bought a house for I don't know $21,000 or $20,000 in 1976 that they still have today I don't know what it's worth it's probably worth fucking million who will not accept like penny less than one million oh no it's always worth a lot more than that for sure you know and I'm like that's a whole generation that got to cash in on that or whatever and you know what I'm not even fucking faulting the boomers for what that became but the fact that some of the power structures of boomers of the people who were in power who allowed to get it to this point to where someone you know you can't even be in a position by like I think about that all the time like I'm doing pretty decently on YouTube it's running a business so as you know there's enormous expenses I also live in New York so running the business there is more expensive for sure I can't buy a fucking house I don't have the money you're right at your apartment is probably more than what I pay for this place probably more right but like planning out your actual income and being able to do that and make that leap and get the place and have it and have the equity like that's crazy that's crit now I had no money three years from now but so I like I can remember what that was like and then I'm looking at the average income of the average American which might have been above that for sure because that was like at zero but you know either way it's not much and you'll look at neighborhoods they live in maybe some places a dollar goes a lot farther for sure it probably goes a lot farther in Nebraska than it does in fucking Essex County New Jersey for sure but either way like that American dream of like house white picket fence family of four you know decent school system that's a whole separate thing we just did a really cool podcast on what I want to tell you about all fair you know that's dead right now and it can be brought back to life for sure but I think I'm at the point at this moment we're like we have to admit that that is dead before we can actually go in there with the jaws of life because I think a lot of people out there and myself included for a long time were floating along like yeah it's gonna figure itself out no no no no it's not like the ship is left the station and some things got to get fixed now does that mean that like and I understand why the Biden campaign wanted to do this when they came in but does that mean coming in and saying we're gonna cancel all college dead and one fell swoop is fair to all the kids that then had paid off their college debt they got nothing from potentially doing something like that it's not it's not so you have to have some hard conversations here for sure but like does that mean that I don't feel bad for the kid who was half drunk signing a paper at 17 that didn't even know what a fucking dollar was that said you're gonna pay fucking 180,000 dollars for your gender studies gree and it's gonna work and now they're 30 and pissed off because they're still fucking 250,000 dollars in debt now and it's at seven percent or whatever it is and they're never gonna get out of it never gonna own anything they hate their job they hate their life like of course I feel bad for that kid yeah I was retarded when I was 25 what the fuck do you think I was when I was 17 you know so like yeah yeah there's there's there's some broken shit and oh it did Tim Dylan just had a fucking amazing ever seen everything he ran about every single oh he's been on fire gold it pure gold but he had an amazing rant was it jay Paul being the red huffer that was an amazing rant but that's not the one I'm talking about like I feel like the people in Kentucky fuck the check ball not doing it you know why he doesn't even live here like it was shout out to him chef's kiss but like he had this third temple jig Paul is the third time and he's like friends with jig Paul that's the best part he's like yeah we go way back but I feel like he's not running for a great thing about him too as he doesn't give a fuck he just he could be his friend he he turns down dinners with Peter Thiel just so he can talk shit about Peter Thiel on his show it's amazing I love that and respect that and I'm glad he's not friends with Peter Thiel but like you know you shit but that's the job of like the brilliant comedians we played the George Carlin clim like guys like Tim Dylan have pieces of that now where there were also the the gesture with serious cultural commentary done to an entertaining comedic lens and we need that yeah and it's like he had this one rant about the boomers accepting propaganda I know you saw and why they were okay with accepting their fucking eight o'clock news for whatever it said even if in the back of their head they're like maybe that's not what I think but la la la I don't want to worry about it because they could pay their bills they could get their house they could have their fucking cake and eat it too and now like I don't think it was the intention of boomers to feel this way on the average it's not every boomer feeling this way but on the average the result though has been that the boomers are like the first generation in mankind that threw their actions is not concerned about the world being a better place for their kids and grandkids as opposed to every other generation that's come before them where that's like their sole reason for existence trying to hope that the next generations have a better world again I don't think the boomers I mean maybe you know your fucking drunk uncle does but like most of the boomers they don't actively think that like yeah I want the world to be worse for my kids or I don't want to be a better place they're not thinking that like that's and that's not what Tim's saying he's making a funny joke out of it but like the actions that have occurred and the passive attitude to allow control vectors of society to come in and just be like you know what I can pay my bills I got my house I got my equity it's fine it'll work itself out that has allowed this to manifest to where now again we talked about those short term buses this that famous saying that Rogan always says the good times create weak men weak men create bad times right 100% and who are the boomers they're the profits in the for turning right exactly that first generation that grows up in the boom we just want everything bitch where the champions let's go bang bang bang everything's good times good times rolling by the time we get to college now we're gonna start looking in where but you know what we're gonna do it while we're on LSD and fucking out it would stock you know what I mean and so they have looking inward that's the key point and they were and in 1969 we were still on the gold standard too so they were still riding on that they got they got they're like the surfer you like surfing they're the surfer they're gonna get you as that way and you're not doing that will not Joey D sharp Joey deep's ready Joey D can fucking do it I don't have an insurance policy on him so he gets he man insurance on Joey D that's you know that's he gets he I know he's out there like fucking he's watching that listen right now what's up shout out to Joey D shit yeah shout out produce a deep but like out there in the Scarface lounge eerily in the center of this large echo chain it's a literal echo chamber out there yeah thank you like I was like walking around before you got here yesterday like Danny Joe but anyway you know what was I saying I forget remember oh it's poor turning yeah yeah yeah set of profits like they they were catching the wave in the surfer game of life like you know when you're right there because I did surf when I was a kid contrary to your opinion Jersey has another best surf in the world great surf in ocean city in New Jersey but like when you see that wave and you're like fuck I got a power to get there and you just catch it in time and then you rip it but the guy who was like fucking force drives behind you missed it completely the boomers of the people that caught that wave and then Gen X started to miss it more and then a millennial really started the messin and Gen Z is just fucked you know and then you wonder why why there's anger why there's indignation why there's generational fighting you know and that was it's just symbolic but we all know the famous the boomers they weren't paddling for the waves though they were getting towed into the waves on jet skis yes they had ski ropes and jet skis were pulling them in and now all the jes skis have run out of gas and we have to learn to paddle again yes and they had their top trying to buffet right before going out there with a full stomach and then we're about thrown out for sure you know but there's now a reaction of that and when there was that famous leaked call with the Israel situation where you had back in the end of 2023 we're Jonathan Greenblatt the head of the ADL we don't have we don't have we've been fighting this left versus right game prime example of the black pill by the way that is not the battle we have a tick talk problem we have a generational problem and he was referring of course in this case to like the Israel situation in the popular opinion on that but overall go way beyond like foreign policy of it as it contains the Israel and just look at everything it's a generational gap right it is it is less you know it may manifest in these left and right loud voices and it certainly does I'm not saying it doesn't you know but the generational problem is is the bigger story yeah yeah 100% I take a piss real fast yeah sure we'll be back I saw you I'm sharing the news that this county Pinellas County has the population here has been like cut by a million people in the last year a million people this used to be the second biggest county left no no no this is Pinellas is the number two most dense county in Florida number one is Miami right and this is number two actually it might be backwards this might be number one and Miami might be number two fine yeah we're leaving what are the most population dense counties but yeah on the I saw some of them that said a million people have left this county and probably all counties in Florida over the last year or something like that why I'm not sure why it might have something to do with like the residual people that came down from New York after the pandemic or just going back up north Pinellas Pinellas County is the most population dense county in Florida with over 3400 people per square mile due to its largest developed peninsula well Miami-Dade has the highest sort of population in general Pinellas hosts the holes the highest concentration followed closely by Broward yeah before I knew you and Matthew B Cox I had always been on the east coast of Florida I had been coming to Florida all my life but never hit the west coast it's a great area the west coast is I love I love I love these coast and the west coast has these coast to it's like you know there's different but you get it you get it comes a nice experience in every single part you get a Jacksonville you get a unique experience you get it fuck I mean Orlando's cool they got nice golf courses and shit but you know I mean most they don't feel like Disney or whatever then you go to you come here it's great you got a great wildlife here they got some of the best fucking seafood here the best fishing here you have the Everglades you have the keys I mean into the keys I've never been my cousin back a loves it that Florida keys are like the twilight zone bro it's a completely different universe and then you have Miami which is like hell on earth I love Miami yeah I can't spend like more than three four days there at a time because I feel like you're gonna leave with a criminal record well it's like it's kind of like Vegas like the best two days and going to Miami the day you get there and they leave but I think that's a little much but I like my I love Miami it's gross now it used to be it used to be great where where's it gross uh downtown where wherever we were we were in downtown Miami really never spent last couple times I've been there it's just been trashed I spent time on south litter everywhere yes Elpich is a little different yeah selfie John nice some me just go selfie just nice great breakfast great restaurants to great restaurants it's kind of like stuck in the 90s sure you know a little bit of it like a 90s vibe kind of old school not not a lot of chains what's that private island the Peter Thiel and Tom Brady live on you know I'm talking about in Florida is that a part of south he became that sounds familiar I have a friend who lives on keeps game yeah my buddy my buddy who uh films all those movies with uh who filmed all the parts of the Caribbean movies oh yeah the Pete to green yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah he lives on keep his game that's one of my favorite podcasts you ever did on the island on the island and on the boat yeah that was pure we literally jumped in the in the bay in this game bay and we were like swimming around filming all the fish and stuff like that see any Jones is a humble guy everybody but like this dude was trained by the number one underwater cinematographer of all time and did he's responsible for the entire movie dolphin tale like I am all 100% responsible for that movie like he was down there swimming with Morgan Freeman like no no I need you to the left you know what I mean yeah I remember I cried I was thinking about this the other day when I was uh one of the days we were filming that I was sitting on the side of the set with his stand in because Morgan Freeman wasn't always there he'd be sleeping in a chair off in the corner but his stand in was the shorter guy who looked just like him who didn't have a fake hand and he was standing there one day and I remember I cracked a joke or something like that and he was standing right there and I forget what the joke was and he looks at me and everyone was laughing and he was not laughing and he looks at me he goes are you being facetious and I was like what I didn't know what the fuck facetious meant I had never heard that word in my life I thought he was talking shit and they were like Danny Danny Danny go go get us coffee go get back underwater throw the goggles on oh man that's good oh yeah yeah but like Pete he did what he do life of pie oh yeah yeah he did all the pie works because he's life of pie yeah he is like he he did the dark into the blue right yes yeah he did into the blue with Jessica album and who's the other guy Paul Paul Walker the Clapto I heard someone told me that he he might have been a Clapto maniac but I thought I wasn't allowed to talk about that we literally I just brought that up on a podcast with thief like a forward list one off camera yeah a little bit kind of approach I've heard crazy stories about Paul but great guy friend of the show um Jessica album still got it though by oh yeah what was he gonna say oh no no Pete also did the most recent avatar movies he filmed all the fucking avatar please go yeah yeah that's next level pretty incredible life dude when your life is just literally building submarines for video cameras oh dude he also did the fucking um the harmony Korean beach bum with Matthew McConaughey have you ever seen that one no can we pull this up show any Korean beach bum so you know who harmony korean is no harmony korean's a director he did gummo he did um spring breakers he did beach bum breakers okay um he's like a legendary sort of like indie like weird deep film mixed one of my favorite filmmakers deep fuck well I got my bubble popped about him dude so let me tell you crazy story about harmony korean before you play this oh that's a great dream was one of my all time like top tier guests I wanted to have on the show he lives in Miami I know people who know him I know people who were friends with them um and I've had them trying to lobby for me for years I've always wanted to get him on the show we finally got a response from him we got one of our mutual friends got me a email and Stevie melden and he responded with a response that on one hand broke my heart and on the other hand made me respect him more than I could ever have imagined his response was Steve thank you for your email I could not be more uninterested in doing his podcast I look I appreciate the I like people that are direct like this is the beach bum we probably get copy written for this but also the red band trail and just heads up but and it's like one of those movies where it's not like he doesn't edit it like a movie he edits he edits it like um like one of those films that are not edited it's like just this long never ending no cuts really it's just kind of like this free flowing narrative you know what I mean it's so so unique but I found out one of my guests Travis kitchens told me he goes did you know harmony korean donated millions of dollars with the idea of I was like no he was doing so well he was doing so good he was doing so well it's no wonder he said he could not be more disinterested you look like the fuck yeah less but he's a clippick kirri out he's a fucking legend dude there's a story that he was on he was on David Letterman in the 90s I think for gumbo his first hit movie he was going on David Letterman and something happened what happened in the green room where basically they kicked him off the set they caught him in the green room like fucking going through somebody's purse and like doing a bunch of blow or something like that and uh very far walk room yeah yeah yeah and then they um they kicked him off the set of David Letterman legend highly recommend the beach bomb and he just did his new movie is actually all shot in it shot remember we were showing this their day it's shot in like night vision or something night fish dude he's like he's like redefining what it means to like make movies I like that he's like eat it on the cutting edge like just trying out the most insane new shit with his cameras and like how he shoots his movies and still able to get like a list fucking people in there well we need that too because there's been such a step back with quality films find the find the thing for his new movie too there were a few good ones last year but that was like the first time in a while where I'm like oh wow a lot all right there's a few options here they're like really well done but yeah you know that medium of created two two and a half hour movie to tell a full story in a world where people are getting used to 10 episode 12 episodes seasons that are five seasons long where you get to really know the nitty gradients and ounce of the characters stuff yeah yeah look this is what his new movie looks like you don't have to play the audio just like show what it looks like and it's shot in four by three it's night yeah Travis Scott You don't even have to play the audio just like show what it looks like and it's shot in four by three That Travis yeah, Travis Scott Wow I don't even know what to say to that. No, I know right interesting. It's just mind-blowing Yeah, good friend. It's the type of shit that just like sort of breaks your brain because you've never seen anything like it before That's right. You gotta try things Just don't do in the podcast like this Oh, this is um, this is called thermal infrared infrared there you go Like those drones that sucked up the airplane into the wormhole How was John the other day by the way? You just had him in here. He was great. Yeah fun as always He was as good as always You're podcasting and we're always classics But like I told you we sat down and he did the first 45 minutes tell me this crazy story Oh, the one you can for like 30 to 45 minutes and then I'm like that was awesome John Don't tell me we can't put that on there so you can't put it on there That's the thing like as nuts is the things you hear him talk about on camera or the stuff that that's off camera is bonkers it's like We in the last one we had our audio guy in there as well who comes into check out the audio sometimes when we have like a Something wrong with like the little static or whatever and so at the end John When on one of those rants after we have done with one of those stories and Phil should Dog will he gave you a scoop on your podcast? I'm like John you better not be coming in here without a fucking Sorry, unfortunately that age well he was upset about that when I came through the door It was obviously but he was 95% right about it and he was off by about three days, but you know I I knew went like when first of all I thought it was gonna be one of those We're talking about when John was basically saying the Iran war was ago and that they were on board And this was a week before it happened But he thought it was gonna be Monday or Tuesday and that was the one part I kind of even before camera I was like I don't he's got the state of the Union Tuesday I feel like he ain't going in Monday or Tuesday and Trump cares too much about the markets to do that But he might have done it if because when we got off air that day that Friday February 20th The fucking Mike Huckabee would Tucker interview dropped and he caused that huge fucking problem saying yeah I wrote that whole Middle East for a lot of care and then suddenly like even Saudi Arabia was calling up the White House Like what the fuck? You know the ambassador to US ambassador to Israel saying that is crazy But so maybe he would have gone in on on Monday or Tuesday But I still think it probably would have been the next weekend either way I thought it was gonna be one of those words I can't talk about that because he literally walked through the door and explained to explain the source the whole But he was pissed off and he's like I want to do it on camera And I was like what? You sure about that? He's like yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think so. I think so. I'm John Kerry I'm like I'm here to fuck shit up podcast and then at the end we'll do that and then yes, that was That was my favorite by the way, we're gonna start this podcast with one of those We're gonna have Julian walked the door, but like I'm Julian Dory and I'm here to fuck shit up Now that was one of my that intro edit was one of my favorites that I've done in a while because it's just like clit, you know You have him and me going back and forth about like if you were gonna fake Epstein's death How would you do it? Right? Just drops into John on the fucking steady cam or the vertical cam like hello I'm John Kiriyaku and I'm here to fuck shit up and he just turns around slams the door into the darkness Yeah Yeah, I thought that you convinced him there, but then I asked him yesterday. I was like so do you think Epstein? Still could possibly be still alive because no chance. I haven't talked to him about the latest stuff I've seen because we recorded that before I did this other stuff right That's another thing the photographer was there. That's another thing about John John Will as you know he will change his mind on things when he's presented with better evidence for sure and he will talk about it on air So I do want to see what he says when I go through some of this stuff with him what was Speaking of Saudi Arabia. What was this latest thing that happened with like they did a deal with a Ukraine? Did you see that? What? That might have been a fake Twitter thing But apparently half the should I see on Twitter's fake I see this fake stories I got to scroll down to see what Grox says But there was something I saw that said NBS went behind Trump's back and did a deal with the Ukraine or something like that. All right, let's see what this is Yeah, see we can find Steve He's gonna look at that thing everyone overlooks Ukraine. It's like people who fucking Dine there every day Yeah, all these years later and so oh yeah that one you created now This is a mutually beneficial deal with Sutter. What did women's this post in is their days March 26th? Yeah, okay So Keith which is built expertise on how to counter drone seals packed amid a run war Skilled down What's the first thing Ukraine says it's a sign of defense again with Saudi Arabia as golf countries continue to come under Iranian attack in the United States in Israel's war in Iran Of all the more lit ski who arrived in the kingdom on Thursday said on the exit an important arrangement has been made ahead of the meeting with the Saudi crown Prince Muhammad and Solomon What does that mean in English? Well, it means that I did this is the first time seeing it What I saw was that on X was that Trump didn't they did it behind Trump's back without Trump's like Seal up or of approval or whatever He's lost a lot of leverage He's lost a lot of leverage Especially with the Gulf states and deservedly so because did you watch his statement last night? I did not yeah, don't I go to waste of errors basically someone tweeted it out perfectly they said I forget who it was to shout out to whoever it was Sorry, I can't remember but they're like basically it was just a chronological Re-speaking of his true social tweets over the past two weeks. That's what it always is But this one was particularly Monetone boring and said a whole lot of nothing about nothing when they stopped ever as your channel to cut to the fucking thing and like The whole wink wink shadow Oh, I'm going to be a military whatever instead of a war when many Goes in the next interview and says I got a jengan on the words so weird man like What are we doing? I don't know and like What about continue? I don't I don't that's that question was gonna derail everything I was gonna send us down a rabbit hole. We were not gonna get out. I'll hold that thought I'm out of my tongue there, but like I really only have one thought here, which is that no one's No one who actually understands something about the situation not all the details But just something is arguing that like the Islamic regime the IRGC is great. That's not what it is They're terrible. They hurt their own people that's demonstrated even with some of the propaganda against them for sure Where it's exaggerated like they are what they are This has been an awful regime for 47 years, but like they've been a paper tiger again And again and again and it's not our job to go play world police for other people They're killing us not that's that's what that's what the biggest argument is when I talk to my parents when I say like They say how many Americans have they killed like I don't know how many Americans are they gonna go? How many of their own people have they killed like okay? They're they're literally trying to do a coup against their government and we're telling them to rise up and coup their government What happens when America tries to rise up and do a coup over their government? Boom. What does the American government do? How about they kill people? How about Scott percent running around Davos All right, the treasury secretary Back on you were he dude fucking bragging about all the sanctions he's putting on a run Which was going to send their currency to zero and put the people in the streets to rise up against the regime in which case The mayor was just totalitarian is therefore going to kill a bunch of these people and it'll cause A problem that will be beneficial to the United States and it's like So if you load the bullet for the psycho are you Innocent I don't think so that doesn't sound like a good guy Statement that sounds like someone who is very happy to be complicit in lies being lost if it means that You know we can get a little financial gain here. Which by the way, how does that work out Scott? How weird is it? Maybe not weird at all that Scott was sent used to work for George Soros who? percent Oh, I didn't even know that he yeah, he was on the fucking board of directors for this one of his first like main foundation How did I know that Google it type in Scott percent George Soros connection or whatever? I'm gonna tell you all about it also the problem with George He's everywhere. He's fucking everywhere fucking you can't hide everything time to mom Donnie mom Donnie He's tied to everybody bro. Yeah, like you can't he's tied to some of the same like you know in some weird way like a typical southern right wing Republican who's round against draw or sorrows And like somehow there's something that's within them that he's in and they may not in their defense They might not even know it right, but it's impossible to get away from mm-hmm Wow He sounds work for George Soros for decades most nearly as the partner and chief investment officer at Soros fund management that's not back door at all that's right through the front door Yeah, how door restraint the 1992 bet against the British pound black Wednesday. I don't even know what the fuck that is It was a currency war if I'm running on a later launched his own firm with two billion in backing from Soros in 2015 chief investment officer from 2011 to 2015 and have on that London office video do the video of him doing the interview and then walking away to go meet Trump in that meeting I want to know what the fuck was that I want to know what the fuck they saw in there, but like you know There's it's tough to like what do you even know what's real and what's not From over there in this AI era. We've already seen this with the Ukraine war where we don't know what's real And what's not now it's on a whole different level What's clear is that there's some severe reverberations that are happening around the world that we can see particularly Economically as well to where it's like oh, no, this isn't going exactly how they planned Like what does it look like? I'm not entirely sure. I'm not gonna sit here and say every video I watch I'm like that's definitely real. I don't know Like you were saying I'm a guy in a seat in America, you know what I mean I'm not in the fucking situation Like what did Scott see on March 13th when he was pulled out of that meeting I would love to know because he was fucking spooked I enjoyed him being a little spooked by the way I didn't enjoy what it could possibly mean though, you know because it could be a litany of things And then he went on to say something about His children going to fight trust them. He would trust his trust this president to send his daughter With his son. I think I think he said daughter too. Yeah. Oh, maybe I could be wrong Like my son is coming to the age who says that it was so weird. Who fucking says something like he's such a fucking he's a weirdo Apparently isn't he the guy that like knocked out Elon Musk like gotten a fist fight with him Number he was that hit that was the guy I think it was Scott percent. I know I didn't see that in him He didn't he doesn't by the way. Just that rocket launch yesterday Bro, I did I thought everyone was playing in April so did I me. I was like get the fuck out of here Then my mom pulled me about it. I was like oh, I would love to know from NASA Was there a technical reason that they couldn't do it on aug on April 2nd Like why did they have to do it on April 1st? Other than the most obvious fact is that it's all bullshit. We never went to the moon. Let's get Jesse Michaels on the case That's my answer Jesse guy he's No, you're not there listening. Go find out buddy. Shout out to Jesse find out find out why they fucking had to do that on April fools I know And you see the toilet broke on the rocket too. They broke the toilet now they're fucking flying around on their own shit up there The toilet broke they broke their anti gravity flying around dodging turds All those poor people. Yeah. I mean it is their lifelong dream. Yeah, and they're more you looking up Were you looking up something? Steve scheming back there. Oh What's this? Oh, no, this is different. This is the fucking okay So this guy is saying that's not a toilet this guy. No, no, no, this is a different thing This guy is saying that the fucking astronauts escape the rocket right before look punch full screen that oh Oh That's the fucking no that's the thing that goes down the zip line. This is why we can't have nice things This is why we can't have I mean that could be the janitor about to get 47 Who's missiles if you're gonna fake it you don't have to put him in there in the first place Yeah, like nobody knows if they're in there or not You just if you're gonna fake it don't even put him in there. You don't know But yeah, I was walking into the grocery store looking in the sky so I could see the rocket, but there's too many clouds 10 days It is crazy though, Danny Jones this war has been going on for five six weeks five and a half weeks whatever it is Yeah, and they have It has done the job It has buried much of the Epstein files for sure Defe and I are holding on to this stone age like like fucking tom tom hangs hanging out on the island Clinging the life and fucking mose that movie with Wilson cast away cast away We're just like one of the last frontiers talking about Epstein And it's it's what because like you knew it when they were oh, oh you had to do this right now right now yeah, right when you're in the middle all they shit and The dows below 50,000 members the days when we were Worried about just putting the word Epstein in the title demonetized right away on YouTube right away full 180 Oh by the way, this is one thing I will give the Trump administration huge credit for that still holds to this moment and when it changes I'll shred them But like there is no doubt that one of the issues that did see a 180 That we can clearly see across most topics at least Is open dialogue online? Yep. It has I'm not just talking X. I'm talking on all the platforms like There are things instagram's night is run by things that like two years ago You would have been banned in the kingdom fucking come yeah for putting on a lot of its comedy by the way Which I like but you know that is certainly that is certainly one thing that that has been a positive that I don't You know if if it's a Kamala Harris administration. I don't think that happens I don't so the question I was gonna ask you that's gonna send us down a fucking Third act let's go for two and a half hours into this we are yeah, we're not What do you make of Steve Bannon the other day saying net in Yahoo's kids should get sent to Iran They took a video of net in Yahoo's kid walking around his fucking balcony. Miami of his Miami apartment or fucking whatever like I said and how sweet Danny Jones I call it like I say at w Steve Bannon on that one and I'm the president longtime president of the Steve Bannon hate club But he's a hundred percent right about that Like that I know I know but it's not it doesn't Nothing's making sense with this dude With Steve Bannon with this things he says publicly and this thing is that we that we know that he's done and been a part of and people that he's been Like all of the emails with him next to all of his connections to Israel all of that shit like what the fuck is this guy? He's a fucking anomaly We don't need to see it. It's a Steve ban oh when I broke the news to Kurt massacre This is one thing Kurt actually didn't know like very rare for Kurt Metzger not know something But when I broke the news to him that Steve Bannon was like the chief finance ear for Seinfeld the hat The hat and glasses came off Anyways, just oh my god. I can't believe what I'm hearing right now I'm questioning my whole life Oh, yeah, I don't think it affected the content if we're being fair, but baby. I don't know Love Seinfeld, but you know guys like Steve Bannon in my opinion At least at some first of all Distorted the opinion is we don't even know past the ground surface of what it really is It could be a lot of different things. A lot of decision tree possibilities, but at the ground surface. He's a chaos agent Whatever his angles are I don't know Because it's like you said, it's all over the place one day. It's one thing the other day It's like that's a counter narrative, but like what is the purpose of a chaos agent? I genuinely don't mean this dancer at like an asshole, but someone to so chaos into the conversation who has a voice at the table of The people that listen that you seek to control and so with a guy like him I think if you could just spread narratives And get people to be religious like George Carla was talking about about these narratives You can then change them without people knowing you just turn the dial like you were saying with the 180 At the drop you get a married and yes, they'll follow you like a cult leader and that's the thing Cult is the root of the word culture which again, you know, that's kind of stretching You know, it's like saying like history is like his story. You man. It's not quite like that as far as I know check me in the comments on that but like Steve Bannon's a guy who has been obsessed with culture in his whole life and he has he's a very smart guy Never take that from me. He's a brilliant brilliant man but like Here's a guy who Wanting his main calling card quotes is like politics is downstream from culture Meaning it's not top down politics to culture. It's culture to politics and that led into the era of like Donald Trump winning Which was the Prime example of that coming to fruition where you had the fucking reality TV star celebrity real estate guy winning the highest office in the land You know and I don't know what the end goals are for that for Steve. I don't know who he works for I've just always been very confident Since I read Henry Abbott's work in 2021 We've discussed as many times. I've been confident and that age really well that March 2022 recording you and I did where we talked about this Like I just know Steve Bannon is involved with intelligence. Oh, I didn't need to see the Epstein files To know and again, that's an opinion like it's my opinion. Right. Like I think now I have a lot of evidence to be even more than I had in the past To be able to back it up. He finds his tentacles In the middle of everything Everywhere all at once over a three to four decade period perfectly timed with all different types of things that happen in culture Happens once coincidence twice. Maybe it's coincidence three times. It's getting interesting four five six seven ten times Comiting with you getting an office right next to the Oval Office in the White House is the chief advisor to the president This guy finance in Seinfeld 25 years before yeah It's just strange. It's just strange like I told you there was a couple nights when those Epstein files first came out where I was sitting in my on my laptop Coming through all of the emails on Jamie like I was Game of Thrones. Yeah, I read like fucking 300 emails from Bannon and the first 350 were Epstein just chasing him down Chase stalking him Are you gonna be in Miami? Are you gonna be in Lauderdale? Are you gonna be in New York? I'm in New York? Where are you can we meet can you meet me here? Bannon dodging him? Ducking and dodging him at every fucking turn for like the first few hundred emails for years Like literally like going out of his way to like Epstein sent him six emails Bannon responds with one one word email That's how it was and like it does it what's funny. It doesn't make sense like why If he was literally like if they were that tight and they were working together that much and Epstein was the one that was like in charge and had all this power and was manipulating things Why is Epstein chasing him down like he's some fucking Some prize because I think Epstein This is this is pure spec right now as deep and I say but I think Epstein Saw the potential of the world crashing in on him. I think he saw That the puck might not be going to the corner of the ice that he always thought it would be and I believe let's go back to the what Tucker Carlson described this as the system of the super government Supra su PRA. I love this like shadow government Yes, but he layered it perfectly right You know the layer of world leaders like the president Prime ministers of other powerful countries etc And the leaders of industry who are the ones who directly finance them that we can see We you know society always assume that was the top layer And what Tucker was saying is not only is it not the top layer. There's actually two layers about it The layer at the top is the people who really run the world the banking families and stuff like that I think the raw trial and the people that are very actually quietly in the shadows financing everything And then the layer in between them is the fixer class Which is filled with very powerful very wealthy people who you would think are just floating along and what is the third class? You know paying for the politicians or whatever, but really they just work for the top class the banking class on their behalf They're the Mike Erman trout Walter White thinks he's gone to Mike Erman trial What shows up in his fucking Lincoln town car and looks at him like he has 10 heads and says here's what you're gonna do Malacca Because he actually works for Gus Fring Right who is the banking families right so these people live under the illusion that they have power and so there's people that we can see Directly what class they're in and Epstein clearly was in the fixer class And then a guy like the president like Trump is clearly in the third class right there But then there's other people where it's like You could make the argument for all three actually like a Bill Gates I can make the argument for each layer for Bill Gates I'm not really sure where that land Steve Bannon's another one that I'm not entirely sure but I do lean towards he was also in the fixer class Really and so if he's in the fixer class and Epstein who's in that class as well Sees the world crashing in on him a little bit and here's a fixer who who was riding high at that time He just put the guy in the fucking White House Floating around the world had a very public name had a lot of people behind him who would believe anything he said if I'm Epstein He's my PR guy. He's a guy. I want to get on his side I'm not playing the left right game I'll but I'll use it if I got to use it and you know this is this spec I don't know but that to me that also stood out like how he was really trying to get around him And he would brag about this this there's a story they got wiped from the internet There's been a lot of this we've talked about this before we talked about it in 2022 We were on the show I was talking about how page six got wiped in the archives over the years But there was a story where Epstein The person writing the story. I think had interviewed Epstein in 2017 or 2018 I can't remember right after the weekend that he spent with Bannon Where he was bragging about going on camera with Bannon for 18 hours Which now we've only seen what two three four hours of it But there's apparently at least 14 to 16 other hours if Probably more than that But that we know of that's at least been reported by Jeffrey Epstein in the past with his own mouth I wish I could find that article it's gone, but it wasn't what publication wasn't I don't remember but I remember as page six I remember that that that's a different that's a different one because page six Archives some stuff is related to sightings and people who hang around and things like that. Oh two Flight time as well. I think that article was hidden for a while But this one was another article. I was reading it four or five years ago and I cannot for the life and we find it today, but There there's a email. I think it wasn't a text. I'm pretty sure it was an email We're banning an Epstein or going back and forth once they now have a relationship to where Bannon says you have a jihad against you the likes of which I've never seen and I've really seen some shit Yeah, and now he's clearly talking from a character clean up PR perspective with Jeffrey and to me I think it was like Hmm, what's a good example in in the real world among us that that I could Make here, but it's like when Trying to think of like an athlete example. Oh, you know what it's kind of it's like this when an athlete has been really great and They're starting to get a little older and maybe they're losing their fastball a little bit and Their buddies who are from their same era who are still great or playing on a team and they're like you know what I want to come join your team now You know like kind of like Carmelo wanted a Lakers to play with LeBron or something like that to try to kind of hang on there I think that's where Epstein was at and he viewed Bannon as like a LeBron at that time and I think he was Probably correct to do that, you know and again The best I can do is speculate here, but he's got such an interesting history. Yes. Steve has been You want to talk about a Forrest Gump. He's been the Forrest Gump of culture and work culture clashes with political ideology and society Since the 80s and again shout out to Henry Abbott who I just recorded with that episode is probably out now when this is coming out But I'm not sure it would be out right around the same time. You know, he had this man You know, I've talked about this for years. He had this in 2021. He's the one that really officially Bullblum blew the whistle on Steve Bannon for me because he made all these connections and then there were a couple connections I was able to make through other people after that as to place a Steve Bannon had been out It was like holy shit man like you don't get into the all those situations unless you're a part of it. I'm sorry You don't and he's not an idiot The only other explanations that he's just the most useful idiot of all time who happens to provide value at all these places where he shows up to be a useful idiot And that's not a good explanation. It's an insult to my intelligence right and if he's got so much money Why are the fuck is he still doing a daily podcast talk show and totally and with Matt Cox running ads in the middle of it title lock He's totally He's totally ignoring the situation What he's done since yes since that's why I brought that up in 2022 with the documentary I'm like he brought this out himself and said he's gonna release this big documentary and then now we won't do it Oh, yeah, we're gonna do it eventually and here we are four years later. It's the same thing Yeah, we're gonna do it. He's not even saying that anymore. It's gone right. Don't worry about it Remember that thing I showed you look over here now. It's not there anymore. Yeah, and that like again like the people that are still buying that are people that are just lost in And their ideology and he speaks their language and all that but this is a master cultural and media manipulator and kudos to the skills, but I've just always I mean you I've I've said it for years off air with you. You can vouch for this I think he's He's not a guy that I am jealous of people that they're in the room with him You know what I mean Like I remember you like flow him like hey, what if I got Steve Banner on I'm like don't give him my fucking number What happened if you saw him in an elevator? I I would fucking get off at the nearest floor and go to the take the stairs Which I know he's not taken. Yeah, he don't look like he's taking a lot of stairs in his life. Yeah He seems to be like I can't pin down like who he works for I Can't I can't I've had thoughts before and then it's like you don't but again Like who did Jeffrey Epstein work for I mean Dave Smith I'm not even saying he's right, but he had a great tweet right after this came out where he's like I used to think Jeffrey Epstein work from a saw it and now I wonder if I'm sorry for Jeffrey I don't really get that simple. I don't think they work for him But like there was a partnership here and also he had clear involvement more than I previously realized with CIA for sure Yeah, I'm very confident at this point that the evidence is showing that but like yeah Obviously he had the longest relationship with Mossad and there's something very weird and foul there and I mean the whole thing's foul but like you know But like, yeah, obviously he had the longest relationship with Masad and there's something very weird and foul there. I mean, the whole thing's foul. But like, you know, you don't know if the world is like this thing or that thing. And like we've joked about Andy Bustamante always, you know, saying whatever to all this stuff over the years and now he's doing that less publicly, even before like he did this thing on the Discovery Channel where he's going to wildly the other end. We've seen him at least like break with some small foundations, which I'll give them publicly over the last year or so with some things. But like I was talking to him off there when I was out there and I forget how he said it. He said it kind of perfectly. But he was like, you know, so Andy matter of fact about it. But he's like, yeah, the two wildest days at CIA, I'm paraphrasing here, were the day you found out how the world really works and the day you found out how you could exist within it. Mm-hmm. Something like that. And he's like that first day is a tough day, man. And he kept drinking his coffee and went on and talked about some different like it didn't really affect them. But like, you know, then you hear stories about like John Kiriyaku talking about when David Rockefeller comes in to back channel with fucking Saddam Hussein. Yeah. You're going to get a bomb up your little bomb up your ass. If you don't come back. You know, and it's like, forget history. There it is, man. There it is. And again, I've said this a million times like on different podcasts I've recorded, but I'll keep saying it because it needs to be said, there are things in the past that people presented that I thought either didn't have evidence at all or had bad evidence that I now will go to those people and say, I don't even care if you didn't have evidence not just like on the surface. You were more right than wrong about that. Or there is at least a good chance. Yeah. Or decent chance you were going to be right about some things that I would have previously in my fucking wishful thinking hoped were fucking insane. But like you see these emails, you seem to have my pizza, you seem to have my turkey, seem to have my grape soda. Right. Then I'm talking about the fucking food. What they're talking about is still up for debate, but it's dark. Yes. It's dark. I will say it. You want to talk about quacking like a duck, walking like a duck and fucking like a duck. It looks like they're talking about kids and the most disgusting vibe. Oh, I think the worst part about it is that I mean, not just that. But the fact that they dumped all that on the public without giving any analysis or explanation of, okay, what was the FBI's analysis of that? What did you guys come to it? What was your conclusion on what was going on here? Not just like release it with no context where it's like there's so much shit now floating around. It's impossible to know what's real and what's fake. And like now the conspiracies are blending in with reality and it's muddying the water even more fucking Duncan Truzzle had a great tweet I saw this morning where he was Burchette talking about UFOs and like aliens and shit. He's like, we can't release it right now because if we did, the American public would, they wouldn't be ready. They would lose their grip on reality and Duncan said here it is. Duncan said, the whole people will go insane if they know the truth is the most inadvertently condescending excuse for not spilling the bees. At this point, you could reveal we live inside the asshole of a space fish and most people would forget that in a few days. Spit it out. We want to come stop edging us. True. He might be right about that. Let me play devil's advocate for a minute on this because it's that I mean, as now we're getting to a whole different level. But when you're talking about like aliens and shit like that, now it gets to religious dogma around the world and it gets to can the information people cope with that bro. They people will. But what percentage won't there's something I think about a lot that like you've recorded hundreds of these. You know what I'm talking about. There's sometimes where someone will be in the middle of a random conversation and a guest will say some lines that are even if it doesn't stick with the people out there. You're in the room and you're like, whoa, all right, that's interesting. I remember my friend Alex Horowitz in episode 16 said to me, he said it way smarter than this. But this is a guy who was like employee number four at eight sleep. He saw the deep inner workings of like the VC world and high level tech brilliant guy, long time friend of mine. He was like, you know, they can simulate these outcomes. I'm recording this in 2020. And he's like, they can simulate an impetus that you put on society and say, if we did this, what does the reaction look like because they have all of our emotional data from social media at that point. They already did. They had enough. And maybe some of that was slightly exaggerated. I don't think it's exaggerated now in 2026 was six more years of data and way more AI as well. You know, and so the devil's advocate, Duncan, trustful who I am inclined to agree with on this point to be clear. And I want to know, right? And I think we all deserve to know by the way, but the devil's advocate is that they've simulated that and determined that there will be a mass existential crisis of religion, meaning and God or whatever. Yeah, that's what help put off said. That's what help put off said on road. And again, like he's a spooky person, you know, someone working from the inner symptoms of government, timber, chatters, someone who works in government. So you got to take it all with a grain of salt, but like just because their liars doesn't mean that once in a while, they don't tell the truth. I'd say that about Steve Bannon too. It's just, it's your best guess and my best guess when they're actually telling the truth because it's not that often, right? You know, so I, but people have just been exposed to so much noise and so much craziness that at this point were desensitized to it. And we're talking about people eating kids on islands. No. Yeah. Maybe aliens aren't that bad to talk about now because it's like, well, we dealt with that. Mm-hmm. You know, and fuck all has been done about it. All these no kings protest are fine. Can we get that same energy for like the fucking Epstein victims? Like, come on, man, you know, and it's it's it's it's so it's so frustrating, but you know, it's I sit back all the time and I'm like, are we all just cattle? And by we of course, including me, including you, all of us in it who aren't in those rooms. Mm-hmm. You know, because we got a microphone, though, make us any different. Are we all just cattle? Maybe. Maybe. And also, what am I going to do about it? Not much doing a little part talking about it here. Mm-hmm. I don't know, bro. This has been fun. Dude, it's great to be back. It's great to see you like you've been such a great psychiatrist for me. I was saying this on that. Cox has show as well over the years because like you understand it. You're in it every day just like I am and have been an amazing friend, incredible support system by the way. People don't see all the shit Danny Jones does without getting attention on it. But like, there's meant a lot to me. You're someone who bet on me really early as well. And like to come in here and I've seen where you're at watching it. from afar and talking to you every goddamn day. But like to come in here and see it and see your giant shed mansion with all your teachers and your probably $6,000 a month air conditioning bill that happens in here. I'm sure, you know, it's it's an amazing, amazing thing, man. And I've just always respected the fact that like you've done it all completely yourself since day one, like self made and everything you've ever done. And that is that is something I know you're like a really humble guy and you're never say that. But like I talked to people about that all the time who don't know your backstory. I'm like, dude, Danny Jones is it. Thanks, bro. I appreciate it. You have the best takes on all this stuff. You've been like the first day we talked, you asked me about Epstein. So like, so like it's pretty cool to see you going off on all this crazy Epstein stuff right now at the perfect time exposing all of it. Like you're the, you're the de facto. You're my de facto source of news on the Epstein stuff. I'll put it that way. All right. I met her that boulder or so we talked about you're doing awesome, dude. Super psyched to have you back in here. We'll do it again. Yeah, you got to come up and do mine. Yeah, I will. Let's go. I'm afraid to get on the plane right now to be honest, bro. Don't travel. You know, like Tim Dylan says. Yeah. We're in a war. Okay. If you want to travel, go to Syria and don't come back. All right, bro. Thanks again. That will.