Bishop Strickland, thank you so much  for doing this. What do you make of the closure of the Church of the Holy Supplr  by Israeli authorities on Palm Sunday? Well, really, Tucker, um I probably some things have  developed even since the last thing I saw, but it looked like they were deciding to open it  after all or whatever. Um, to me really Tucker, this comes down to a consequence of the the evil  that we see that we're witnessing. Um, and I think we need to pay attention to it in that context.  As we already discussed, the the largecale destruction of civilian life is is never morally  justifiable by any nation, by any entity, by for any reason. It's just not. And to me, the the  closure of the holy supplr, the holy side for us, there's so many in the holy land, but the closure  of that and the not allowing the procession of Palm Sunday is is a tragic consequence of just  how far off the mark really the world is at this point in so many ways and what's going on there.  We must speak calmly, lovingly, clearly that no, we can't allow this. And the closure to me  is just one of many tragic consequences where um the this has to be addressed. And we've got  to keep going back to that principle that the largecale destruction of civilian life can never  be morally justified. Amen. And I'm I'm glad to hear at least one religious leader in the United  States say that so clearly. I think that any believing Christian would agree with that as a as  a foundational part of the faith. Um, but you're hearing just the opposite. And I want to ask you  about that in just a minute. But but you're you don't seem like you believe that the Church of the  Holy Supplr was closed for quote safety reasons. Well, u I really don't know, Tucker. Um, and and  maybe for some making those decisions, that's the reason. But why is it why would it be judged  to be a place that is unsafe because of this chaos that surrounds it? Um so like I said I think  it's a it's a consequence of of everything we're seeing which is immoral and is destructive to  humanity in I mean and in very significant ways. uh you're a man of history and we all need to  be people of history. And if we look at history, these days will be marked in history as a very  devastating time similar to things that we can look back in the last 100 years, 200, 2,000 years.  that when these kind of moral um aberrations begin to just take over, we need to speak up. And  I really don't know um the motivation for the closure of the holy suppler. I mean, I can surmise  a lot of things they the the possible reopening or partial that I've heard about. I don't know if  even that's accurate. That's part of I know what you're fighting and what we're all fighting is so  much misinformation, so many false messages. It's really hard to know what what is true. And that's  why I think it's so important and I will be a broken record repeating we can never justify  the largecale destruction and devastation of civilian life um as morally justifiable. We can't  do that. And I think we have to keep going back to that home base with all the chaos that we're all  dealing with. I I think one of the things that we can say is that Christianity targeted or not, the  core tense of Christianity, whether on purpose or not, is often in the crosshairs. We know that  I believe talking to people in Jerusalem this morning that there were no synagogues completely  closed. Um and we know that the church of the holy supplicer was not closed during the last two  world wars. We know that the idea was to have um a Catholic leader and three others in there  for a live stream service and that was banned. So it's it's hard to understand how this was done for  safety reasons. And moreover, I wasn't aware that the government, the secular government of Israel  owned the Church of the Holy Supplr or by the way, the Dome of the Rock or or any other religious  building owned by someone else in East Jerusalem. I mean, where where does this authority come from  that you can just close someone else's church? Well, it I don't think it it is true authority  and it is it's you know basically totalitarian saying we've got the power, we've got the bombs,  we can do what we want. Um, and that is again as we look at history and we look at this moment  that is about as scary as it gets to to have that attitude and sadly we're we're seeing that  attitude. We are the ones with the power. So we are the ones calling the shots. Forget what  is moral. Forget what is true. Forget what is historic has historic precedent. I mean, you know,  I'm I'm sure both of us for several years now, I I get tired of the word unprecedented because  we hear it all the time, but we're living in unprecedented times. For all the more reason, we  need to go back to foundational pillars of life and faith. Of course, as a Catholic bishop, Jesus  Christ is that pillar that we keep returning to, listening to him, looking at the model of  his life, which flies in the face of anything violent. And that doesn't mean that he was uh not  addressing the the terrible issues of his I mean, you you mentioned you use the phrase in the  crosshairs. cross is where Jesus Christ died. And ironically, Tucker, and I'm sure it isn't lost  on you, that in my experience as a bishop and a priest, Holy Week is always a time where things  are in the crosshairs and it's different issues and different situations historically. But there's  something about Holy Week that calls us back to who is Jesus Christ? Do we believe him or not? And  if we do, we must morally be guided by his light. We must it it suggests that there's something  else going on here. Um perhaps influenced by the spiritual war ongoing around us that Christians  would be the target since it is at its core a religion that opposes violence against innocence  and the destruction of innocence. And so here, I mean, a totalitarian regime, at least  as you think of it in your mind, or I do, targets violence against its enemies. It's,  you know, the threats. There's nothing less threatening than four Christian clergymen standing  in an empty church live streaming the sacraments, but they went after those guys. So, what does that  what does that tell you of all the enemies? Why are they really really Tucker? Uh what it tells  me is that truth is threatening. And if you think about the drama of Holy Week, which we in the  Catholic faith are in the midst of, um, when Jesus Christ is before Pilate, and that is historic  reality for whatever your faith perspective, this Jesus of Nazareth stood before Pilate, the leader  of the Roman Empire that was stationed there in Jerusalem. And Pilate says, "What is truth?"  and the the mob that was there, Pilate himself, everyone was threatened by this Jesus who we know,  we believe um is truth incarnate. He is the truth and as he's standing there really Tucker, I think  that is what's threatening to those who are not living by the truth and humbly seeking the truth,  which we all have to do. I don't claim to have it all figured out, but I look to Christ because he  is the truth. For those who are promoting all of these things, closure of holy sites and attack of  innocent people, they are definitely threatened by the truth. Not by some propaganda, but by the  real truth. They find it threatening. And to me that really what Cardinal Pizzavala and the others  were going to try to do just a live stream very small scale really that was threatening because  it's about proclaiming truth that really begins to cause people of good hearts whether they have  faith or not. It causes the human instinct to say, "Wait a minute. What's going on?" When they hear  truth, that is disruptive. Not in a violent way, but just because truth cuts through it all. That's  what they're afraid of. I truly believe that. So, we're still in the middle of Lent, inching  closer and closer to Holy Week, the days leading up to Easter, when we are called to walk  alongside Jesus through his suffering, his death, and then finally, gratefully, his resurrection.  And there's never been a better time to commit to more prayer. If that sounds worth pursuing, we  sincerely recommend downloading the Hallow app, which we talk about every morning at breakfast  in my house. Hallow offers thousands of prayers, meditations, music choices to help draw you deeper  into the passion and listen for God's voice. Jesus died for every person, no exceptions. This month  especially, remember his sacrifice. Download Hallow today to connect with the Lord on a daily  basis in a way that you will not forget. We are completely hooked in my house. No kidding at all.  Literally every day we talk about it. Lots of apps or time wasters. Hallow is the opposite. Get three  months free at hallow.com/tucker. We sincerely, passionately recommend it. One of the truths that  seems the most threatening is that violence is not the answer. And so that Yeah, I'm sorry.  Well, the power of the world isn't the answer. That is what threatens them and that's what they  don't want to get into the hearts and minds of just everyday people. They don't want that word  to get out there that war isn't the answer. Sometimes it I mean the the church the Catholic  Church has a doctrine of justifiable war which is pretty strict and pretty clear and probably very  few wars uh have qualified and there's serious questions about this war. I I think it's pretty  much unqualified. Um but that's what we have to keep looking at. look at the principles and  and really Tucker what I would encourage your viewers and all of us I mean I'm just one of  the viewers in many situations I'm a bishop who doesn't even have a dascese anymore but I do have  a apostolic call that I take very seriously and I say to myself to you Tucker as a good man seeking  truth and all of us who are are in this we need to take a breath we need to calm our hearts and  we need to simply seek the truth. I believe and I feel compelled to proclaim to the world. We  know the truth. The truth sets us free. It's Jesus Christ. And certainly that was the threat  that the Romans and the Jewish leaders wanted to get rid of. That's historic reality. They plotted  to rid themselves of this truth problem. And in in many ways we see the same thing repeated. I mean  it gets masked in a lot of ways but yes all and I pray daily for the leaders of the world for every  nation for leaders to who have the power and the responsibility in this moment to go back to those  basic principles. They need to take a deep breath and ask themselves, is this true? What what I'm  promoting, what I am doing, is it about the truth that sets us free? And when we ignore the truth,  that is when we are the most bound by violence and evil. And we're seeing it. It played out in our  lifetime right in these moments on the TV screen, on our phone screens, on the airwaves. We're  seeing ignoring truth has consequences. And it comes down to each of us individually. When  we ignored the truth that I am a sinful man who needs to repent and I need to seek the life that  is Jesus Christ. When we try to to hide that to ignore it to eliminate it, it doesn't go away.  It will not be eliminated any more than killing Jesus Christ on a cross in the first century  eliminated the truth that he is. Truth will not be eliminated. But a lot of innocence can be  harmed when we think we can avoid the truth and do it our way and do it with our power when we go  down that path. It's destructive in so many ways even to those individuals that are doing it. But  the tragedy is there's so many innocents that get lost in it. Um that we must speak against innocent  lives being just you. The the term is collateral damage. But that in itself says we have to be  very careful about allowing our hearts to hearten that we just used terminology for innocents  dying. Oh, they're just collateral damage. May May I ask you to go back for a second as a  Protestant myself who's often heard the term just war theory which I think derives from Augustine  but I could be wrong. Um can you summarize that for people who aren't familiar with what it is  just in broad terms? What's a justified war? Well, there are four basic points and I can't  claim that I can get all of them as you know it's it's pretty simple most of the time the  truth is pretty simple but it has to be the just war theory is based on if war which should  be avoided if at all possible if it is to be justified it has to be proportionate it has to be  no it can't be preemptive it it it really Tucker goes back in a lot of ways to the right to  self-defense. The right to self-defense of one person, the right to self-defense of a nation. Uh  that is really the core of the just war theory. It has to be a real threat, not a perceived threat,  not a future threat, but a real threat. It has to be in proportion. I mean, you know, putting it  on the the just personto person context, I mean, somebody slaps you, you don't shoot them. That is  not proportional. Yes. It has to avoid harming um innocents that are really have nothing to do with  whatever the conflict is in any direct way. Um and and so those basic points are what you have to  look at. It has to be it has to have a reasonable um expectation of success that this will  accomplish the protection of innocence that it should be about. Um those points are what  we have to keep looking at. And like I said, um there probably aren't many wars in human  history that would qualify as meeting all the criteria. Some meet more than others, but  I don't know that this present conflict, they're not even calling it a war. And I think  that tells us something. But it this present conflict I don't know that it qualifies on any  of those points because yes there was some threat there but was it justifiable to immediately um  address that threat which seemed to be a future threat that may have been very real. I don't claim  to know all of that, but I think the leaders are challenged to really look more deeply at that.  And certainly the the idea that of protecting innocents honestly I mean and again I haven't been  in any war rooms or or heard the real discussion but it it it seems and what we're seeing it's like  we can expect and we can plan for the collateral damage which should be always stated as we can  plan for innocents to die because of this action. um because that's what collateral  damage really is talking about. Um so that I think is a reasonable probably not  the most scholarly uh exposition of the just for theory but those are the basic points and again  if if people say oh that gets too complicated just think about defending yourself defending  your home defending your family you can't go out and you know you have a neighbor that's talking  crazy and go and put a bomb in their front yard I mean that's not proportionate. That is not  reasonable and it it has to be something that is a reasonable and and I think one of the one  of the greatest uh points of the just war theory is it going is it likely to be successful? Is it  likely to have an outcome that brings more peace, more protection, not just to the individuals  that you're specifically responsible for, but brings it to the world. And so I think that  we've got to honestly assess what is happening and and acknowledge that no nation seems to be really  and and I love the United States. I I was raised as a patriotic kid. I still believe in a lot of  the principles but when we lose sight of the basic principles of our founding as a nation or as of  our faith of Christianity or whatever our faith is those basic principles have to guide us and we  can't allow popular popular opinion or political agendas to override those basic moral values  that should be the pillars that found us that sha that stabilize everything that is shaking in  the world today. A lot of people hesitate before getting traditional therapies for cholesterol  health. They don't want to wind up stuck on capsules for the rest of their lives. Pills they'd  rather feel like they have some say in how they take care of their own bodies. And that's why more  Americans are turning to more gentle alternatives with ingredients they recognize. Ingredients like  ginger and pomegranate. One of those alternatives is a dose for cholesterol. Dose for cholesterol is  a clinically backed cholesterol support supplement that targets triglycerides, LDL, HDL, and total  cholesterol levels. We know a bunch of people use it and the results have been overwhelming. They no  longer fear having blood work done because at last the results are good and they're not on some kind  of weird chemical cocktail. It actually works. We wouldn't partner with them if it didn't work. Dose  is easy to use. It's a daily 2 oz liquid shot that tastes like mango. Ooh. No capsules, no powders.  It's seamless to use. Visit dosedaily.co/tucker. Use code Tucker for 35% off. That's  dosedaily.co/tucker. Code Tucker for 35% off. It's worth it. So this morning, the president of the  United States, whom I campaigned for and defended daily for 11 years, not attacking him, but he  issued a statement um threatening to destroy the civilian infrastructure of Iran, including the  desalinization plants and energy grid of Iran. And that seems to be a threat against innocents. I  don't know any other way to read it. Um, how would you how would you assess that? Is that consistent  with a just war? No. And as you said, Tucker, we have to acknowledge that it is to directly do  that is is wrong, is immoral. Going back to that basic principle I started with. Anytime civilian  life is devastated, it's not morally. It's not done morally. It's not something we can just turn  a blind eye and say, "Well, we got to do this." Um, the largecale destruction of civilian lives is  never morally justified. Like I said, I I if I'm a broken record making that point, I believe I need  to be because the more I think about that, the more I pray about that, the more I look at what's  happening, it says, "Let's put a stop to this. Let's pull back from this." And I understand from  you know what I see in the news that there are efforts of of talking about some sort of solutions  but the talk seems to always have much less focus and much less power behind it than the bombs and  the the destructive forces. Um, I guess that is, you know, by human nature, maybe that's somewhat  natural that when you've got the power, it's hard to restrain yourself from using it. We see that  played out in so many ways. But that is where the moral values have to kick in for the individual  man or the individual nation and the leader that is a a man or a group of men or women and women  that are leading a nation. They need to constantly go back to those principles and asking themselves,  is this justifiable? Is this something that is moral to do? And if it's not moral, then we should  just put up a big bright red stop sign and say, "We're not going to do this because it is morally  questionable, much less clearly immoral." And when we go down the path of saying, "Well, we've got to  do some immoral things." I mean, it's like the end justifies the means. I mean some basic principles  of of philosophical logical thought that have guided nations and individuals through history.  You know if if we get on a path where we say the end justifies the means then the means can become  so immoral that it's just devastating for not just the individuals or the nations involved but for  all of humanity. We've got to be very cautious about going down that path. And I I'm afraid  that many of the things that we've seen have have crossed that line of just saying we believe,  yeah, this is evil. Okay, it's evil, but we've got to do it for the good end. That is very dangerous  territory. Also common, I think. I mean, people, as you said, who have power tend to misuse it. An  often noted phenomenon because it's true. What's different, at least in my lifetime, is seeing  self-described Christian leaders not only defend violence, but attack anyone who questions its use  and then use the Bible to justify it. That So, I guess what I'm saying is one of the battles  here is over what Christianity is as a faith. And that seems to me a very important uh battle.  Okay. Certainly a conversation. So what you're seeing some Christian leaders do is say, "Well,  there's violence throughout the Bible." And God justifies it. In some cases, defends it through  what the Christians call the Old Testament from beginning to end. There's violence against  innocence. So it's therefore okay. What is your response to that? Well, Tucker, um quite  simply, probably not surprising, my response is Jesus Christ. Yeah. Um if we claim, which I do,  and I do my best. I mean, I'm a sinner. I mess up all the time. We do individually if we're smart  enough to be humble enough to acknowledge that we as nations and we as individuals, we get off  the mark. We mess up. But we can always repent of that and seek again to follow the truth that is  Christ. And that's the distinction that I would make. If people are calling themselves Christians,  we are of the body of Christ that is his church then and we have to look to him. Yes, in the Old  Testament there are there are many examples of destructive power but that is is not the world  that we live in. We believe that Jesus Christ has redeemed everything. And one of the key points  of Jesus Christ um and St. Paul says it very well, we need we are neither Greek nor Roman. We  are not individual nations. We are Christian. And to use Christianity as a weapon against one  part of his body to another part of his body is that's a misuse of the message of Jesus Christ.  If we look to him, I mean he died on the cross because he embraced that freely as a man and as  the son of God, but he was willing to do that. He was willing to personally receive the greatest  violence of destroying his body and his human life for the sake of the peace that he brings. And if  we look to Jesus Christ, we can't justify the the violence that we're seeing. Um, you can hearken  back to the Old Testament, but if you believe Jesus Christ is the new covenant that he I mean  he came out of that world of the Old Testament, he is he of Hebrew origin and we should embrace  that. Absolutely. That is historical reality. But he came to bring a new covenant and to bring  a redemption of all of that. And just just one example of what Christ if we look to Christ he's  often saying yes we used to do this but this is the new way that through the father sending me  to you is being revealed. It used to be an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. That cannot be  that way with us. He says to his disciples and we have to really listen to that. We may not like  listening to Christ himself, but that is what we're called to, especially if we call ourselves  Christian. That is probably, as you point out, Tucker, one of the greatest issues that we have to  face now because there are many non-Christians in the world. Um, and for Christianity to be really  co-opted and hijacked in the way that we're seeing um, is is destructive to the message of truth that  is Jesus Christ. Because I I can imagine people are saying, "Well, if this is what Christianity  is really all about, I've had considered it, but I'm not going to even look at Christianity if  that's what it's about." It's not what it's about. But when voices are saying we can go again  going back to that basic idea of we can destroy civilians violently and in in drastic ways and  say that it's moral because we're claiming to be Christian. That's nonsensical and it it's as it's  as offensive to Christ himself as anything could be. He is a man of peace. And that it doesn't mean  just let yourself be run over. But real peace is about respecting the our lives and the lives of  others and always seeking without violence to embrace the truth that sets us free. So I guess  what I would say to Christians that are claiming u sort of Old Testament justification show me that  in Christ and they're not going to find it. So it's rare these days a company that actually makes  things here in the US not just designed here or assembled here. Actually manufactured here start  to finish in the United States. Brooklyn Bedding builds every mattress in their factory in Arizona.  Not in the Far East in Arizona. No middlemen, no cutting corners, no outsourcing to save a buck.  The founders started with nothing. No degree, no corporate backing. Just learned the craft,  built a factory, created a product that actually works. That's the American story. We ought to  support it. And we do. And here we love the Thermo Balance mattress collection. It's made a  huge difference on the quality of the sleep of a lot of people who work here. No more waking up  hot in the middle of the night thanks to their cooling technology. Your back feels better in  the when you wake up. They're endorsed, in fact, by the American Chiropractic Association. So, it's  not just marketing, it's real. They'll give you 120 nights to try it out. That's a lot. If you  don't love it, they take it back or swap it out. No hassle. That's how confident they are. Visit  brooklyn betting.com. Use the promo code Tucker at checkout for 30% off sitewide. This offer not  available anywhere else. It does seem like this is an effort to co-opt Christianity and change the  world's understanding of Jesus. And it seems like Holy Week maybe is particularly hard for people  who want to do that because the whole message of Holy Week is the opposite. I mean, you're the  theologian, but I think Jesus is coming into Jerusalem at a time when it's occupied by foreign  pagan authorities. They're oppressing the people of Jerusalem. And a lot of people watching assume  Jesus was going to liberate the city in some using force. He was the king. But he doesn't come in  on a waror. He comes in on a donkey and then submits to being tortured to death because the  victory is larger than a military victory. It's a final victory. It's a spiritual victory. And  that seems like the message as a you know as a non- theologian Protestant that seems like a very  clear message. But you tell me is that is that the message? Tucker, you are spot on. And that's why  I mentioned earlier in our conversation, Holy Week is is a week of drama and it's a week of waking up  and realizing the real message of Jesus Christ. I mean it the whole passion story of Christ is the  the elements there. I mean we have Judas a Scariot who why did he betray Christ? I mean, I don't  claim to be able to read his mind or his heart, but the indications are he betrayed Christ  because he wanted the kind of military leader that many wanted. Christ's triumphant entry into  Jerusalem um is it it's a very interesting scene that we need to con constantly go back to and  look at in terms of what's really going on. Um just before Christ as recorded in scripture, just  before Christ enters triumphily into Jerusalem, the the verses are talking about the authorities  seeking and plotting to assassinate Lazarus, the one he had raised from the dead. And so one of the  which is one really one of the most it's described in John and it's one of the most amazing passages  in the entire Bible. Jesus has just raised this man from the dead 4 days after his death. One of  the amazing things he did. The guy's alive and the religious authorities want to murder him. It's  like Sorry, excuse me. It's amazing. It it really is. And it it it the drama is right there. We  have to see it and recognize the way it continues to unfold in our lives. I mean I don't want to  label anyone Judas a scariot but we need to to ask ourselves every one of us and I include myself we  have to be very careful and ask are we beginning to move in a direction that Judas's scariot would  have approved when we are saying we want hail Jesus uh hail to the son of David but we want to  shape the son of David according to our agenda. That is where it gets very dangerous and it  it culminates in in destruction for Judas's Scariot and apparent I mean real destruction  for Christ because he is truth because he is God's divine son. What the world can throw at him  can't destroy him because he's beyond creation. He is beyond. He is the lord of creation. But he  allows it to happen out of love for all of us. And you know in the the con I mean it's just so rich  with images that can be beneficial to all of us. But for us to hear Christ in this time, in this  moment in our history, for the world, for this nation, for the Catholic Church, for Christians,  to hear Christ say to those who are literally in the moment, nailing him to a cross, killing him.  Father, forgive them. They know not what they do. to have that kind of mercy and compassion in  your heart is and we've seen some saints that have have echoed it. St. Steven the first martyr  echoed his lord in saying that. That that that is again going back to where's the threat that is  a very threatening sentiment when you think when we think when the world thinks that the powers of  the world can ultimately prevail to hear the man being destroyed by the world saying father forgive  them they know not what they do it reminds us that we've got to retune our hearts and our minds to  the message of Jesus Christ and to face everything we're facing. That is it it it it's like Holy Week  being played out again at large in our time. The the the hidden messages and the the plottings and  the confusing. I mean, here we have things being hailed as wonderful and then underneath it under  the the underbelly is a darkness of plotting the the destruction of innocence and the destruction  of of lives that really have nothing to do with this. So once again I go back to that idea of we  have to I mean the gauge has to be the largecale destruction of civilian life can never be morally  justified and you know with Christ I mean it was one man but in terms of reality in terms of the  universe trying to kill Jesus Christ son of God Jesus of Nazareth killing him. I mean they were  successful in killing him. He died on the cross. But that is largecale destruction of innocent life  of civilian life. And that is the principle we just have to keep going back to. um to keep really  looking through looking at everything through that lens and urging the leaders of Israel, the leaders  of the United States, the leaders of Europe, the leaders of the world to come together  and to listen to the words of Jesus Christ, even those who don't believe him, because they  are true words, they resonate in hearts. if people will just listen and really open their hearts to  what he's saying. I mean certainly I believe the world will embrace Jesus Christ before it ends.  That is prophecy and that is logic when the world will embrace truth and not everyone we're all left  with our free will and that is I mean the free will of the individual and large the free will of  nations. Um, and we see that in Old Testament. God doesn't necessarily stop the free will of nations  or individuals from doing something that God knows is contrary to truth. And the consequence of  ignoring the truth really, I mean, we can see it as God's punishment, but really it goes deeper  than that. It's simply in conflict with reality. And when we oppose the truth, we're opposing  reality and it the consequences will follow. Maybe not immediately, but the consequences will  catch up with us when we ignore truth. And Tucker, I know that the people that you interview  as as your life, your career, your your good work of doing your best to share truth. You're  constantly talking to people who have themselves lived through the consequences and hopefully  awakened to the reality. I've got to follow truth. When we ignore truth and it I mean it it's in  countless ways in our society today but when we ignore the truth we get on a path that brings us  harm and sadly can the more influence we have the more that path involves other innocent people  the more we can bring we can bring destruction down on the heads of the most innocent when  we decide I'm going to going to consciously deviate from the truth because I've decided  I know better. That should be a huge caution ultimately stoplight for all of us. be very  careful about going down that path because we've seen it in history and we see it in our time.  When the individual says, "I'm somehow above or outside the truth," then they may prevail for a  moment, but it will always come to destruction. There was a controversy six weeks or so ago  around a woman called Carrie Peen Bowler who was a member of the president's religious liberty  task force. Um she was expelled from it. Really I from my reading for two reasons. One um she  called attention to the deaths of innocents in Gaza and made the point that their lives  were as valuable as anyone else's. And two, she refused um the basic tenants of Zionism,  political Zionism um and said that she didn't have to sign up for that as a Christian and  she was expelled for that. And there were a number of religious leaders, Christian leaders who  approved of her expulsion and in fact who made it possible. You weighed in on this. Um can you tell  us why you why you did that and what you said? Yeah, thank you, Tucker. Um, well, really again,  you know, I'm a simple guy and it comes down to basic simple truth. Ultimately, truth is simple.  Yes, it's deep. It's rich. It's hard to fathom, but it's not complicated in the way that our  world is so often complicated. As you said, I think Carrie was removed because they didn't like  the truth she was speaking. The truth about Gaza, which is verbotened by many. Uh the innocents that  have devastatingly died there is just horrible. It truly is a holocaust of our time. Um, but she was  they didn't like that truth and they didn't like the truth of her pushing back against the agenda  that is saying this political Zionism is something that Christians need to embrace. No, it's not. And  the Catholic Church is very clear from everything that I've seen. I had a conversation with Carrie  before I put out my statement. And uh I had the conversation because I was hearing things and I I  just wanted to really my intention with reaching out to Carrie was just to be a pastor and to  offer her some support and some consolation. In the midst of that conversation, she basically  challenged me and asked me, "Bishop, if if what you're saying, you really believe um your message,  my message to her, if I really believed it, would I was I willing to publicly speak it." And  and I told her I would pray about it and I would consider it. But even as I told her that I would  pray about it, I knew in my heart that, you know, I was, as we say, sometimes Christians say, I was  convicted. I I knew that that if I was going to be the man I wanted to be, if I was going to be the  Christian that I want to be, I had to speak up um and to to not attack anyone, but simply say,  you know, and what I tried to do in a rather several more words than this, but basically was  say Carrie was removed from that committee because she was speaking truth. that the powers that be  didn't want to be spoken and because of that we I felt the need to speak out for her. Um you know  I don't think Carrie claims to be a a sinless some sort of perfect woman but she was right in what  she was speaking. uh you know people can say I mean very often and I know you hear this all the  time um you know people will when they don't like the truth that's being said they'll very often go  after the tone and and it's human to for the tone to get a little elevated when we're speaking  truth that especially when it's being opposed I know I can personally confess that sometimes I  that happens we can When we're facing push back against something we know deeply in our hearts to  be the truth, we can hopefully not get violent, but we can get very animated in how we're doing  that. But and I think that that's what people really pretty cleverly will say, "Oh, well, it  was the tone." Well, yeah, sometimes the tone, but sometimes it may be appropriate when truth is  being ignored. we need to get attention sometimes and again looking to Christ as the model. Um  I mean he said love your enemy but he also was willing to call a spade a spade. And when the the  leaders that he was speaking with were clearly not in the line of truth, he was willing to to get  pretty animated in the way he spoke to them and said things like, "You brood of vipers." I mean,  I think that was actually John the Baptist, but Christ said those kinds of things to the leaders  because that's what truth demands sometimes. it. We should not return to violence in order to stand  for the truth, but we should do it with vigor, with strength. And to me, that's where where  Carrie was rejected primarily because they didn't want her to speak that truth. And they,  you know, as as and you've seen it. So, well, you're I think you're an example, Ducker. I mean,  you you were a man speaking truth and they tried to silence you. Carrie was speaking truth. They  tried to silence her and ultimately it backfires. When it's when it is truth when a when someone or  a group is speaking truth trying to oppose that it does backfire. I think of Galiel in the Acts  of the Apostles a Jewish leader who said you all need to be careful. If if this is of God you'll  find yourself finding God. If it's not of God, then it'll go away on its own. What GLiel is  saying, truth lasts. Truth prevails. Truth continues because of the essence of what it is. It  is truth. And we see that over and over again when truth is being proclaimed and whatever powers  of the world try to squelch that truth, try to silence it. So often I mean Jesus Christ, what  is the whole drama of Jesus Christ? The world, the powers that were in the first century tried  to eliminate him. And where are we now in the 21st century? He is still that voice of truth that  can and should guide us. So Carrie was removed as one voice echoing the truth that is Jesus Christ.  She was removed because of that and look what's happened. Her voice has grown. I had no idea  who Carrie preaching bowler was before she got removed. And then I end up making a statement  about her. That is a beautiful example of what we all need to remember for ourselves in our  personal journey against sin and death. And in the global journey, we need to remember if it's the  truth, it will come out and it will prevail. So, we better do our best to stay with the truth.  I love the image of the plum line of truth that comes from Old Testament prophets to to stay with  the truth. I waver. I weaken. I'm a sinner. But I do my best to return to that plum line of truth.  And that's what we need to do as individuals and as nations. We need to constantly be willing  to challenge ourselves. Am I in whatever way avoiding or trying to obfiscate the truth? And  to the degree that I'm doing that, I'm sinning. I repent. I ask forgiveness and I get back to the  truth. What kind of response did you get to the statement that you wrote about Carrie preaching?  I'd have to say overwhelming. I mean, I've been on X even when it was back when it was Twitter. Um,  and I've had some things that I've said that have gotten significant response. Um, you know, I don't  even know what you call the numbers that you see, but whatever the the biggest number there is  close to a million at this point of people. Um, and sometimes those numbers don't all necessarily  mean that people are in agreement, but the vast majority of people have said, "Thank you for  being a bishop, a successor of the apostles that was willing to speak to this." Um, and you know,  Tucker, over and over again, and I can imagine, I mean, you're in a in a large, you have a big  voice in today's world, and I know you know that, and and I know you do your best to take that  responsibly, which we have to. I'm the first to be surprised to have a million acknowledgments of  what I've said. For the most part, very positive. So, the response has been tremendous. And it it's  I mean the words I believe the words that I posted I believe they came from prayer they came from  real consideration of the truth that I believe in but it wasn't my words that people are really  responding to. It's truth. People are hungry. They are starving. There is a a a worldwide famine for  the truth. Thankfully it's there. We can find it, but we have to fight for it sometimes. And  that's what I saw in the response is people are grateful when a voice and you know I and when  Carrie and I spoke, you know, it God has blessed me in tremendous ways and really Tucker, I mean,  we've never met, but I see you our story is very similar. Um, you they tried to cancel you. I mean  back in in the culture when people speaking truth were getting cancelled and what has happened your  voice has grown and I think it should thankfully I mean I know you're not the perfect man but you  are a man seeking truth that's how I understand Tucker Carlson and because of that they tried  to they fired you and they tried to eliminate your voice and that voice has only grown the same  thing for me I'm a bishop removed from his dascese And my voice has grown. I mean, I still  I'm in the the kid from East Texas, but my voice of doing my best to be faithful to  the truth and to be willing. And that's I think where both of us can stand together. We've been  willing to speak the truth when it wasn't popular, when it was sometimes um threatening to to be  to be further consequences if we stay with that voice of speaking the truth. But I think both of  us in different ways, I can't speak for you, but I can speak for myself. I have to I have to do what  I've done. I can't knuckle under and say, "Okay, just just quit speaking the truth." I was told  to quit it. Stop it. Quit speaking the truth. You were told as well, and I'm sure behind the scenes,  you could share lots of stories of people saying, "Oh, Tucker, don't you know, calm down. Don't  do this. Back off." But we can't. When it's the truth and you know it deep in your heart, that is  is what Christ was able to do in a a beautifully peaceful way. He endured everything the world  could throw at him. And you know, in many ways, I haven't had anything thrown at me, but I've  been willing to to speak the truth when it wasn't popular and when it and basically got me kicked  out of the club. But I'm still a bishop. I'm still a successor of the apostles. And so it's essential  that I continue to speak not my truth. I mean, you know, that's where some it gets crazy. People  speak of, "Oh, well, that's your truth and that's my truth." There's truth. And we all have the  obligation to seek it, to be willing. And I've said this many times, and I say it again. Anytime  I speak something that I'm claiming to be the truth, if people can show me that this is not the  truth, I want to hear that. I don't want to ever be in a position where people are saying, "Oh,  well, he's got a big voice, so I won't tell him he's wrong on that." I want to hear if I'm wrong,  but and I I have been. I can be for sure. I'm a, you know, man, weak and sinful and and easily  confused and easily diverted from the truth, but I keep going back to trying to do my best to  proclaim it. That's what we're all called to do. And I think I'd say Carrie right there with us  as a woman, uh, a mother and a wife and a woman with a voice. And once you have a voice, you  have an obligation to speak the truth with it. You said you're on axe. You're clearly paying  attention to what's happening around the world. It's very easy to become discouraged. Jesus is  under fire. The the the church broadly is under fire. Truth is um obviously a target, maybe the  main target. So it's discouraging. Do you see God moving as a counterbalance to that? Do you see God  moving more as evil becomes more obvious? Tucker, thank you for asking that question because I think  absolutely. I see goodness and beauty and truth, changing hearts and moving people in all kinds  of ways. That's been one of my blessings. I I'm basically basically am I'm an itinerant  bishop now who travels all over the place and speaks in different settings and meets people  across this nation and really around the world and I have seen that goodness in those hearts  seeking the truth and of course I I believe that God is it's his it's still his world  it's still his church and he he isn't absent from any of this free will allows us to destroy  ourselves if we make that foolish choice. But God is always offering the opportunity to each of us  individually and to each of us in whatever group, whatever definition of of a group of humanity.  For us, we're all brothers and sisters. We're all the children of God. But I believe absolutely  answering your question that God is working in hearts. God is working through all of this. I  mean, look at all the evil that's been exposed. We We hate it. We're horrified. But it needs  It's like a a wound that needs to be cleansed, a need a wound that needs to be opened up.  And the putrified flesh needs to be cleansed. That's we're in a time of cleansing, of  purification. God is allowing the the truth that has been hidden for so long. So much  corruption, it just it does get overwhelming. And I've put out messages to encourage people.  Don't despair. It's so easy to despair. And we see it. I know both of us see it too often,  especially young people, lives ending sometimes intentionally because they just despair of this  dark world. But we can never despair. We should be people of hope and acknowledge the the evil  that's there, but believe that God is with us. Jesus Christ prevails as truth prevails. And I  guess that's because I know many of the people that probably listen to you are are not people of  faith. But again, I would go back to simply truth prevails. When is the truth? And we know I believe  that Jesus Christ is truth incarnate. Truth walked this earth. And we believe in the Catholic  faith, he remains here through the sacraments, through the life of of baptized people in goodness  living in the world. But truth prevails. And when we are willing to challenge ourselves to always  go back to the truth, that will lead us nowhere but to God. And and so God is working through all  of this. And there's so much goodness out there that things that have been hidden literally  for centuries that are coming to light. What comes to mind for me is is an apparition  of our lady called Our Lady of Good Success. Um that is in uh Ecuador, Keto Ecuador. It happened  shortly after Our Lady of Guadalupe in Our Lady of Guadalupe appeared in 1531 there in Pepia  outside Mexico City. the the image of our lady of Guadalupe still is revered there by Catholics  and others there of that miraculous appearance. This apparition happened in the 1570s I believe  shortly after our lady of Guadalupe. Now what's interesting is the apparition uh it's to a nun uh  our lady believe speaks to a nun and this has been approved as private revelation but it is accepted  as authentic uh by the church. Um but basically the apparition Mary says to this uh nun mother  Mariana that for the 20th and 21st century this will come to light and will help people navigate  a world and a church deeply affected by the chaos of not following the truth. I mean that's what it  comes down to. We believe the church, you know, is will prevail. The gates of hell will not  prevail against the Catholic Church. That is our faith. We believe what Christ says in the gospel  and we believe it applies to this church. But that doesn't mean that we human beings and the church  has gone through every kind of storm that humanity can come up with. But we believe the church will  not be destroyed. So we can't despair. But what's interesting to me is that this apparition, it  it's a sign of the goodness, a sign of the hope, a sign of God still with us. One of the things  that as a bishop, as as a lifelong Catholic, one of the great realities that I think is always  helpful to me is to remember God is timeless. That's hard for us to grasp. We can't really grasp  it. How can how can God be outside time? But he is God is eternal. And so the things unfolding we  say, well, this was 400 years ago and now it's happening now. And how's this work? For God,  there is no time. It's simply truth, goodness, and beauty always flowing from the heart of the  trinity. God, father, son, and holy spirit. So keeping that perspective always reminds us reminds  me to to be careful about presuming things about history because God's outside all of that. I mean  history is a is a reality of of the creation that God has given us which is precious and is good as  God says in Genesis. He saw that it was good. But the evil and the bad can come when we who are  created in God's image and likeness begin to ignore truth. That is constantly what it comes  down to. When I sin, I'm ignoring truth. I mean, we may not say, "Oh, I'm going to go ignore some  truth today." But if we trace it back logically, what I'm doing when I sin in significant or the  just small ways, sometimes it's literally telling a lie, ignoring the truth, pretending that this  is the way things are or this is what I've done. But when we ignore truth on the personal level,  on the national level, in the midst of history, when we ignore truth, we are on a destructive  path. So we're always challenged to go back to the truth. And and in this conversation once again  I repeat the destruction the want and destruction of innocence of civilians is never morally  justified. That's the anchor of truth. That's the pillar of truth that we have to keep returning  to when we get caught up in the confusing and chaotic realities that we're all facing. We have  to go back to the truth and humbly acknowledge, Lord, I wandered in significant or maybe just in  in basic ways. But the more we allow ourselves to put blindfolds on and ignore the truth, and I  think that's a lot of what's happening right now, it's like, you know, the the political entity that  is called Israel is getting a free pass for facing the truth for whatever reasons, for political  agendas or some kind of co-opted religious idea. But when we ignore the truth that atrocities  have been committed against civilians, against innocents, then when we won't speak of that  like Gaza, then we're on a dark path and it and it becomes something. It's sort of like the the  club of complicity where we say, "Well, we'll all ignore that truth, won't we?" And we move forward.  And too much of that happens in today's world. You you wonder why I mean there are you know a lot is  written about this. There's a lot of speculation about it. Why would people intentionally lie in  the United States about what everyone can see about the atrocities you just mentioned? Why would  our political leaders do that? Why would many so many of our religious leaders do the same? And  there all these theories, well, they're being paid off or those are not adequate explanations  from my perspective. It does feel like, and there are instances of this, Paul alludes to  this in Galatians, that there's it's almost like there's a spell. There's a supernatural quality  where people can't see things. They sincerely can't see things. Their vision is clouded. Do  you think that that phenomenon exists now? Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Evil is real. The  Catholic Church sees evil personified in Satan and his demons. Christ has has I mean Satan has  no power really. But we individual human beings and any group of human beings when we give into  ignoring the truth we really are giving into the power of evil. And and like you're alluding  to, Tucker, I mean, that's why thankfully God clearly tells us through his son and in in  other passages, even in the Old Testament, we are not to judge each other. We are not the  judges. We are to make judgments about what is true, but we're not to judge the individual  person. Um and I think that that's where we have to always remember because you know the the  atrocities that happen and that doesn't mean what we just say well you know I out of respect for  this person I need to allow this to happen or allow myself to be attacked that is not what we're  talking about but we do have to always acknowledge when it comes down to judging the person we should  simply not do it and acknowledge that Maybe there is evil that and and I truly believe that the the  delusion of evil has many by the gra in its grasp in the world today. We all have the obligation  to to set ourselves free from that to to see the light and to make the choice to turn from  it. But I know that can become very difficult, seemingly impossible. Um, and I think that really  as we we talk about all of this, Carl Tucker, we I believe it again it comes down to basic  human choices. The the the world leader that is deciding this is justified because I have decided  this this and this. It it comes down to and and I again I think of us as individual sinners when  we sin we've simply decided I know better in this it it you know we we explain it away we make  rationalizations but what at the heart of it is yes this is what the world says is true but I know  better figured it out I know better and I think that that's where you know the atrocities in Gaza,  they they are they are actively working to hide those and to to squatchch any voice that dares  to speak up about innocents lives being destroyed because it threatens their I know better attitude.  It threatens that truth that they're trying to create. We can all try to create our own truth,  but it doesn't exist really. And that is what we have to always be humble enough to acknowledge.  And we have to pray that world leaders will be people whose hearts are open because they've  got the power to do drastically, devastatingly destructive things like we've witnessed in Gaza,  what we're witnessing in Lebanon. Um, I mean, very little is spoken about some of these things  because the powers that be don't want that truth spoken because it threatens their false scenario.  And so it it really is as basic as that. Um but I think there are forces uh worldly and supernatural  of evil that I mean just like when you know when evil tries to cancel a voice of truth in our  culture um certainly in the supernatural realm Satan and his minions are trying to do the same  thing. I mean the St. Michael prayer that we offer as Catholics is rooted in acknowledging that  basic reality and not seeing a demon around every corner but acknowledging that evil is real. Evil  has its power when we give it power. And that's why we have to prayerfully turn to the truth.  I urge everyone to do that. And if you aren't a believer to at least I mean hopefully to somewhat  being sane is to embrace the truth. I mean to to a definition of insanity is to say well I I'm  going to ignore what's true and just go into my fantasy world. Sometimes that happens. But if we  are people who are rational then rationality means based in the truth. And we all have an obligation  to to find the truth, to speak the truth, and to live the truth. My my final question  is about persecution, which you've alluded to, and you've said um Jesus was murdered for telling  the truth. That was the main threat he posed, the fact that he was the embodiment of truth. And that  that principle stands and that people who it's not the liars who are punished, it's people who tell  the truth. So if we accept that we're clearly in a new kind of world where trends are accelerating,  you would have to think that persecution will intensify specifically of Christians and I and I  think it is. I think it's what we're watching. Um do you believe that? And if you do, how should  Christians respond to persecution? Well, um, Tucker, I do believe that I mean it's it's very  clear. I believe that that faith any really any stance for truth, the real truth um is being  persecuted because the powers of chaos, the powers of that false message are growing um and gaining  influence. Um, what what is our response as Christians? Well, it, you know, I guess it sounds  pretty simplistic, but we stay with the truth. We don't compromise. We don't become violent in the  face of violence. We don't embrace hatred. I mean, I think that, you know, it it probably is one  of the most powerful things we can do is seek to truly love our neighbor. Um, y and certainly,  I mean, Christ tells us, "Love God with all your heart, mind, and soul, and your neighbor as  yourself." The great commandment. But I think that we need to put that into practice by not giving in  to the hate. No matter how much we are persecuted, no matter how much hatred is thrown at us, and  we have great examples in in our Catholic faith, in the saints of the ages, so many of the saints  and and Christ himself says, "If they hate you, remember they hated me first." What is persecution  about? We're persecuted when they hate what we're doing. They hate who we are. They hate what we're  saying. And so, we're in good company with Christ himself. How did Christ respond? He didn't waver  from the truth, but he didn't violently fight back either. Um, that is I I think the basic reaction  we should have. We should trust in the power of the truth. Um, yes, we can be eliminated. We can  be assassinated in this world and it happens. But the truth continues to prevail. And if as Christ  died in service to the truth, he was the truth and he died for the truth. Um if it comes to that we  shouldn't seek that our lives are valuable but if it comes to that then we who believe in the truth  should should you know be the martyrs be willing if it if it if that's what it takes to stand for  the truth that I sacrifice my life in this world it begins to remind us that life is not limited  to this world. We believe in everlasting life. The salvation of souls is what the church, the  Catholic Church exists for. It may not always look like that through history and in our time because  too many voices seem to be too worried about this world, but ultimately to be alive is to have  eternal life with God. And so sacrificing this earthly life if it comes to that and we should I  I've always loved the example of St. Thomas Moore. He was a great lawyer. He was a great mind and he  did everything he could to keep from losing his life in this world. But ultimately he knew that  if he had to sacrifice his life in this world, he could look to eternal life with God in heaven. And  he says that to his own daughter um to we shall merily meet in heaven. That has to be our attitude  as well. Not wantingly and easily allowing our lives to be destroyed. That is not respectful of  the treasure of our life that God has given us. We should desire to be here as long as God gives  us breath. But when that ends and we if we we lose that life because we've stood for the truth,  then we're in good company. Um, so the Christian's response to persecution should ultimately  to be willing and to be strengthened and to strengthen each other to stand with the truth  come what may. Amen. Bishop Strickland, thank you very much for taking this time. That was great.  Thank you, Tucker. God bless you. God bless you.