How'd you get into this? Into the Navy? Yeah, I mean. It was one of those things where a time in life where it's just time to leave town. If you ever want to make God laugh telling your plan for life and then it's something changes. And it's even like going up to a bit in law and bedroom. It was never planned to be that way. It just happened. Life happens around you as you're planning. I joined the Navy just, it was time to leave town. I had a bad relationship with a girl. My plan in life was college basketball, MBA, and then worked with my dad as a boy. And I got, I had a bad relationship. I got dumped and it's like, I got to leave and the easiest way out of butep, Montana is to join the Marine Corps. Butep is not the same as Bozeman. No. No. I don't think, I don't think people understand that. Bozeman is beautiful. It's got Yellowstone. Yeah. Even though Yellowstone's in Wyoming, you know, the show made everyone go to Bozeman. Of course. Bozeman's beautiful. There's great food, really good coffee. And butep, Montana, you will get your ass whooped. Yeah. Like it's a mining town. And they're proud of that. The bigger. I think it was the biggest. Yeah. It was, yeah. It was, I think it was the, it got electricity before Chicago. And it still has the oldest Chinese restaurant in the country, the pecan. And this is funny. So the guy that owned his name was Danny Wong, his son, Jerry Tam owns it now. Best Chinese, you only need a menu. You go in there and they just serve you. But after Danny Wong, they named the street behind it after him. And I don't know why, but they saved it Danny Wong way. It's like, are you messing with him after his death? We do love. But yeah, it's just, it's a wonderful town. Really good food. And they don't quite realize how good the food is or how good life is there. Like I have friends back home that because I have an odd job now, I'm not really sure what I do. But I have friends that have a nine to five. Like they go to work. They have lunch with their buddies. They go home at five. They see their kids are with their wife. And I'm jealous of them. Like a normal life. It's a cool town. Yeah. But it's a, it's a, it's a old fashioned town. Yeah, it is. I've actually brought, when I was at Seal King Six, I've brought about 20 dudes up there to Skydive. We sold off a Skydive trip for high altitude and then horseback riding and mules and stuff like that. They got along great with them. I told the butte guys, hey, there's a difference between being a tough guy and being a technical fighter. So let's just all get along. Don't, you don't punch him. You don't punch him. Let's just have a drink. And we did, it was a blast. There was one fight, but it ended a little amicable. So you wanted to be a broker. Yeah. Yeah. I just, I thought I would, it just, I didn't know anything about it. But my dad did it. He looked good in the suit and I just, I liked his house. So you didn't dream of fighting wars. No, no, no, we weren't a military family. It was a, you know, I'd seen full metal jacket and Navy seals, but there was, it was never going to be me. I did have two friends that wanted to be in the Marine Corps growing up and there were two years old. I mean, there was a reason that I went to join the Marine Corps because I saw them when they come home. I had one dude that joined the army and he gave me great advice when I just sort of decided he just said get it in writing. And that's good advice for life. Like, you know, we can, yeah, I love when people say let's do business on a handshake because like find a shaker hand after you sign the contract. Well, so you went to join the Marine Corps, but you haven't been the Navy? Yeah, because the Marine recruiter was at lunch. And I wanted to be a Marine because I wanted to be a sniper. And the, but the recruiter was gone, the Navy guy was sitting right there. And he was wearing his khakis, he was a chief. And I didn't know what a chief was, but he's a senior dude in the enlisted ranks. And I went in there just because my Marine friends told me that the Marine Corps is actually part of the department of the Navy. It's just the men's department. And so I went to ask him where's the Marine if anyone will know you will. And like the Army guys are here, first guys are here and Marines is not there. And he said, why do you want the Marine Corps? I said, I want to be a sniper. I'm a hunter and Marines have the best snipers in the world call us. Halfcock. Yeah. Like I said, Full Metal jacket, I can do that. It looks cool. And he said, look no further. We have snipers in the Navy. You need to be the Navy seal first. He brushed over that and gave me a contract. And I signed, I didn't know what a seal was. I didn't know how to swim. But is this a recruiting center? Yeah. It's still there. I go in there when I go back to be at Montana talk to the recruiters now just to see if anybody wants to be a seal or even maybe I can tell them that Marine boot camp is going to be greater. Join the Army, be a ranger to be awesome. Just to, it's just a good way to grow up wherever you are in this country, you can go join right now and be on a bus three hots in a car. You'll be part of a brotherhood somewhere. And I mean, just being a Marine would be cool, but he just wasn't there. But I look back on it now and I tell my daughters that if that the butterfly effect, if that Marine recruiter wasn't at Arby's at 1130 on a Wednesday, you wouldn't be alive because I would have joined the Marine Corps instead of the Navy. But I joined the Navy and he showed me the videos of what Navy seals are after I signed. And I remember I went to get my mom, I brought her in and said, check this out. And she didn't say it, but she admitted later like there's no way in hell you're going to make it through. The only one who believed to me was my dad. Wow. And what year was this? 1996. I, yeah, I joined in 1996. I left in 1997. So what was going on in the world in 1996? Nothing. No, I joined in 1995. I went to bootcamp in 1996, January 1996. And that's part of the mystique was I can, I won't make it through seal training, but I'll live in San Diego. I'll go to a ship on the fleet for four years. I'll come back to Butte and I'll hang out at the Maloney's Bar and tell sea stories like that. I'm not going to make it. Nobody makes it through seal training. And that was almost the mindset of failure. Yeah. And I, you know, I learned how to swim. I knew I wouldn't quit, but it's, it's not on the ocean. No, the entire state's landlocked. Yes. Right. I could, I could keep myself alive, but I didn't know any strokes at all. I actually ran into a buddy of mine who swam at Notre Dame, one of the few swimmers from Montana, because I still had my ID from Montana Tech. They had a pool. And I had a couple, I actually had a couple weeks before I left and I ran into him at the the pool and he goes, don't take this the wrong way. I'm happy to see you in the pool. I just literally never seen you in the pool. What gives? And I said, I just joined the Navy. I'm going to be a seal and he goes, Oh, not like that. You're not. And he showed me the breaststroke and the sidestroke. And then I practiced that and I was good enough to pass the screening test to get into seal training. But that's, I mean, that test is easy. So the first test is a swim test. Yeah. Well, it's a, it's a 500 yard swim. 42 pushups, 50 set ups, eight pullups in a mile and a half time run like it's really easy. But when I went there, when I went to boot camp and took that test, we're sitting at bleachers. There's 250 dudes on these bleachers. And I remember thinking, well, what makes me special? There's no way I can make it. And out of that, 252 of us pass the test. And then when you pass that test, then you might get orders. And then out of that, two of every 250, 85% will make it through training. So it's, it's a really, but it's a mindset at a certain point. You need to. So from the day you got on the bus as a teenager, like, you know, you're in the, you're in the Navy. Yeah. How long was it from then until you got your try to? I think both of you a year boot camp, no, but you're in half boot camp was nine weeks. I did a two week A school where basically the Marines taught me how to wind a bobbin and use a sewing machine. They called it, showing it's a big part of it. No, no, just you had to get a rate for a job in the name like Bose has made or photographers made or I was an air crew survival equipment. And just because that's the shortest one to get me to San Diego. So I did a two weeks in Milington and then I went down to April. There would have been 96. I checked into Buds Class 208, class up there and, and then we graduated in December. But I got some good advice by a guy by the name of Tom Donovan who is an admiral now, which makes me feel so old. He might be a two star, but he was fresh out of the academy. And the Naval Academy has a really high rate of guys making through because they screen him so hard in an apple. And his dad was an admiral. And I remember seeing him and he doesn't remember saying this, but I ran into him in the cages one one day and I was like, wow, this is crazy. Like I'm scared, but you're like in charge. Like you got to be really scared. He looks at me and goes, fuck you're afraid of why are you scared? I'm like, I don't know. He's like, don't be afraid. Just these are just normal dudes. Just make it make it one evolution to the next. And he was a student like me, an ensign. Great. I mean, there are guys that when we did hell week, he person, there's like at least 20 Navy seals that oh, their careers to Tom Donovan because he got them through. Like just like motivating them as a student. So in 96, 97, you're, you know, trying to become a Navy seal, which is, you know, the most famous of the American war fighters. But what do you think you're going to be doing? I didn't know. Did you think about it? Or are you just so focused on? No, well, I was focused on the training because I wanted to make it through. I had, I keep bringing up hell week because that's allegedly the hardest part when you wake up on Sunday and you don't sleep till Friday. You're awake the whole time running with boats on your heads and doing evolution cold wet, sandy miserable. Like by Wednesday, every part of your body that's touching cloth starts to bleed because of the salt water in the sand. But I had an instructor. I don't know why he said, I don't know why he was, he didn't need to be motivating. But he said, right before hell, we care about to go to war for the first time. And the enemy is all your doubts, all your fears and everyone you know back home that told you you weren't good enough to do this. Keep your head down, keep moving forward. You'll be fine. One meal at a time, he said another, he said the first day of training was I know you've read the books and probably seen the movies regardless of what you've been told. However, this course is not impossible. People graduate. Look at me. I'm living proof. So I will never ask you to do anything impossible, but I will make you do something very hard followed immediately by something very hard followed by something even harder day after day after day for eight straight months. And that sounds like a lot to get from not a graduation day, but don't think about it that way. That's not how you achieve a long term goal. Do it like this. Wake up in the morning on time, make your bed the right way and then brush your teeth. That's three wins. You just started your day with three victories, make it to the four AM workout on time. And when I'm beating, you don't think about the pain, concentrate on your next goal in life, which is breakfast after breakfast, your next goal in life is lunch after lunch. It's dinner after dinner, do everything you need to do to get back inside that perfectly made bed. And because you took the time in the morning to make your bed the right way, regardless of how bad today was and it'll be bad tomorrow's a clean slate tomorrow's a fresh start. And when you feel like quitting, which you will, do not quit right now, that's a motion quit tomorrow. If you can keep quitting tomorrow, you can do anything. And just that's the mindset that I needed that because I went there scared. It's like, well, I'll just quit because it's almost like a fear of the unknown. Like I'll just quit because it's easy. Or watching other guys quit like a loud mouth or a big tough guy or a college football player. He quits. It's like, well, shit, if he can't make it, I can't make it. And that's like sympathetic quitting. Just let him go. No one's better than you just because you're from Butte Montana or from West Palm Beach or from Long Island. Doesn't mean someone from Chicago's better than you. And people like Butte Montana, we're almost in a bubble like the other side of the continental divide is you got Seattle, Portland, San Francisco. They've got to be better athletes than me or something. But don't believe that shit. You can do anything. Just got to keep the right mindset. How many guys quit? We had a big class out of our 227 when we graduated 33. Two classes before so graduated seven. There was a class that graduated zero. Like they call it the class that never was. They got down to so few that like, well, you're all done. You got to go to the next class. But then the older you get, it's funny you get every Navy SEAL always says my class was the last hard class. Because they're easy now. And they're like, what do you mean? I'm like, we'll be graduated two. They made us fight it out. Just bullshit. Here's the fact of life. You may not learn till you're older, but I'm going to tell you now. It's very hard to have a good time if you're wearing bad boots. In fact, it may be impossible. And that's why you need to covets. As a matter of fact, you don't just need them. You owe them to yourself. Ticobas makes Western boots for everybody. Ranchers, real ranchers, lifelong cowboys. First time boot buyers and anyone in between. Every Ticobas boot is handcrafted made by hand with over 200 meticulous steps for a broken and feel right out of the box. You don't have to compromise between looks and quality. You can have them both. Whether it's a long day or a big night, Ticobas are built to last and impressed. You wouldn't believe the compliments people here get when they wear them out, which they do. Right now, get 10% off at Ticobas.com slash Tucker when you sign up for email and text alerts. That's 10% off at Ticova, T-E-C-O-V-A-S.com slash Tucker. But it's the camaraderie there. You meet the people. You, you, you, the sense of humor, the dark sense of humor. And, um, misery loves company. We say that all the time. One guy that I met during Hill Week, that you're cold and wet and miserable the whole time. But every day, at least once a day during Hill Week, they send you to medical. They check you out. They look at your eyes because you're, you're going to be delirious, like freezing, you're shaking. And then as soon as you're done with medical, they, you have dry, a dry uniform and dry boots, right socks. And as soon as you put them on, you're right back in the water like it just sucks. And I was trying to tie my boots one time and I couldn't. My hands were shaking so bad. I look at my buddy and I go, hey, Barker, can you pee on my hands? And I meant to warm them up, right? And he's freezing. He just goes, well, yeah, if you're into that, I'm like, no, I'm not. I'm just funny. But I mean, just the dry sense of humor and the camaraderie. That sense of humor. And, but that's, that's the, um, that's what you need when, when we were going after Marcus Littrell, we were awake for about three days were on top of these mountains in Eastern Afghanistan. And we're exhausted. And I looked at my guys and I said, this is why training is so hard because if we were going to quit right now, where the fuck we going to go, we're just here. And this, and that's why you know, you, you've been through the training and then combat s way worse, uh, even being at the SEAL teams is way worse than SEAL training. That's just the initial welcome to the, uh, naval special warfare. Do you have any sense of that when you were, when you completed training? Did you have a sense that I'm going to do shopping things for the next, no, what 10 years when we finished SEAL training, the last part is 40 days, maybe 30 days on Sacramento island where they say no one can hear your scream. You go out to this training site and it's no time off. Then when you get done with that, it was a Monday and we're graduating Friday. And I remember the instructor saying, right, go to admin, go to dental, get your service record, your medical record, you're checking into SEAL team too. And I'm like, well, shit, what does that even mean? I'm, what do you mean? I'm done. I, this is shouldn't end. Now you got to go be a SEAL. So good luck. Did they give you any sense of what that would mean? No. No. I picked, I picked two, two, eight and four because they were on the East Coast and I wanted to go to two because they were in Bosnia and that's the closest thing to combat. And I thought I want to combat. That's before I went to combat. And you know, they're in Sarajevo, Kosovo's popping off. We'll get in there. So I went to SEAL team too. And then, I mean, they don't really teach you anything in SEAL training. Then you, when we got to the team in my era, then it was SEAL tactical training at 13 week course where they finally teach you how to do stuff. And then you go to a platoon, which is 16 guys. And that group works together for a full year getting to know standard operating procedures and how, you know, tendencies. And then they sent us overseas. So my first deployment was in summer in 1998 on the USS Austin. We went to the Mediterranean. You know, there was, we heard about Al Qaeda. They were in Albania because there was some sort of an exercise and they threatened them. And I just finished sniper school. I'm kind of jumping around here. I just finished sniper school. So I was on a rooftop with a raincard, you know, out to a thousand yards looking at this place like, okay, I made it. I'm a Navy SEAL now, but there was nothing. There's, you know, before 9-11. So I thought I was high speedest. In Albania. Yeah. But I mean, if you know, I'm not sure most Americans understand we sent seals to Albania. Well, just seals to, you know, Albania. Well, you got to figure that part of the, the, the, the, the Adriatic and you got all kinds of al Qaeda guys in close to Obama's. So they're going to be in Albania too. I mean, of course it makes sense. And it's a heavily Muslim country. But I guess my question is, did you understand just how large the landscape was? No, because we were just basically training. We spent a lot of time with the special boat service in the UK. A lot of time with the German consumers, Norwegian, yeah, those are bad ass dudes. Really? Yeah. They're, they're, yeah, they're really good, but they don't get involved because they're government stocks, but they're, they're studs. I talk about skiing and rock climbing. You never seen anything like it. Plus the best looking dudes in the world. It's like got to be honest. Just the, the normal weed. Yeah, there was studs like they're really good. Telemark skiing. There's nobody better. And so combat skiing, you know, rock sacks guns and all that crap. Like carrying the old M14s because they work better in cold weather. But we were training just because contingencies like we don't know, you know, Russia's gone. Cold war's over. Nothing's going to happen. So we're basically going to be safe. And when my time came up after four years, I just, I knew the guys and I'm like, I'm 23. I don't want to go home now. I want to stay with these guys. So I realized that just to stay with the guys that seal team too. Well, you're what I said, that would have been 1999 or right around 2000, no 2000, chocolate realistically on a, on a, on a Humvee and Kuwait. But I realistic because I knew the guys and then 911 happened and I'm like, well, I can't get out now. And then I ran into a dude from seal team six at a Navy exchange on, I was taking a leadership course at Damneck, which is narrow Shannon Virginia Beach. That's where seal team six is. And I'm taking this course and I went over to the Navy exchange, which is a mall in my uniform with the Trident and the camees. And there's this dude in there with flip flops shorts, a beard and long hair. He's kind of eyeball on me because he knew I was a seal. And I'm like, well, that's a seal team six guy and that arrogant fuck, I'm going to find out with that place. That's the only reason I would seal team six is that guy was mean mugging me. Wow. But that's again, that's how, you know, life's decisions. The small 2001 you've been in five years. Yes. Did anyone you know, she didn't want during those five years? No, no, there was rumors of one guy might have got a kill and Bosnia. But the only guys who were shooting were, would have been some Molly right around 1993. And then 91, I don't think seals even did anything in desert storm. And then he had petite airfield in Panama in 1989. And those dudes are just legends because they got in the gun fighting. Some guys did a combat swimmer up. They, they swam over to instead of blowing up Noriaigas boats. I guess they were told the unscrew the screw on the back of the boat. Typical American let's just be nice about being mean. Just unscrew it. Just blow the damn pot up. But those guys were just legends and nothing until we just finished a 40 day thing in this coast of over 30 days and we're sending out emails and then the towers were hit. And they were like, where were you in that house? Germany, I was a stew cart. What were you doing? Just a deployment. We had a unit over there. So we go over there and we would, we would stage out of Germany. So we went to Lithuania for training with again, the Norway over Scotland and we did training around their coast of all was the real world stuff and then back to Germany because that's where all of our stuff was. We deployed it. Germany is called the Yukon. So European command, special forces are over there and seals go over there. And then we have a plate, we had a place in rota spain too. That's where deployments were and that's all you do. You're not like I did when I was on the deployment with Jocko and Drogo and Scott Page and Steve Drum. We, the one mission we did was we took down a Russian tanker full of smuggling Iraqi oil and there was no resistance. I mean, like we were taking away steak knives because there was weapon like just bullshit mission. Where was it? That would be in the Persian Gulf. They were smuggling oil. So we just we hopped on that drove it to Oman and we made headlines and we thought we were high speed. So that would have been right around 2000. The Russians say when you boarded their ship and they didn't have a choice. We came in with a hell of a sniper in the helicopter and I guess fast roped down and they are guys just took a week. We good at that. There was, but no, no, we're anticipating resistance, but I don't think they had any guns. So, but that was like at the time they annoyed that you stole their ship. Yeah. But we were doing stuff like that. Like people were smuggling dates and we would take down these little dial boat dates. Like all right, dates like the fruit dates. They're smuggling dates. So let's go save the planet. Literally, Navy seals taking down boats with dates. So your hours of work may not be the most comfortable of your day. You're maybe sitting in a stuffy office. You're standing out in the beating sun on a job site. Whatever you're doing during the day, you're probably not that comfortable and you can't get around it because we are all commanded to work and most of us do. But when you get time off, you deserve something much more comfortable and our friends at cozy earth can help you. They've designed bamboo sheets and yes, that sounds bizarre until you try them. Boom, boom. It's actually an amazing natural product. Sheets made from bamboo naturally wick away heat and help your body maintain a cooler temperature throughout the night. It makes a huge difference. So it may be hard to believe, but cozy earth is offering a hundred nights sleep trials. You can test them during the hottest nights of the year with no financial risk. If you're not totally satisfied, returns or hassle free. So upgrade this summer, go to cozyearth.com. The coat tucker up to 40% off. Trust me, you're going to feel the difference the very first night cooler in bamboo. Plus it's awesome. Sounding. I'm sleeping in bamboo. Stay cozy at cozy earth. So you go from that to the 9 11 and it's just how how soon did you realize like this changes ever the second the minute the second plane hit the tower, the South Tower. And we just assumed because we were already overseas, there's going to keep us here. We'll go to Sudan because that's where a lot of al Qaeda is. We didn't know we didn't think Afghanistan. No, but someone knew somewhere. So but we stayed over there for another month and then we went back and then read a clip to where well, we were heading over to invade Iraq. I was on a boat. It was in 2003. We were on with Marines. They're going to go through Turkey, but then something happened in Liberia. So they sent the Marines off and then we turned around and had a swim into Liberia to do to do a hydrographic reconnaissance for the Marines to come in and save people out of the embassy. And that was a different place to be too because it's a civil war. Liberia is named after Liberty and then Monroe is the capital and the industrial president we were all because they sent the sentence. I was there then that year of 2000. And 2003, we know the most dangerous thing we were thinking about was sharks or saltwater crocodiles. When we got there, the people love to see us. They thought we were liberating them. No shots fired, but there was a civil war going on like cannibalism. So it's kind of an awakening, but we missed the invasion of Iraq and then turned around and then I went like beer. Would you see General Butt Naked when you were there? No. It was a major commander. No, I didn't even, I'm not familiar with that at all. General Butt Naked, it describes his uniform. So you're in Liberia. Yeah. When they're invading Iraq, so they're already in Afghanistan, they're invading Iraq and we're in Liberia, which is just weird. But yeah, that was that. And then went back and then it screamed for a seal came six and went through selection. My first deployment to Afghanistan was 2005 went to Jilalabad right around the time that the turbine 33 was shot down Red Wings, the lone survivor. Why did you what what is seal team six and what did you want to be in a seal team six is the national mission force. And so they were designed to rescue American hostages at sea. If a cruise ship gets like, so Delta Force will do the airplanes and stuff and then we'll do the water on paper. That's just where the best seals go because half of the guys that get selected to try out don't make it. These are Navy seals like like experienced Navy seals, usually five or six years in the seal teams and then they try out for seal team six. And it's just a hard selection course. There's a lot of close quarters battle, a lot of drills designed to make you fail. And to see just to see how you handle failing because I don't really care if you succeed, they want to see how you handle fail. There's not about physical fitness. No, well, you do at least a 10 mile run every morning. And then you get into the training and like skydiving a high altitude, high opening jumps. That's when you jump out of a plane and you can go to a spot 11 miles away under canopy. Like look, even looking down at your GPS, you can't feel any wind, but you're going 90 miles an hour. It's a crazy experience jumping at night, jumping bundles, jumping tandoms, jumping gear, testing stuff out. And that's scary. I mean, when you can't see anything, but you know you're an altitude, you know, you're a 25,000 feel like you think you're looking at Tucson, I wait, that's actually Phoenix because I'm so high up here. And then, you know, like even on a 25, we would do 25,000 foot halo, so high altitude low opening. And it's where we were wearing the old school altimeters with the dial and watching it get to zero and knowing you're not going to hit the earth because you had another 13,000 feet to go, which is crazy feeling, but it's so dark. You can't see you got to trust your how long is the fall in a haystack? For that would be about two minutes. Normally when we jump at 13, it's about a minute, depending on what you're doing. If you jump at tandem, you have to set a drogue shoot like a six foot drogue to stay at terminal velocity with everyone else. We're jumping a bundle. What's a bundle? A bundle is a huge barrel that weighs about 400 pounds and is full of extra gear. So it'll be radios, batteries, bombs, bullets, just stuff that guys can't carry. So the bundle master jumps all of it and then you break it out and you hand it out when you get down there. And some guys like it because when you're jumping at night, under night vision, you can sort of see the ground, but you want to flare when you get to the bottom and that turns the back of the parachute down so you can stop. But if you flare too high, it needs to eat again. Then there's just drop you from 10 feet so you kind of judge where you want to do it. But the bundle will hit the ground first and you hear it hit and then it's kind of pulls you down. But the entire time, the bundle's trying to kill you on the way down. so you're connected to a 400 pound barrel. With a 10 foot tether, yeah. I mean, that sounds unappealing. It is. And it's one of those things I did just because I wanted that call. I want to say that I'm a tandem master, a bundle master. I just want that call. What can go wrong when you're jumping with a florida there? A lot of stuff can go wrong. Everything from when you start, you've got to set your your drone parachute. If that doesn't set, you have to know it by feel that you're now going faster than everyone else. And you got to get it set out there. Then once you're falling with it, I've had an occasion where when I pull, so when you pull like little things like remember to cross your legs because you don't want to snap your nuts off because you got this thinking little things like that. In my case anyway. But once that pulls to then you know, you got to check your canopy, make sure it works. You got all nine cells up there. Make sure the brakes work and then you do a little test. But I've had it before. We're only half the parachute opened and then it's in a dive and I'm in the middle and this thing spinning. Oh, and. The 400 pound barrel is spinning. Yeah. And I'm in the middle of it. This is a triflful force. It's pulling me to the, but I had a line twist behind me. So it's pinning my head to my chest and the cutaway for the bundles right here. And I'm lucky I pulled on a high altitude jump at 10,000 because normally you pull at 5. 5. And I actually burned about 7,000 feet in this spin. If I would have. And so I remember saying to myself, if if you ever want to see your daughters again, you got to get this now because it's like I can hear it in the grounds common. I pulled it. The thing shot off it's got a parachute on it. So it landed in former Brownsville. I landed by myself under this 400 canopy and my buddy Phil came out to me. He didn't see them malfunction, but he came out and he goes, you look like you just saw a ghost or you okay? And I said somebody needs to change that. This high speed canopy with that low speed cutaway has got to change because we just changed the new parachute high these high performance parachutes. Someone's going to die and a year later Lance Vacaro died of the same malfunction because they didn't fix it. And then they fixed it. Why didn't you fix that? What happened to the same same exact malfunction except he pulled it five five and he couldn't get the, he couldn't get it out and he's smacked into the ground. And like some of my buddies went out there to them. They had to they cried them with a pen like a riding pen cut his neck and put it in there tried to get him to breathe and he died out there. Oh, that's in training training and this is during war. I don't remember that was 2008 maybe. But yeah, I mean, the training is dangerous, but it has to be done because well, we do all that we do all the jumps all the wind tunnel time into our skydiving because that one jump that you need to nail the exit, you can't like Captain Phillips, like everyone there had been in the tunnel had done the jump. That's just because you got to nail that exit. When you leave an aircraft, especially a C 17, you're hitting the relative wind at first so 130 knots. So so you're actually hitting that wind straight and until it transitions you to go down. So when you jump out, especially with the Rucksack, it's going to pull you. And if you mess with it, you can flip and then you don't, if you pull on your back, you can if you can come out and horse you and wrap around your neck and people have died that way. So you really got to nail an exit. So we trained that much for that one jump. How many jumps are you doing? I had I've had over 1000 probably 1000. Yeah, that's not a lot either. Like some of our, some of our instructors 20 some thousand because we hired civilians like Arizona arsenal on. Marana, Arizona, best skydivers in the world. So we started to hire the best in the world to teach us this like the best fighters, the best skydivers, the best shooters, the best drivers just to teach us how to do what they do and they taught us how to do exits and learn how to fly canopies over 1000 jumps. So that's multiple jumps a day. Yeah. Well, I go that out there a lot. I would, I would do about eight trips a year to Arizona for two, three weeks at a time. Just a skydive. How often you skydiving when you're out there? Every day, six a day, six jumps a day, maybe more depending on your attitude. Like guys would say for 10 or guys just wanted to get back to the Trident Bar and Grill, Nelson Miller owns that place. This is fun to hang out. Did you lose your fear of jumping out? Yeah, there was never a fear of jumping. It was the first jump is like looking through straws. Like you really lose your periphery. But then it starts to get easier and easier. And then so jumping is not, I mean, when you're strapped to a bunch of stuff at night, it's definitely sporty, but it's not fear. It's like I know how to handle this. And I'd rather like the Army Jump Static Line where you connect to the thing and you jump at 2500 feet or whatever. Like that, I don't want to be connected to the aircraft I'm jumping out of. No, no. I've got a minute to work. Any high speed malfunction or low speed malfunction, I can solve it. But that's, I mean, 2500 feet doesn't give you a lot of time to really. Well, that's why that's like the 82nd Airborne. Like there's throwing hundreds of people at once in like vehicles and stuff. Like that's ranger stuff. Like we can take an airfield. And our. a lot of time to read that. That's like the 82nd Airborne. They're just throwing hundreds of people out at once and like vehicles and stuff. That's ranger stuff. Like we can take an airfield. And ours is high-offs to high-opening because we can ideally jump in and then float without anyone saying this. And I've had friends do that. One of my really good friends is he led the jump to into Somalia to rescue Jessica Buchanan. And they jumped, I think, 17 dudes in 49 wins. That we wouldn't have jumped in training, but he did that. They let it and they killed like 22 terrorists and rescue both hostages. And that again, that's just because he was prepared. His team was ready. Like they did so many training jumps that we can do this when we need to. You said that training for SEAL Team 6 was heavily psychological and they make you feel like a loser. They make you fail on purpose. What is that consistent of and what's the purpose? They just want to see how you handle failure. And even when we're training later when we get into SEAL Team 6 and a debrief even after a combat mission on a debrief, I would say, okay, what did you screw up? I don't want to sit here and listen how awesome you are. What did you fuck up? Tell me and we'll learn from that. So they purposely get you in situations that you can't pass to see it like when they ask you what were you thinking your answer should be, I'm an idiot. That's it, deflate it. Don't get in an argument you can't win. But the guy that starts to explain, well, here's what I'm blah, blah, blah, blah, thanks for the debrief, you're out of here. I don't want to hear your excuses. Just your idiot, no, learn from it. So sometimes when people sell products on TV I love this product, I use this product. There's the question in the mind of the viewer, does this guy really use the product? Does he really love the product? Will he keep the product at home? Ask my dogs. Yes! Now we are in a garage. I'm gonna tell you where it is because again, this is prepping, but this is my garage. There's a gun safe. And this is a part of my stockpile of radio hour. Completely real. The second I put it here, the second, radio or Senate to me, I felt peace of mind. Because no matter what happens, we're not going hungry in my house. I moved a lot of fishing gear out of the way to keep it in my garage. And ever since it's been here, I have felt the peace of mind that comes from knowing my family's not going hungry no matter what. Lastcountrysupply.com. Lastcountrysupply.com, it can be in your garage long, the peace of mind that comes with having it. So what would they make you fail? House runs. That's when in a kill house, like when a hostage rescue team comes into a house, you'll see it in action movies and stuff, where they just come in here and they clear the whole area. There are definite steps, distances, movements and angles based on covering each other's backs and fields of fire. So each, like one man goes here, two man goes here, three, four. And they just, they make it really, really difficult. Target identification, like they'll stupid paper targets where someone's pointing something at you and you shoot them all of a sudden, it's just a cell phone. So that's a safe evaluation, you're probably fired. Or they'll have something holding a hostage and if you shoot the wrong person, you're out. But just little footwork stuff or too far off the wall, too far over-penetrate, long hallway, stairwell, just screwed something up. You didn't go by the standard operating procedures, but they'll let you keep going to see if you, but like when you first take a step into a room, are you the person who comes into a situation and makes a mistake and then realize worrying about that mistake right now is not going to help. I have a job to do and we'll talk about that later if we live or are you the person who comes into a situation, makes a mistake and then you can't stop thinking about that mistake. And even though you're moving this way to clear that corner, you're dwelling on this mistake and because you can't stop thinking about that mistake over here, that's where you make a bigger mistake and that's where they get you and then you're fired. So it's make a mistake, get over it and then keep going on and the house run can be another 20 minutes and you're still thinking about that first entry point that you screwed up, but you gotta get that out of your head. How do you do that? You just get over it. It's simple as just stop thinking about it. That no longer matters. That we're just here. You're a failure no longer matters. No, because I mean everyone's still alive. I screwed up, I came in with the wrong choice, whatever. So they make you feel incompetent. Yes, like every run. One of the end of it, you get debriefed on how bad you and like the whole green team, we call it the selection course, telling everyone how they screwed up and then everyone gets punished for it. And then as soon as you're done getting punished you're right back in there again. And the whole point is can you get over it? I mean that sounds harder than running. It's hard. And I've seen dudes that when they just freeze, they screw up too many things and they just freeze. Yeah, because it's a perfectionist who gets into this business anyway. Like who wants to be a Navy SEAL? Only someone who wants to test himself be the best. Right? Yeah, I think so. So someone's got something to prove. Exactly. And they want to be the best. And then I mean it's even unique going to SEAL Team 6. It's not everyone knows that SEAL Team 6 is a different animal. Like a lot of the Navy SEALs you see out there now weren't SEAL Team 6. And they know that. And a lot of people don't talk about it. That is the best command in the world. I mean, those are the guys that they call when Osama bin Laden pops up. We're SEAL Team 6. So how do people fail out? I mean, these are all SEALs with drivers. Usually safety violations. Like I was talking about with the wrong foot or shooting the wrong target. You can have minor safety violations or majors. If you get a major, they're going to boot you. But if they like you, they might keep you. Like if they personally like you. If they hate you, you're in a bad, you're starting off on a wrong foot. There's a point during the screening process where they just hand your picture around to the guys that have made it. And if you get too many thumbs down, like I've seen this guy, I don't like them. You're not going to, you don't even get a try. Like it's a good old one. Really? No. Yeah, you want a 1% inch easy attrition 50%. When I went through half the guys didn't make it. And you knew the molly. Oh, I knew all of them. And it was bizarre because one minute you're having breakfast with your buddy, then you go to the, and I there were guys that had breakfast with, and I never saw me get in my life. They did something wrong. They're out. They would walk around with the instructors. And they're all sealed team six guys, these instructors. They've been through this course. They'd walk around with like two airplane tickets back in the day when you have paper tickets. They'd be like, all right, we're not, we're not done until two of you guys go home. So we're going to keep training until two of you guys fail. Like it's, it's a, it's a job course. How long is it nine months? Nine months? Yeah. Does anyone fail out at the end? Not usually. When you get through the initial part of close quarters battle, they, they keep you around that the initial down antennas are not Tennessee in a, in a, in a market. How are we? Mississippi. If you make it through that and jumping, they'll usually keep you around because you've proven you can do that stuff. Plus they spend a lot of money on you. And so they might keep you around. But you can get shit can at any time too when you're at the command. If you screw up, they can, we can. So you graduate, you become part of seal team six. Yeah. You made it to the top. What do they do with you next? They split us up into squadrons and there's just, you, you go from being a, a number team to a color team. So like I was at seal team two and then I went to seal team six red squadrons. So I was at red. And it's even funny out in town. Like you see some of the local groupies and they would talk to seals like number or color. It's like, first of all, fuck you, but second of all red. Other better colors than others. No, it is funny that no, when you get to that level, everyone is, is at, on the same level. There's different, different attitudes, personalities. Like red team was known for training way too hard. Gold team was known for telling people to F off. Like you can't tell us what to do. And blue was awesome. When we finally started silver, this is kind of funny. So because Delta was going to go to four squadrons. So we went to four squadrons. And the rumor that gold squadron started was, yeah, I heard the next one's going to be silver squadron. And that rumor just started and it turned into silver. And we finally asked gold. Why, why did you keep saying it was silver and they go silver is not quite as good as gold? Second place. Yeah. But no, I did one deployment was silver also. And the guys are just the best of the best. How many are there in still team six? 200. I think at any time. And that was a unique place because I was excited to get out of bed. Because every day I could go to work with people who were better than me. And we all thought that way. We all acted that way. And nobody ever undermined anybody else. Like if someone was outshooting me, like in a speed drill, I would go up to him and say, hey, why did you switch your holster to here? Why did you put that pouch over here? What's time to wake up? What do you, what workout do you do in the morning? What do you eat? I want to find out what you're doing to make what made you better than me today and try to get better. And then we'd help each other instead of like trying to steal their job or whatever. We'd help each other. And then when we, I mean, at that level when we first started going to Iraq, because I'd only seen Iraq on television, suicide bombers everywhere, car bombs going like I, the first three months that Iraq, I was like, are we missing something? Because we're really good. Like this isn't even close. The enemy's not even getting shot off. We got to a point where we stopped blowing up doors and stopped talking to each other and went quiet with silent. Like we, if we were silent, we were faster. And we got to a point where instead of blowing up a door and waking, instead of landing a helicopter right on the house, we'd land way over there, walk in, pick the locks, break the glass quietly, go in. We would have competitions on who could touch more terrorists while they were sleeping. Like walk up to him and you like to test their vest for a suicide vest. And then you put your hand on their lips and go, shh, shh, shh, shh, and you wake them up. And then they shut their pants. And then what happens? You rest them. Unless they have a suicide vest on them. They find out if the 72 versions are real. When was their first time you saw someone killed as a seal? Do you remember? I want to say in Ramadi. I didn't, you know, because we dropped bombs on people in 2005 and then I went to Iraq in 2008, 2005. And that's for somebody killed someone. And actually the sniper from the cat and Phillips mission, we got our kills at the exact same time. What happened? We were doing a combined hit with, it was CL-TEM-6 Delta-4 and the special air service. So we got a good crew coming in. And we're splitting up this, like SAS says, this Delta's got this and here's our target. And we crept in. We just started that tactic of not going on white lights, not moving fast, going dark, not talking. And when I see people at Ward scream and go, go, go on at bullshit. It's like, shut up. Why aren't you just yelling? Here we are, just shut up. And like, if you point this way, I'll assume you see something and we can just read off each other. So we went into this house for us. One of the guys was from the SBS, special boat service. And we're walking down this long hallway for us. And this dude came out with an AK and he could have killed all of us, but he couldn't see us. So he went back in the room and then we hit the room and killed him. Then we came outside as the whole town started to light up. And me and the sniper went out and we did this cross pan thing on a building. And when you're crossing like I'm covering here, he's covering there. And you can wave and take your corner or whatever. But these two dudes just popped up too. I'll kind of guys. I blasted him, he blasted him. And I go, oh shit, I just killed that guy. My buddy goes, I just killed that guy. What are we doing out? I guess we do one of those bounding things and find more al Qaeda guys. But it was almost like the first kill wasn't, it didn't bother me. It was more of the, okay, now I'm part of the club. Because I friends F kills now I have a kill. And then the floodgates open and everyone started killing people. When was it was 2005? Oh, six and 07 wasn't really gotten that over in Afghanistan. Did you that night after you killed somebody to think about it? Not really. No, I mean, it was just a kill. It was everyone's trying to get there. Everyone's trying to do it. So I'm just part of the club. It didn't bother me at all. And again, just working with these guys, I thought I was different mindset. So it didn't, and that guy still doesn't bother me. He had a gun. He was maneuvering on us or whatever. He was definitely al Qaeda. And then, you know, we just did that and we were really good about it. We, the more latitude that we had as far as collateral damage, the fewer innocent people got hurt because we're the good guys. And we're not going in there to murder people. And if you give me that, then, but then I mean, it got to the point. Right before I got out there, if you're in a gunfight and there's a cave, I remember one, there was a cave we're trying to call it hellfires. And the boss is 200 miles away. Said we're not saying there are women and children in that cave, but we can't prove that they're not. It's like, what are we even doing here? But we got good at it. Every night we're going out, we, General McChrystal decided that we should be hunting SUNY terrorists. That's what al Qaeda, they're SUNY's. And they were terrorizing the locals. And that's kind of where I got an affinity for locals because they got to deal with us. And they got to deal with al Qaeda. All they're trying to do is get on with their lives. Like most people in a combat zone are not combatants. They just want to live. And so they deal with al Qaeda in their house. But so then we would go to their house and then we got some, we got into interrogations, trying to find the bad guys and root them out. And we were given a lot of to if you see how kill them on site, how would you know who they were? Well, I mean, usually if they go to their guns or they, they sleep outside with guns buried, you can kind of tell their bad guys. And you know, if they don't have guns, we don't kill them even though we know they should be. But again, we're the good guys. We're not trying to do that. They'll usually hop up and fight. Or you know, or then the trees run, you know, get shot at from rooftop and things like that. But interrogating him was actually funny. I mean, how do you do that? The way I started to do it, because I never had training. We just learned on the job. And so what I would do is I would take my interpreter and like have him stand here and put the al Qaeda right in front of him. So they can't look at each other. But I talked to him and he talks to you. And then you tell me what he says and I'm going to be very direct. I just going to ask who's the man of the house? How many guys are here? What are their names? What's your name? And then let him go. But then like I've run in. Why do you ask that? Because if there's seven, usually it's like a rule of threes. Like if there's seven dudes, there's going to be 21 women, 16 God knows how many kids. So the guys are the bad guys. And so if there's seven dudes, five of them are going to be they live in the house and those two are they came in from Jordan. That's al Qaeda. And just separate. And then you arrest them and bring them back to, you know, prison and stuff. They can interrogate them there. Maybe you look for, you look for contradictions. You ask them all separately. Yeah, because the two guys are lying. They don't know who the guys in the house or they don't know their names or how many people are here. Like five guys that live here do. And then the one that I really liked was like the 12 year old kid, the boy, the oldest of the children because you could, you could prop him up like dust him off and say, all right, finally I'm talking to the man of the house. What's going on here? Who are these dudes? And then he just, yeah, I'm the man of the house. Well, these two are assholes. It's like, all right, cool. Or even bring him in a place where they can't see him. Like put him behind a sheet or something. And I'll bring these guys in and you just point to the, like a lineup on TV and then those are the bad guys and they don't know who the kid is. And then he's rolling up that way. And I mean, it sucks. He's sending him to prison. They're out in 30 days. You're finding him again. Where, where was the prison? Abu grip, usually in Iraq and then the bagram we take in there. We sent a few guys to go on to on them. You know, that was, but at the time too, it's almost like it's, we were at a time where we're just fighting for the guy next to me. You overall plant like been on the ghosts were never going to find him. Like I would even joke with those I was interrogating. Like who's the man of the house? Who's house is this? Where's the song been on? And I see terrorists laugh at me. I'm like, I don't know. Like I know you don't know. I don't know either. Just figure it out. But like I've run into English speakers where like like he didn't need the interpreter and he'd say, I know the deal. This, I remember one guy said, I go, you know the deal? He's like, yeah, I know the deal. You're going to send me to prison. I'm going to get out in 30 days. I'm going to kill your friends again. I said, so you've dealt with Americans before. And he's like, yeah, I'm like, did they look like me? Like with the beard short sleeves tattoos? Do they look like me? You never dealt with us. We're not here on accident. We're here for you. And then again, watch I'll cut a shit there, France. It's pretty funny. I mean, what a heavy life though. Yeah, but everyone was doing it. So it seemed normal. Did you ever talk about it? I mean, you're just the people, the guys you're working with sound like smart people. I mean, they're screened for intelligence and self control and like they're not shallow people. No, right. No, they're deep thinkers. I can tell. But just be like everyone around you is doing it. So it seems normally was not uncommon to see a guy at the team that just made headlines around the world and say, hey, dude, you just made headlines. It's cool. You want to go to the gym? Just blow it off. When my buddy rescued, we're rescued Richard Phillips. And we're on the ship. And I said, this is obviously before the, can you explain the Richard Phillips story for those who don't remember? Yeah, it was the, uh, the Mariscale Bama was a ship carrying crate around the Horn of Africa. And Somali pirates had started taking the ships as criminals because the insurance company is always paying the ransom every time. So it's going to be a lucrative business. And, um, they captured the Mariscale Bama and Richard Phillips was a captain in order to save his crew because there was a fight on board. He got in a lifeboat and then the four terrorists are criminals. Got in a lifeboat and then they went out off to see because he was going to just send them out. But they took him as a prisoner because they could sell him to Al Shabaw or whatever they're going to do. And eventually, um, the USS Bainbridge, a destroyer started towing it. So they're towing this around, uh, not sure what to do with them that you got terrorists inside there in a, in an American prisoner. I mean, even to the point that he jumped out once and he was looking at the Navy like, are you going to go hot? Like you can go shoot now because I'm in the water and they didn't even shoot like you're putting his life at risk because they get him back. So they tied him up and all that stuff. And then that's when they called us. And I was, um, it was my birthday, good Friday, April 10th. And I was at my daughter's Easter Tea Party at her preschool and I'm getting her cupcakes. I got a pink plate and I walked over to four years old and I got a message that you're going to get him now. So I had to kiss my daughter like looking in the eye like that's the hardest part to combat. Look her in the eyes and kind of realize this could be it. This could be the last time we ever see each other. And there's a huge difference between kissing your kid good night and kissing your kid good bye. And she was always there. Like she was forger and that when she was one after lunch or vivir she was seven going after bin Laden. But he's saying goodbye to her given her a kiss and then, uh, well, I, we had a set amount of time to get to work. We've been selling it since 1980, but we've never done it. And I have about an hour to get selling it to selling that we can be wheels up at a certain time and we can be anywhere in the world in 24 hours. We've been selling it to like J. Sock the army and the white house. And you got to figure the Obama administration only been in office for a few months. So there this is very serious. But the funny part of the story was I was a head of schedule and I stopped at a 711 on the wait. There's a 711 outside the base and I got a log of Copenhagen to carton cigarettes and as much cash as I could out of the ATM. That's the spirit. Because I knew we're going to be jumping on the east coast of Africa, but there's never a perfect plan. We might not land where we want. I'm the lead jumper. And I might we might not end up where we want. If I land in a semi permissive environment, I might be able to barter with the locals with the tobacco or pay my way to save you with cash. What brand is cigarettes? I bought parliament lights. Parliament people. Lights. Yeah. But I was in there to get it and there was one dude. There was one dude in front of me and he was buying a USA today. And the headline was about Richard Phillips about the mission we're trying to do. I'm right behind him and he slammed it down on the counter and kind of announced the whole store. And I sure was someone would do something about this. And I'm behind him recognizing the irony and looking at my watch. And I tap him on the shoulder and he turns around and go buddy, pay for your shit and we will. Like I'm not even kidding. Like the national security timeline is squarely on your very broad shoulder. He should make it within. Yeah. I made it in time and then 15 hours and 46 minutes after I got the message we were in the Indian Ocean with 103, 103 guys full head count. And then a day and a half later on. How'd you get the Indian Ocean? We jumped out of the C-17. We flew from Oceana, refilled and then I led the jump out. And we had a dude behind me that he wasn't a seal and he didn't have any skydives. But he was a communicator. He set up the radio so we could talk to the White House. But then we're like, we might need better communication. We get down there. So I'll handle this. I went over and kind of kicked him and said, hey, huge change in plans. I guess we guess the skydive. And he's like, oh, no, I didn't join the Navy to be a seal. I don't want a skydive. And I was like, you're half right. Have a nice jump. And so we told him on the plane. Oh, we're jumping out over there. You're going to strap up to my buddy here and he's going to jump. Well, that was a funny story too. Because I'm on the ramp. We just launched the boats. I'm the lead jump. I'm the first guy to bring the guys down. I turn around at the end. Is this poor kid doing his first tandem? And before I jump, I'm in a great mood. Right? Because I hooked him up. I'm a tandem master. So I'm doing the personnel inspection on him. He's just the radio guy. He's a radio guy. And I could have ordered him to go. But I'm like in a good mood. And I'm like, dude, chicks pay for the shin on the weekends. And that water's like 90 degrees. This is gorgeous. He's going to be so fun. And he's scared of death. So I'm getting ready to jump. And I turn around. And I kind of give him a thumbs up. And I'm getting nothing. And my buddy who I connected into his head comes around and kind of gives me a thumbs up. And then this kid looks back and they're like any other intimate space. And the last thing I heard my buddy say, well, don't look at me, bro. I don't know what half this shit does anyway. For you, jump. And then we jump in. So the kid actually went out the plane. Oh, yeah. He says, scared of the whole mission. He said, well, yeah. Yeah. And then it ended on Easter. So you landed the water. And the water. And the sink, the parachutes. We sent four boats out. So we hop on the boats. And we go to the USS Boxer. And then we put the snipers on the Bainbridge. And then we were coming up with plans. Because no one had thought of a life bopping towed by a destroyer. So literally everyone come up with a plan and we'll write them down and we'll come up with the top five. And as we're doing that, the snipers got a good look. They were looking at them for a while. And they got the shots and they just took it. And one of the stories, I don't know if it's true because I wasn't with them. But his story's awesome. One of the snipers, there's an obstacle at SEAL training called the slide for life where you climb the structure and then you slide on top of a rope all the way down. And we always thought, what's the application, the reality of it? When are we ever going to need this? Yeah. That one guy needed it that one time when he crawled down a rescue Richard Phillips. So he crawled down there. And again, this is his story. He said he pulled this pistol and he's getting ready to go in that small hatch in the back. And just being an arrogant Navy SEAL, he's like, this is the only time I'm going to rescue someone. I got to think of something cool to say. So you'll see him here to get you out. Whatever. He said he went in there and now he's in this live boat cover. They've been using it for a toilet for five days. And it's in this hot African sun. And now there's three dudes laying in it with their heads blowing off. And he said he looked at Richard Phillips. And the first thing he said was, I'm going to need therapy after this shit. That's what I say. I'm going to need therapy. Did he? I don't know. And I don't know if he said that the story's awesome. It was, I mean, to crawl into a, you know, a latrine filled with guys that had their heads blowing off. Pretty heavy things to see. Oh, yeah. It is. What I was getting at though was when when my buddy did that, and I talked to him afterwards. And they did a really good job in the movie. The sniper shoot. Then they put their biopods up and they leave. I talked to my buddy and I said, you realize that you've just done the most important thing in the history of the SEAL teams. And his response was cool. Can we go home? How long did it take you to get it home? About two weeks. We went to cutter and hung out at the pool for two weeks. Carry okay night. R&R. What a weird life. Oh, yeah. Well, because we never, because we'd never done that mission before. We'd been selling it since the 80s. And that actually reminds me of the mindset. This is because, you know, getting to SEAL team six, the mindset, those snipers were sleeping in their own beds on a long weekend. And their guns that not need to be sighted in for the most difficult shots of their lives. If they would have, they didn't get complacent. Complacency kills. Complacency is caused by success. Too much success and you have a tendency to say the worst thing you can say when you're running a team. Well, this is the way we've always done it. R&R. Those guys get us and I'm going to cite my gun in on Tuesday. I can drink barrel weekend. And that's a shortcut that's being complacent. And they weren't complacent and to save them as life. Those shots. I mean, they're shooting through a window and two moving boats. You know, there's some serious. And if they miss, they're going to kill right away. Like if you miss the shot, he's going to execute that. And it's on you. And that's a lot of pressure. How do you, how do you hit something when both the object you're standing on in the object the target is standing on a moving? They done it 10,000 times in training. They muscle memory, they shooting at movers, walkers, cars, shooting in wind when someone's walking, like having to move in target and wind. So it almost is shooting behind it, but you know the wind is going to take it into them. Anticipating the, with the sea state that's like and you're leading them. I didn't take the shot of all some shots. They were, yeah, they were pros. Really good dudes. So how long between that mission and two years would you do for that two years? As soon as, as soon as Kat and Phillips was done, we went over to Afghanistan and I was on the base when Bobo or Galwalkoff. So we try to rescue him. That's a weird story too. Because I, wherever you are be there, be present and I happen to find myself on all these major missions, just because I was available. I've had Army guys joke with me. They said that I'm the force company. The Navy only I'm not as good looking. I can't run as fast. I'm not sure how to take that. But Bobo or Galwalked off, because the way that we would work overseas is we see who is Bobo Galbo was the guy that would tell of them, grabbed him and they held him for five years in Pakistan and then the army flew in and traded out those five Taliban guys for Bobo Gal. So he was a POW, but he walked off because he was an idiot. Right. And the way that we would walked over to the Taliban, he walked out just because he was going to start a new life in the mountains and he, it's one of those things where just because you don't think you're at war with someone doesn't mean they're not at war with you. Exactly. When he walked off the base, I went into the tactile operation center with a coffee and they said, yeah, this dude just walked off the base and I was like, he walked off. So yeah, we intercepted this phone call from the locals calling the Taliban. They said, we found this American soldier, do you want him? And they said the Taliban said, what do you mean you found him? They go, they said, we found him on the side of the road taking a shit and the Taliban response was, yeah, we want him and he'll never shit right again. And that, and like that dude was held for five years. And I've been asked before to city, he should do jail time. It's like, no, he needs therapy because he's been punished. He realized he made a huge mistake. Whatever happened to him. I don't know. I think he got commercial. I don't know. I should look that up. Wow. So you went to Afghanistan after the Indian Ocean. What was that like? Uh, it was the same. It was summertime. So they don't really fight in the winter. They do the spring offensive and they fight all summer. And we just been authorized a few years prior to actually fight the Taliban because we were fighting just al-Qaeda as a tier one unit and then they authorized us to Taliban so we could fight anybody. It was just, I mean, same stuff looking for targets that weren't as important as our government tries to make them. They like words like shadow governor and here's the spider web of this, you know, this leader of it's like, or you mean a farmer. Like where's al-Qaeda within Pakistan? Where aren't we in Pakistan? Why weren't we in Pakistan? Well, I don't know. We were running sources in and out and then the agency was right there. My actual deployment right before the bin Laden raid, I was running several outstations working with the agency. The bin Laden team was there and I didn't know them. And it was, I used to give the agency shit. I was like the biggest problem with the CIA is they make too many cool movies about the CIA. They're not that cool. But the bin Laden team was there and they were that cool and I just didn't know it and then I met them later. Where are they really? Yeah. They lived up to the hype. When I met them at first when the commanding officer, SEAL Team 6 came in with a team of women and said the reason you guys are here, this is as close as we've ever been to a summer bin Laden and they explained to us how they found them. I was like, okay, this is their tier one unit. But the whole time they were there because we got back from Afghanistan like in February or March. My last, well, my second to last appointment was like my 12th deployment, I think. And then they, we went to Miami for diving. We were still thinking some only pirates in the mothership. Like we're going to make up tactics out of dive in currents in the middle of the ocean so we can hit an anchorage ship. And plus it ran south beach, like we just finished war and we'll train all day and then we'll go out and have fun on the patio with, happy hour with our friends. And then we got recalled to Virginia, just the senior guys and they, when we first got there, they said, this is real. This is not a drill. We found a thing and this thing is in a house and it's in a bowl in these mountains. And in this country and you're going to go get it and you're going to show it to us. We're like, cool. What's the thing? Can't tell you, okay, which countries is can't tell you? How are we getting there? Can't tell you. How much air support we got? None. Okay. That's an answer. And then we assumed it was Libya. Um, Gaddafi, the Arab Spring, whatever that was was happening. So this is April 2011. We assumed, okay, we're going to fly off some ospreys off a flat top. And they don't want to tell us because ospreys have a shady track record. They've crashed. Yeah, I was. So we're going to go there, get them and bring them back. That's got to be it. So we were actually training for that. And oh, they said also, you're not taking any air force guys. So if you're used to carry a radio, you're the radio guy. If you're used to be a corpsman, you're the medic because we're not bringing PJ or CCT. And so we're adjusting our gear for about a week. And he even other dudes from other color teams are coming up to us like, hey, the super secret mission. What is it? I don't know. And they're like, come on, you can tell me. Like, I honestly don't know what it is. And then they, um, on a Friday, they briefed us again and said, all right, go home, be with your kids. Come back Sunday at about five a.m. And we're going to leave and we're going to drive you to a place and read you in. And then by the way. They briefed us again and said, all right, go home, be with your kids. Come back Sunday at about 5 a.m. and we're going to leave and we're going to drive you to a place and read you in. How many men, by the way, had kids, would you say? I think all of us. Wow. Maybe one of the guys in the mission didn't. Maybe two. I could be wrong, but most guys were family men. Most guys were in their early thirties. Married. And then they were briefing us. There's actually a funny story. Coming on Sunday and I remember asking who's going to be there at the at the read and they said, well, the vice president secretary defense secretary of the Navy. It's like, jeez. What they're going down the list and they said, CTC pad will be there bubble on the kept going on. I didn't say anything, but CCC pad is a counter terror pack afghan. If we're going to Libya, that doesn't make any sense. No. So I went home and then we came back. They split us up. This is a funny story. They split us up four dudes in vans and we're driving down to North Carolina. My boss is next to me. My two buddies are driving and I told them exactly that CTC pad. I said, this isn't Gaddafi. They found in law. And my boss looks like me and he goes, that's exactly what I was thinking. So we're just calmly discussing it and my buddy driving as bad as a sound. See, look me in the river mirror and goes, man, no, Neil, if we kill some of the lawn, I will suck yo dick just like that. Rude, but three weeks to the day we're standing over his body and I went, hey, now's a good time. He's like, oh, hell, no, I'm like, you said it. But the other we went down to the thing and the team was there and we weren't joking anymore. We're all serious and they said, yeah, this is as close as we've ever been to Osama bhamad and the head. Targeter explained, she must have talked to us for three hours about how she found him to the point where it's like, okay, we just believe you. I don't need to know anymore. I don't need to know how the sauce is. I trust you. We're going. So let's train up on it. Come here. Go now. What was she like? Just cool as cool as you can imagine. Just awesome professional. Like she's, she's the reason that I, when I was saying, okay, this is the real tier one. See, she was like that badass. The team was badass, but she was like in charge of it. She even came with us to do all of that. She stayed with us the whole time. Yeah. Just didn't go to A bad with she stayed at the, at the talk in J bad. But we trained for a couple of weeks. Just on the exterior, because I don't want you to tell me what you think is inside. Like if you tell me there's definitely going to be a right turn, there's going to be a left turn. So don't. It's like almost when, when we go to a target, I don't want you to tell me how many men, women and children you see. Tell me how many people you see and I'll figure out who they're when I get there. So let me do that. So we trained on the exterior. We came up with the perfect plan. We talked about contingencies. The youngest guy in the room one night said, well, the helicopter could crash in front yard. Let's talk about that for 30 seconds. And that's what happened. And then we went out west to, well, we would stand around this table at night talking about it. And you know, what, and this was in Jaulb. No, this is in North Carolina. Someone who made a two scale model of his entire place and like seals are funny. Like then we have a good time. And guys were joking. And I'm usually the guy telling a joke or whatever. But I said to the guys like, Hey, you just take this a little more serious because this is a one way mission. Like we're not coming home. This is it for us. We're going to get shot down. There's going to be a fight. And if anyone's going to blow us house up when we're in it's been lying, we're going to run out of fuel like take this serious. And then we went out out west to Nevada. And we met the helicopters. And we turned a corner. We saw these things and everyone was kind of laughing. And I remember someone said to me, why you laughing now? And I go, well, there's a better chance we're going to live because I didn't know we were going to war on Transformers. These helicopters that they got. So we trained on them for a while and then what were they stealth helicopters that no man invented? Like these six, I don't I can't even describe them. They're just awesome. And we were training with them with what makes them different from. I don't know. It's got to be the angles of the the outside the structure and the paint. Had you ever seen one? No, no one had the president and nobody. The president did that. When they were talking about what are they going to do? Or we're going to bomb the house place. And the Air Force said that to bomb it, we got to put 22 J dams on that house, 2000 pound bombs. Like you'll never know he was there. And then I guess the chief of staff, the Air Force said there's one more option. And he told them about the helicopters. And that's what we went out to train with them. So the president didn't know that his own military had these. Yeah. And he was cool too. There was no there was no partisan politics on this mission. This was just this is the right thing to do. When we first presented a plan, two helicopters, 32 minutes and then fly out, you might run a fuel so we're going to run over the Hindu Kush. Like we got to get back to Afghanistan. If we get compromised, it's going to be because of the local police. It's not it's like if someone invaded near West Point, it wouldn't be cadets going after them. It would be the cops. And then that weren't aware of spot because I don't want to kill cops. I don't want to kill Pakistan. Please, they're just doing their job. We're here without their invitation. So what we said is we're going to will hardpoint it. And then you need to send someone to Islamabad and negotiate our release or whatever because we're not going to surrender or whatever. But by now, it was our plan. And I guess Barack Obama again looked at the chief of staff of the Air Force and said, what do you need to rain hell in Pakistan? My guys are not surrounded anybody. Good for him. Which is some South Chicago politics right there. He was awesome. So we got a gorilla pack as we got more helicopters, more stuff juiced up. And I don't even know what we had over overhead. But I mean, when we finished and they launched F-16s, I know we had something up there that convinced them to turn around. But these helicopters, was anyone aware that these existed? No, no, but I mean, these are hell. So the US military can just like have a, I mean, a hell, it takes a lot to build a hell of a guy. That's very well. I mean, and I can't get too much into it because right, to extent you can. They're like, you're not even a lot of talk about what you think you saw here. Like, there's a shit going on. And you say they were out in Nevada, where in Nevada? Well, I can't say that either. Yeah, but I think we know. Yeah, we probably know. Yeah, near Vegas. That's what we stayed. That's great. I mean, it was gave me faith in what we can do if we need to. I just find it very not to, I never thought I'd be focused on the helicopter, like who cares. But and it was, but that's the weirdest thing I've heard in a long time. Yeah. And then you got to figure the pilots had never heard of them. And so they, they got a practice for what five days. And then they're flying us into Pakistan. Those are the heroes, the pilots. How do you get a machine like that from Vegas to July, all of that? That's, I think they probably put it in the C 17, flew them over. And then when they put them together, they're too like they're in the middle of an airfield with their cover during the daytime. And then there's bright light shining out. So no one can see them. They would put these things in the hangar. So like Chinese satellites couldn't see them. They're pretty serious. What's like to ride on one was comfortable. It was quiet. And it was just cool. We had, there was more room in that they look kind of like 60. Because there's no engine right. It's just, oh, they're yeah, they're flying by magnets. Yeah. But no, they were, they were cool. And it was, it was comforting because I mean, once you take off and cross the border, they tell you that you're in Pakistan, it's like, okay, now we're going to find out if this works. And then then again, the mindset comes in like worrying about a missile is not going to stop it. So I'm not going to worry about it. You know, if like you're worried about anything in life that your worry doesn't affect why you're wasting your energy. So what I, what I do, I learned as a sniper was count. So I would count from zero 2000,000 zero. And I was just getting that in my head, you know, count, change the cadence up, just count, you know, looking at the watch. We got 90 minutes to get in there. Cairo, Cairo, the dog was sitting next to me, the Malaw. No easy, no ordinary dog is a book written about him. His handler, Chesney was right here. Good dog. He was the best dog we, he was the best dog I've ever worked with. Cairo is the best. What made him, I don't know. He was just a, he was smart. He was just a good boy. He, he'd been shot before in the chest in a gunfight way. Yeah. Um, and when a dog gets shot, he's just dead. And we got, we were really, we're gunfight couple years before we were doing vehicle interdictions. Uh, Taliban and al Qaeda were figuring that we were coming after them at night. So they would start driving their motorcycles right around dust to cross the border Pakistan. And then we just started hunting them on their motorcycles. And if you've never hunted men out of a helicopter on motorcycles, you have not lived. You take big hunting. That's nothing. Hunting guys on motorcycles. So we got in a fight one night where we found the low ground. We yes, in the end of the program, we had to split it up. And I had to flank some guys up here. And these guys went down there and there was, we could hear my guys in a fight and they said, hey, we got a friendly wounded in action. And I asked who is, and I wanted to call sign because you know, if you tell a call sign, you don't know who it is, but I know exactly who it is. And they said Cairo. And I'm like, he's dead. I just, he gets shot in the chest and the arm. But the guy with him, who was actually the point man on the Belan raid got to him and like shaved him and put a chest seal on him. The pilots came in under fire and pulled them out and then away and the surgeons were waiting for him and they saved him. So Cairo lived and he actually, he actually pilots landed under fire to save the dog. Because that does make you love America. Yes. Because he's one of the guys where his pack and other countries don't end up. And so he went on trips with us again and he actually, he actually got PTSD. Because we'd be on targets and we tell him to go in a room and he kind of, you sure? Like, yes, that's your job. Get in there. But then he went on the Belan raid and he was like, why do you part of my ignorance? Why do you bring a dog on a raid? He can smell him. He can find him. People hiding. I've had him open secret doors for me. Like get on their hind legs and push something in it opens in a castle. Just weird Afghanistan stories. They'll chase people down. They'll, they'll corner them. Just like finding a grouse. It's good. Yeah. Yeah. And there I'm, well, even a Cairo, I read stories that he had some $20,000 titanium teeth, which is bullshit. He had one tooth because of a gum disease. He was there for his nose and his job was a good boy. He was just a good boy. But on the, on the, yeah, he was, he was with us always. He was, he was one of the dogs it could when we were overseas, we would have like the stadium seating with leather couches to watch them. we're not working, watch TV and everyone can sit there. And once you take their vest off, they're just part of the pack now. So you can pet him. You can play with them. And they want their ball more than the, more than a treat. But then they'll do stuff like if they're up on the same level as you and put upon you, you got to push them off because they're trying to get up there because like his handler is his dad and you're an uncle. Yeah. And if they start doing that posh, if they're trying to get up the chain of commands, they certainly are. But then you're trying to dominate. But then you got to be careful because he doesn't have a muzzle on if you piss them off, maybe he'll bite. But Kyra never would. None of the dogs ever bit. Well, one dog probably did, but he was just a good, but he never would do that. He wouldn't even try to challenge for hierarchy. He was just awesome. Just a great dog that books amazing, no ordinary dog is amazing. And they can find people anywhere. Yeah. You're not hiding from him and you're not going to outrun him. He'll, if you, if you score it to because it's bit, you know, it's better to send a dog to get him to do just shoot a guy. You can he'll bite him and then we'll arrest him because you don't know, he might be running because he's afraid or what I'm not under the bottom. And this is not a culture in Afghanistan or Pakistan, people keep dogs at home. Right. No, they hate dogs, but they have dogs. They have them like one of the hardest things to get used to is the 30 dogs that are barking as you roll up on a house. They're just out there barking all the time, but they're not pets. No. But our dog, that's cool to watch our dogs with those dogs because they don't give a shit like this. It's like, I'm so much better than you. I didn't even pay attention to the other dogs. Really? Uh huh. Like I'm the one wearing a vest. I'm carrying extra magazines. You're nothing. They carry extra mags and they were a flag and he had his red man patch out. And so he I was sitting next to Cairo. He was asleep on the play. And it was a funny conversation just to what because not conversation. I was looking around the hilo flying into bin lawns house just to see how my guys were handling. We could get shot down. How are you guys dealing with this? And one of my friends was asleep. He put his headphones on. He was asleep. And I kid you not the when I said to myself was you're asleep literally on the ride to a summit bin lawns house. Like you have eyes and your veins and I actually see why women find you attractive. That's badass. That is. And then we have banked to the south 10 minutes out and uh and uh and uh it sounds Hollywood. But I was counting still and I don't know how I remembered the quote. But I said 556 557 freedom itself was attacked this morning by a faceless coward and freedom will be defended. And it kind of sunk in 10 minutes from bin lawns house like holy shit. This is the mission. This is the team and we're going to kill him holy shit. And then like the air crew guy who never gets credit. He reached over and opened the door two minutes out. Like the the crew chief's job was to keep the helicopter flying and open the door. That's it. But how important is that? What if we couldn't have figured out the door? But just sitting in a helicopter can't get out. And if we had hit with a missile he's got a family too and they'll miss him. But no one ever mentions him. He's a hero. He opened the door. He was the first step of us getting into bin lawns house. Who are the pilots? Not by name but no, they get to fly a machine there are a task force 160 at the night stalkers. Talented. They're the best in the world. Army helicopter pilots are the best helicopter pilots in the world. And we got the best for. And we're lucky we did because the flight lead saved everyone's life on the first helicopter by crash landing it in the front yard. How does crash land to helicopter like that? Well, he told me I'm not a pilot, but he told me when they were coming into fast rope, which is when you hover 30 feet 20 feet, whatever ropes come out snipers are watching guys just slide down. They're going to separate to where they're going. And Mike, we're going to drop some guys off and Cairo outside and then Mike teams going to the rooftop. We're going to hit him that way. But as soon as he started to hover, he realized he couldn't hover like there was an updraft. Some with the fences were different than the ones we were training on. And it was a little bit warmer than we were used to. So they're not going to get much lift. And he said an inexperienced pilot would have powered it up and rolled it and everyone would have died. But he realized in a blink of an eye if he can turn it and put the tail on the 15 foot fence and pin the nose, everyone might live. And he made that decision quicker than I just explained it and he just smacked it into the ground. And then our pilots was bringing us to the rooftop. He wasn't injured in that. Yeah. But not like at the time, like they have bad backs now like they're spine stuff. But nobody got hurt right then. And plus the adrenaline was pumping. I'd imagine just getting dropped like getting dropped off in a crash helicopter in the front yard of the number one terrace in the world. And you don't know what the resistance is going to be. And so our guy lifted up, but he saw them and then put us down. And he knew they couldn't hover. He probably couldn't hover, but we didn't know they crashed. So they just he kicked us out. So now we're outside of Ben Lon's house looking at a 20 foot wall on this and I can see his house. And I remember just thinking, I guess we start the war from here. We know what we're doing. There's a door right over there. Let's go blow that one up. So we went to the northeast corner where there's a double door. And I called a breacher up who's a breacher is the methods of entry guy. He's going to get you in. He'll pick that lock. He'll break that glass. He'll blow that door. So he decided to put seven foot charge of C six on the double door, which will open anything. And he blasted it and we tried to go in and there was an open like a tin can, but there was a brick wall behind it. And I was there a brick wall behind door. He just made a fake door. And the breacher turned around and he goes, fake door. This is failed breach. This is bad. And I said, no, this is good. That's a fake door. Nobody does that. He's in there. So now we know this door opens over here. It's a carport. So we had to go pass this house to this double door that we knew open because we'd seen it open. And the the other we heard them saying dash one going around dash one going around because we assume they took fire and they're doing a racetrack and they're going to reengage, but they were saying dash one going down. So we didn't know they crashed and we said, Hey, this is so and so we're going to blast the carport and they said, No, no, don't blast it. We'll open it. And before that could even register the double doors open and the thumb came out with a glove that we recognize. And it's like, okay, it doesn't matter. I don't know why they're in there, but it doesn't matter. They just are they're in there. And that's the that's a point in life. Like sometimes it doesn't matter why exactly we're just it just isn't the clock's ticking. I told you yesterday about the football team when I talked to the offense. Like it doesn't matter why it's second and 15. It just is. And you can complain about it, but the clock's ticking. We got to make a move. So then we went there was already and this is a weird thing about rules of engagement to one of my guys was outside of the house and he shot through the window at I think a bar. One of the careers and his wife jumped in front of him. So he shot her to and he looked at me. This is how fucked up the rules of engagement. He goes, this is a seal came six. He goes, I she just jumped in front of my just shot her. Am I going to be in trouble? And I go, dude, who cares? We let's go find a lot and then we'll worry about rules of engagement. But why is that in your mind right now? Because your leadership is so poor that you're thinking about going to jail right now. So then we got inside the house. These are all guys from the other helicopter. They're going down a long hallway and I hopped into a room because like if you know, I hope you're never in this position. But if you're in a gunfight and a house, get out of the hallway, it's just that's a good business. So I'm in this thing and I'm looking for bombs because this he's going to blow this house up. He's got to be a marker. And one of the guys behind me just said, um, helicopter crashed. And I said, because we had extra helicopters. So I thought there were 45 minutes behind us. They weren't stealth. So I thought we just lost two helicopters. He's pulling my friends. I'm like, my God, what helicopter crashed? He goes, bro, our helicopter crashed in the front yard. I think you walked right past it. You didn't even notice it. No, I didn't notice it. But now it makes sense. Okay. Now that's why they're in here. And then even the sniper who was with Cairo running around, he saw the tail on the fence. So he's running around and the tail is right there. And his response, he came over the radio and said, all right, guys, be on alert. They're ready for us. They have a training mockup of our super secret helicopter in the free yard. And then the, there was a lot of training. And the boss came over and there's no jackass. That's ours because we crashed. And he goes, that makes a lot more sense. And the shit I was just saying. So these are the conversations. And it's crazy to think that guys still have their sense of humor. But then I'm just, and I'm behind my guys and I'm watching them. And it was just so cool. I was just so proud of them. Like we could die any second. And it's not even phasing you guys. You're just doing your job slow as smooth, as fast. No one's freaking out. Just you're, you're, you're escalating as necessary. You know, you're, you're, you're kicked the door, try the door, kick the door, go mechanical, go explosive, boom. And then the woman told us, uh, you're going to run into a stairwell and you're going to run into Cleveland line. So the head who's played been lying his son, his 20 year old son. And she said, and she ended up being 100% right on everybody in the house. This was the CIA. Yeah, woman, sorry, not checking. Um, I doubt she'd care. I don't think she gives a shit. But yeah, he was right there and he hopped behind a banister and we got eight dudes going up the stairs. It kind of turned, they go up and turn back and they're separated by, um, just a banister and they're both armed. They're both grown men and they want to kill each other. And so instead of now, normally I'd pick some guys back and move them out of the way because in an urban environment, they start throwing grenades. Of course. But I'm, we're going to die. So I want to see how this goes down. I got to see this. And he just whispered to him because we're quiet. We don't, we're not saying anything to each other. So we confuse the shit out of him. And, uh, he whispered something along the lines of come here, come here and Urdu and, and Arabic. And he said his name twice, Khalid and Khalid leaned over, he's got a gun. He'll never was what? Blast him. Right there. How did he know how to say, I don't know here, Khalid, that's how smart he was. He just knew he would need to know how to say that. Just certain things like I was kind of arrogant that when someone tried to teach me how to say drop your gun. So like, I don't need to know how to say that. I can say like that. I'll just shoot him. He'll drop his gun. But this guy learned it. And like he just was smart. And that's a, I don't know how many lives because if we turn that corner for an AK, I don't care how much body arm you have on at that range with it, 762. Yeah. He killed them. And I remember walking over his body thinking, okay, that's the coolest thing I've ever seen. And I was right for about seven seconds. And then I saw him on. That was cooler. But we went to the second floor. I'm about seven or eight. I forget the number back. And guys start to split off because you got unknowns. There are people in here, rooms over there and there. So they're cleaning that and then it's down to two guys now. So the point man, the killed the Khalid and then me. And the way that works is he's looking up and I'm looking back and I have, you want to have not control, but you want to let the point man know you're there. So either hold his leg or hold his shoulder. And he's feeling that. And his, he's always looking forward and wherever his eye goes, his gun goes. So he's looking at the top of this curtain and he can see people moving behind it. And so he starts to pimp me. Doesn't know it's me, but he knows it's one of his shooters. And he just starts saying, we got to go now. Come on, we got to go. We got to go. Because you're saying those are the suicide bombers, but we can beat him, but we have to go right now. And for me, it was just, it wasn't bravery. It was like, he's right. I want for, I want, I'll take two, but it's going to be just us. And I, I, I've just, we're going to blow up now and try to thinking about it. And I just squeezed him and he went up. And there's a curtain at the top of the stairs, not a door. And he moved the curtain and then there was these two women there. And he assumed those were suicide bombers. So he just jumped on, which is most courageous thing. I jumped on, I tackled them to absorb the blast. So the guy behind him could get a shot. Like it's crazy. Can't say that man's name. No, but he should have a metal of honor. Someone knows who he is. And it's not hard to figure it out. And just be, and simply because he went, this way I turned left and there's been on San and there was been on do he had his both hands on a mall, his wife. And she was shorter and he was tall. And he was maneuvering. He was skinnier than I thought his beard was kind of gray. Uh, taller than I thought he'd be skinnier. I remember skinny, but I was looking right at him. That's his nose. I've seen that nose a thousand times. He said he look at you. I think so, but it was dark. And it was, he's a threat. I got to kill him. And the way you kill a suicide bombers shoot him in the mouth or in the head. So I shot him twice in the head then once more on the floor because all they need to do is suicide. Well, I dealt with suicide bombers and it is terrifying and it's permanent and it's loud, it's scary. And all they need to do is have like a negative and a positive. They just got touched the leads. So they can do that like this and then there's go, oop, and then everyone blows up. So I was even giving some shit about that. Like why just shoot him in the face? Positive identifications like well, shoot him in the chest. People live for a couple seconds after you shoot him in the chest. You want to kill him. He needs to go down. Would you shoot him with five, five, six? Yep. Hall of points. 77 green. How? 18k, 416. How long between when you identified him in shot him? Probably second, maybe a second. That's like the saying we had is you have a second to convince me not to kill you. And he didn't do it. And that was his bedroom. Yeah. What was his bedroom like? Big bed, King. But I think he and I think there was him, his daughters and his wife and young son were all in there. I think it was two daughters, I think at the time when you shot him, they were all there. Yeah, they were all there. Well, it was the daughter that actually said finally it was that Shaco, Sama, you got him. That's before we did the Geronimo call. Because we, this is cool. We had a dude from another squadron who had been teaching himself Arabic. So he was already deployed with blue squadron and we were red squadron and we floated all about he was there. And because he taught himself Arabic, we're bringing you because you're a shooter. So you'll think six, you're coming. So congratulations. So he was the one that was speaking Arabic. And even his buddies were given him shit because we'd stopped going to Iraq and we're just in Afghanistan and said, why are you still studying Arabic? Exactly. He don't need it. Well, it's like the skydive. I might need it once. And the daughter was trying to say it wasn't him. She finally said, yeah, that's him. That's Shaco, Sama, you got him. His daughter said that. And then when we came over the radio for God and country Geronimo, he can. And that wasn't, we didn't, we got shit for that too because we used the word Geronimo as a pro word. We didn't name him Geronimo. That would be an insult to chief Geronimo. It was a pro word in honor of chief Geronimo. Instead of saying, hey, I'm in Ben-Lon's and he's dead. You say Geronimo, EK, meaning Geronimo means I am with Ben-Lon right now. And you have different pro words instead of saying, hey, I'm at the front gate, you say something else. Like, how did the kids in the wife respond? They were shocked. They were surprised. Then they were scared. And they were the same as every target. They huddled in a corner and you know, you try to calm them down. Try to reassure them. You're not going to get hurt now. Just sit here. And then when you're leaving, you say, I'd stay here until the sun comes up. We do have aircraft. So don't go outside until Pakistani military gets her. Then you'll be fine. We're taking him. You see the only person you took? You left everybody else there. What else did you take? We found a bunch of intel. We didn't know if he was running al-Qaeda, but he was. He had, it might have been two or three offices. So we took, they had the old school towers for home computers. So we crushed those two hard drives out. We found a bunch of CDs and a bunch of papers and anything electronic were written. We just threw it in the bag and brought it back. And then we spread it up with the intel analysts when we got back. And they went through, I didn't really go through anything. I've heard rumors of missions and porn and all that stuff. But I think the porn might have been there because they were, they embedded missions on that. So if someone looked at it, they would just be porn, but not the mission they're trying to send, I guess. And again, that might not be what happened, but that's what someone told me. But I didn't go through any of the intel. The inside of his house was it like the house of a rich guy? No, it was, it was kind of standard. Like, I think he might have been the only one with a bed bed, the rest of them had like formats, just kind of like everywhere over there. And then, you know, there's animals and trash that they burn. And it's not a, I mean, there's a garden they were growing their food and three story house, but it wasn't, I mean, it looked like the outside of his stone inside. There wasn't a lot of decoration. There was a couple things hanging up, you know, crayons on shelves and she'll like that. But how did it smell? I don't really remember. It's when I got in there, it smelled like bombs going off because my guys had breached a few times. So it smelled like a training area. But again, it was one of those things where you just kind of taking a snapshot. I remember saying like, you remember this because this is going to be it. Like this is a little up. Just remember this. And then, you know, I killed in line. We got in London. I was just standing there. I'm going to go take a picture. One of my guys came up to me and he goes, Hey, you good? And I said, um, what do we do now? Because we're still alive. And he's like, now we find the computers every night. We do this hundreds of times, right? And I said, yeah, you're right. Holy shit. And he said, yeah, you just killed Osama bin Laden. Your life just changed. I get to work. And I knew what work was so we got to get him in a body bag out of find the intel, bring him his body outside blow up a helicopter calling another helicopter and then hopefully live for 90 minutes and get back to Afghanistan. Did you take books? Possibly. I was more working on the computers. I was in the, um, I imagine, I'd imagine they took pretty much everything they could. How many people were killed in the raid? Four. One, two, three, four, five. Yeah, we killed the courier, the other courier's wife, Khalid and then Osama. What happened to his Osama bin Laden's body? Well, when we got back to Bagram, we flew him to Jalalabad. We showed him to the woman that found him. We showed him to see a target. Yeah, she was there. She wanted to see him and she saw him, said, I guess I'm out of a job and left. She said, yeah, she's kind of looked down like that. I guess I'm out of a fucking job. She was the only reason we were there because of her and she gave up her life to find him. She was so cool. No husband, no kids 20 hours a day only on this. And once you saw him, that's it. Like when I saw her later, I said, because every, no one at the agency believed her really, like 70%, maybe. And when they got back, she said like everybody got awards. And I didn't even get a parking splice. Yeah, but we showed, she sounds like a hard case. She's badass. She's like, if anyone knows her higher, I'm not going to say her name or what she looks like. But yeah, higher, that's a little point. Have any idea what happened to her? No, I don't, I mean, I've hurt. No, I don't know. Probably on Wall Street or something. She should be. Yeah, we brought it back to J bad. We showed him to Adam on the craving. Who was awesome? And he, you know, we, yeah, we had a just a moment looking at him. And I remember he put his hand on my neck, kind of like that. It was like a really just a cool team thing. Like here's the boss. Here's the guys. There's been Lon, what was what was been Lon wearing? He had on a, I think it was like pajamas like white pajamas might have been gray. It's kind of hazy. Yeah, for me. But then we brought him to Bagram, laid him out. They were doing the DNA tests. And this was a weird time for me too, because we're still in our gear. We laid out all of our intel. The smart people are going over that. The TV was on. And they brought us breakfast sandwiches. And President Obama, the red tie came down the red carpet. And he said tonight, I can report to the people into the world. The United States conducted an operation that killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al Qaeda. I hear President Obama say Osama bin Laden, I looked at Osama bin Laden. And I thought, how in the world did I get here from Butte Montana? And then I had to buy to the sound. So this is the best breakfast sound I've ever had. And then they did that. And then we had, we handed him on. And then we were looking at the TV and we're just like, say it, the no one was hurt. You got to say it. Say it. And he finally said no Americans were hurt. Like, thank you. Because our parents were now watching this back home. And they figured out by this point at this point. Yes, because we, well, I call my dad before I left on the mission. I couldn't even tell him what we were doing. I call him in my gear, Angel. All that I grabbed one of the phones and one of the behuts. And I called him and I would call him on missions before. And I would just say, Hey, God, I got to work whatever. And he would always say, I wish I was going with you. And I would say, you know what dad I wish you were to. And this one I called him. And I just was saying, Hey, you know, thanks for teaching me how to be a man. I got to go to work. And he said, I wish I was going with you. And I said, well, I'm with some really good guys. Don't worry. And then I left. And he was at home. And I'm getting a little emotional now. He was at home in a Walmart parking lot. And he sort of realized that word is going somewhere important. He didn't know I was overseas. And he went into Walmart. And he ran into his sister, who's a registered nurse. And she saw him. She's like, and my dad says, he was his two favorite words, apoplectic and catatonic. And she said, what's going on? And he goes, I don't know. I think, I think something's going on. And then we got back and he saw the TV and he said, holy shit, because my dad always thought that I was on the big mission. And he's going to think that was it. And he was, I even called my mom. I'd been joking with my mom my entire life, even in high school. I would say, don't worry about me, mom. I'm here to do something important. I'm going to be safe. Don't worry. I'm here to do something important. And I called her from Bagram. And I say, hey, mom, you can start worrying because that important thing. I would say don't worry about me, mom. I'm here to do something important. I'm going to be safe. Don't worry. I'm here to do something important. And I called her from Bagram and I say, mom, you can start worrying because that important thing I think I think it just went down. That's amazing. And then we handed him to the army and they flew him out to a ship and threw him over over into the ocean is what they told me. Not only is that an amazing story, you did an amazing job telling it. How long after you killed Osama? Did you get out of the Navy? My end of obligated service was January of 12th. So I was going to get out then. But then on August 6th of 11, extortion once heaven was shot down. Yes. We had 31 Americans on board and some Afghans. And we lost a lot of guys from CL Team 6 on that. I knew pretty much everyone on that helicopter. And so then I was definitely going to get out because I want to see my daughters get married. And the unfortunate truth is just so what, I mean, that changed your perspective. Yeah, because it can all everything that is in everything that's ever mattered to you can end with one bullet. Yeah. And a bullet never never lies and it needs to be right once. But then we also had a backfill those guys because we lost a troop of CL Team 6 guys. So I went to a different squadron to deploy one more time. And my thought process was I came in through the front door. I'm going to leave through the front door. So I'm going to go to war one more time to prove that I didn't just come here to kill bin Laden. I'm going to do one more deployment. So I actually bin Laden wasn't the last guy I killed with that gun. I went overseas again and I went with Silver Squadron. We had a winter deployment. Got in a couple fights, but it was winter in Afghanistan. So not a lot. My actually my last mission was an L ambush, which is the oldest tactic in war. The only time I've ever done is when you set up an L on someone either watch or drives right into it and you got him two ways. So we were able to do that with a vehicle. We were watching a vehicle start in his village, drive around a mountain. This is Afghanistan. And Afghanistan. And then they were waiting for Americans to ambush. And Americans didn't show up on Monday. So they went back to their house. They did it again on Tuesday. And then we're watching them now and then Wednesday and Thursday. And then I remember watching them saying if they do it tomorrow on Friday, they're day of prayer. They're definitely going to do it Saturday. So if they do it tomorrow, we're going to set up on them Saturday. So they did it Friday. Now we're going to set up on them. And this is the winter. It was a car and no one else is driving this road. So we just we inserted, we set up on these rocks, put some snipers up. So we have an L ambush. And we're going to wait for them. And everything, everything that can go wrong will, no matter what you're doing. The mission was so simple. We're someone is going to be in a plane watching them. And then they're going to give us a green light yellow red. And that's when we're pop out. And even I was even selling the army on our selling them. Like, yeah, I'm going to pop out. I'm going to stop the car. And he's like, what if he doesn't stop? I'm like, I'm going to shoot him. This is pretty easy. I'm just going to tell him to stop. And then if he doesn't want to kill him, the snipers will. So we set up there naturally, their car wouldn't start. So we actually took out cigars and went them up waiting for them to try to figure out how to start their car. So they're on this other side of this mountain. We're waiting over here. Car won't start. Like, I almost want to walk over there and help them put it and put it in gear jump it and then I'll run back to the rocks. But then we're waiting on them and we're starting to get the calls and a van full of women and children drives right past us. And it's like, what was that? Like, where did they come from? Like, imagine if we weren't well trained and we just lit up an entire family for no reason. So a van drove by and then these dudes finally drive up and we set, you know, we step out and I tell him to stop and he didn't want to stop. So we kill them. Him and he's like, they tried to get out, got their RPGs and we kill five of them, I think. and that was it. Last mission. And then the same right, Phil used to shoot Benlon. What happened that right? Then I brought it back and I asked them if I could keep it and they said, no, so I had to turn the gun in and I don't know if someone else got it. I don't know if they hung it up somewhere. I don't know what you know. I do what happened now. I kept the firing pin though, so I have that, but they kept the gun. So they might have given it to some one of those radio guys that is going to sky that for the first time. It just happened to be carrying the Benlon gun. It's pretty funny. Did you tell him this is the Benlon gun? Everybody knew. Yeah, and even the gun is made. He was cool. He let me keep the firing pin. Even the gun is made. He's like, easy. Come on dude. Let me keep the gun. I'll give you $10,000 for the gun. What kind of gun was it? $18,000 or $16,000. Good gun. Never had an issue. Never had a jam with that gun. So you come back from your last deployment to Afghanistan and then? Well, then I get done and I have, I had a bunch of terminal leaves. They call it, you get 30 days of paid leave a year and I hadn't taken any. So I have like 90 days of leave where I can still get paid, which is good because now I have until August to figure out how to get a job because we're to leave the military without a degree because I know guys now that would they'd rather go to war than fill out a resume because war makes sense. The resume does. I don't know what shoes to wear with the suit. Crap like that. So I had to learn what to do. And it's just unfortunate that I can tell a story. I'm fortunate that I can manage stress and solve problems. I got on the speaking circuit. I'm out of, again, just being present. I got offered with leading authorities out of DC. And the first speech I gave was to, I think, 2000 airline pilots. And I had no experience speaking. Never taken a class. And I remember remembering backstage looking out at this audience. I'm like, I called my agent. I'm like, hey, I've been to combat, am I going to faint when I get out on stage? I have never been looked at like this. And she said to me, here's what you do. Here's the key. Three glasses of red wine right now. Not two and not four. That was her prescription. Three. And you'll be fine. And then I didn't have them. But I walked on stage and they were pilots. So there was a lot of Navy guys, a lot of Marines in the audience. And one of the Marines, former Marines, he kind of heckled me. And that clicked like, oh, they're friendly. Okay, good. Good. This is a fun crowd. And so I gave my first speech like that. And just, and speaking is just, you can't really market it. You just, if you're good, someone in the audience hears you and hires you. That's success. So it's like I did one in November, and then two in December, and then five in January, and then 10 in February. And it started speaking. And then helped guys transition. How was your transition? I mean, it was difficult because, you know, I don't necessarily miss the missions, but I miss the guys. Of course, the skydive trips to Arizona. There's nothing like those. You know, skydiving with 30 year best friends, going out to dinner when you're done jumping, talking about the how close that jump wasn't jumping the next day. And, you know, I miss that. I miss the workouts, the morning stuff, because even a SEAL team too, we every Tuesday, Rayner, shine, we had the two mile ocean swim. And I'm talking like February and Virginia Beach is not fun to do it. But the bus ride to get there is hilarious. Just because every, it just sucks. And we all know we're just going to take a big bite of this shit sandwich, but we're all in it together. Let's go swim. I miss that. Yeah. If I never do an ocean swim again, it's fine, but I do miss that bus ride. What, what is PTSD? Uh, PTSD is real. And it takes for me and a lot of my friends, a lot of my Marines, a lot of SEALs, some of them don't have it, but for me, it seemed like a seven year thing. Like right around the seven year market starts to sink in what you were doing. Seven years out of the Navy is when it started to hit me. Real. And that's just, um, had you ever had any symptoms of what you would now describe as PTSD when you were serving in the name? No, or for the first seven years out. No. No. Interesting. Yeah. It just, it just seemed like, well, that's what we were supposed to be doing. But then, you know, you get older and you realize that, you know, I was in house as killing people in front of their families. I mean, even to the point where you're like, okay, I did kill that guy in front of his two sons. Now, did I get rid of a terrorist or I make two new ones? What are they going to do when they get all what are they doing now now that they're in their twenties? I mean, they're not going to forget me killing their dad in front of them. The guy that I killed in front of his wife, he's not, and I killed his brother right before I killed him in front of his wife there that they still remember that they still hate my guts. So you start to think about, I mean, I'm convinced I never killed the wrong person, but also, I started to think, could I, could I have talked them out of that? Because the one guy that I talk about, I tried to talk about a getting his gun. Like he got up and was trying to kick me. What, where was this? Was it a room? I rack. We, we just went into a house and as soon as we went in to the, it was a big, like sit on mansion type place. As soon as I went in as a guy with the gun, so I blasted him, that the other guys are coming in. There's an open door here and I did a one man entry, which he shouldn't do, but I went in there as a guy in bed with his wife. And I'm standing above him. And he, I can see a gun and he's right there and he's waking up and he's like, he threw a kick or something. And I remember thinking, okay, he just woke up, give him a courtesy 10 seconds because he's, he's groggy. And then he starts looking at the gun. And I was like, no, don't, don't do that. Don't do any went for any kill them. And then I put a white light on him and his wife now sees him. And so she screams. And then I'm like, man, I, I, and then the later I started to think into why did I shoot that guy? Well, because he went for his gun, but why did he go for a gun? Well, because I'm in his room at two in the morning. And then you start to take a while in my end of his room. Well, George Bush had a problem with that. So we invaded that rack. And that's why I just killed that guy. And again, everything that ever mattered to that dude doesn't matter anymore, because I just took it all the way from him. So that, and that just starts to, you know, that, you could, that can eat you up sometime. Me, anyway, some guys don't have a problem with any of it. And he was a terrorist. So whatever. But you still think about it. And the thing that I bring up to is if I had met that dude in Paris over coffee, did he know a joke? You know, that's, that's the weird shit. And then for me, it's PTSD is, is anger, like a quick anger and then hyper awareness, like even if I'm downstairs making a sandwich and my kids and I got to be looking at the doors, just to make sure no one's coming in, you know, yelling at the wife for not locking the door, arm the alarm. Here's the shotguns. Here's how it works. And she probably doesn't need to know all but that's just, that's part of it because one of my sayings is it's a large planet, but it's a small world. And people can get here really, really quickly. And we've done it to them. And they can do it to us. And it's one of those things that it's so dark and bad. And I know what people are capable of doing to each other. And I don't want to see it again. But, you know, if they come here, I mean, I'm ready for them. But you get an October 7th type thing in this country, people are not prepared for what they might see. Because it's people are people who are worse than animals as far as violence. We can do some of the most horrific shit to each other. That gets to me to the point where like I do, I've again now, I do psychedelics. I'm going to actually go back down with a company called Ambio in a couple of weeks to do I've again. I do it once a year just because when I when I start to get a short temper or just like if I have to have green noise on to sleep. So I can't hear what's going on my head. It's just time to get back into the psychedelics. And with a psychedelics, they get, they get me structured. So there's like a four or five month window for eye-be-gain that it works. And that's when you're supposed to structure yourself. So like for me, it'll be the bare foot walking in the grass at least five minutes after you wake up and before you go to bed. And then meditation yoga and working out. I mean, you got to workout. Just get that get the endorphous going. But eye-be-gain helps you get back in that. And then once you're in that system, then you can stick with it. So that's how it helps. But yeah, PTSD could be anything. I've, you know, I've seen guys, um, try to drink their way out of it, which is horrible. Because it's like, uh, I've had friends say, yeah, I'll take a drink of alcohol to get rid of the pain. But then I got to have one more drinking alcohol to get rid of the pain. And then I'll wake up the next day, I have a hangover, but you know, we'll get rid of it another drink. And there's a vicious cycle in there. And the alcohol doesn't help the psychedelics doing. That's why they're not legal here because it works. And I don't know why they won't help the veterans with that. I think they're working on it now. I know there's a there's a company also in Texas called veterans exploring treatment solutions. And they partner with ambio and we get veterans and first responders to Mexico, but we should have it in New York at the VA. We should have it in Virginia in California that veterans should be able to get I began administered medically. And that's how they do it in Mexico. It's a doctor. You're on a heart monitor. They watch you the whole time. And, um, it just, it gets in your brain. It shows you stuff and it really, it kind of cleans out the closet. It's, it's terrifying. I began is DMT is not. It's awesome. But it, it, it breaks everything up and then it kind of pushes it out for why is it terrifying? Because, uh, it opens your like when people say you use 30% of your brain, it's like you use 30% for tennis and then a different 30% for chess or for whatever. But this one opens all of them. And it all talks. And so stuff that you've suppressed, uh, trauma and it's far back as your childhood, it'll show it to you. Um, that you wanted to stop thinking about. And then you have to deal like you have to deal with it. Like the medicine shows you things. And you can tell it. I don't want to. I'm not ready to see that right now. But if it keeps, like for me, it's demons. If it keeps showing you stuff, you have to deal with it right now. Demons, demons like black gummy, yellow teeth demons, yeah, just staring at me. Um, that first and then it gets rid of them. But what do you think those are? I don't know. Um, I don't know. It's hard to say, I mean, it's just an evil face, but it's a bunch of them. Uh, and then with your mind working, if, if you're, do you think they're real? Yeah. I think so. I do. I think, I think there's, there's real evil in the world too. And guys like me that we're never supposed to be kill and they're going to, they're going to taunt me a little bit. But when your mind gets creative, what do you mean guys like you who are never supposed to be kill or how close to be a chef? I'm supposed to get stock broker. Um, so I mean, I'm, I have a big heart. Like I, I, I don't want people to go to war. You know, I don't want people to be shooting each other. I don't want bombs dropping on innocent people. Yes. Um, but when you, when under I began as creative as you can get, you can start thinking of horrible shit. And because you're in, you're in a state, you actually see it. You can see it. It's, it's a vision of like, uh, like awful, awful shit. Uh, and so you have to deal with that. And, but it goes back and forth. And the medicine kind of like guide you. And, um, the coolest thing it said to me was, uh, the only people who go to hell or people who think they deserve to. So it's a heat, it's a healer, but it's just, it's, it's really scary. And then there's a 24 hour period where you're just, it's like a really bad hangover depleted. So you get a bunch of IVs and stuff, you do a, a raking massage, which is an energy massage. And then they give you, um, five MEO DMT, which is the God molecule. And you go to, you go wherever heaven is and you see it for, you lose track of time. Uh, the first time I did five MEO, I asked them when I was done, how many days have I been asleep and they said a minute and a half because you lose track of every, like you can't describe it. And I've heard other people talk about psychedelia. You can't, it's the most beautiful, um, time lapse, like you lose track of time. I get, I feel like I'm being lifted by my stomach. And there's like, there's family everywhere and a maternal voice. And it was telling me I was home, but in the language I didn't understand, but I could, I couldn't understand it, but I knew what she was saying. And like my grandmother, my dad grandma was there and she was just saying, we're not waiting for you. We're just here, like we're here now, like, at its sounds crazy right now, but it's, it's, it's, it's, it's It doesn't sound crazy. It'll really, it really opens your mind to what next. It's, I mean, everyone that's done it too. Like I went through with, I'm talking Sergeant Major and Delta Force guys, 30 years in the army. And they finished this, I began Reiki DMT and they, they told me to give a message to Amber Capone. Um, she just, she runs vets, veterans exploring treatment solutions. Please tell Amber that she saved my life because I was going to kill myself next week. This is my last shot at doing something for myself and it cured. It's cured, uh, heroin addiction overnight, like dope sickness. Like the day I heard a story of a woman that was addicted to heroin and she did, I began, didn't have any visions just slept. And she said, I don't think it worked and they said, well, are you dope sick? And she goes, no, only those were worked. So now just set your patterns. So it's, I mean, every veteran that's seen combat should everyone that's had any trauma in their life should, should get a shot at eye beginning because it's a, it's a life changer. What are the symptoms of PTSD? You said anger and paranoia. I'm apparently just just awareness awareness. But like over aware, like I can't concentrate on the show because I'm always looking at the door. And then the anger, I mean, that's, that's not me. I don't like getting angry, but I'll just get really pissed off and then where do you think that comes from? Yeah. It's, it's just got to be all the, all the stuff that we saw because even, you know, shooting people's one thing, not all of them bother me, a couple of them bother me just because you kind of what if I did it differently. But then you, you know, you see other dead people, you have friends like the, the worst conversation is when someone would come up to me and say, Hey, did you know Scott Neil? What do you mean? Did I know what happened? You know, did you know Rob Reeves? Yes, what happened? You know, just did you know, it's like, I knew to what happened, you know, did you know Neil Roberts was the first one I heard Fifi the guy that fell out of the helicopter, um, we were at team in Afghanistan. And I, yeah, I knew him. He's the first seal I made, but I mean, we went to Arby's my first day because he was an older guy and he brought two new guys to Arby's to tell us what seal came to was like, I know, I knew him. So just losing friends and knowing their families, it's just, it's, I think it's a lot. I mean, and it's like anything, like just the older you get the more shit you start to realize. Of course, there's, I mean, there's a lot of dramatic stuff. Even like, I remember, um, a house I went into and I rack and we're going into two three in the morning. I went into the wrong house and the only people inside was a woman and her, her young daughter. And I'm standing, they came out of the room to look at me. Here's some dude with a green face and a gun getting muddle over their white carpet wrong house. And I remember looking at him thinking, I understand why they hate us. Like I wouldn't want to wake up to this guy in my house. No, not at all. And just thinking, what did I traumatize that poor young girl for nothing? So just shit like that. Maybe I'm too sensitive. But we, they asked a lot of us. We did a lot of stuff over there. What are you haunted by? Um, is it, are you more haunted? Why can you probably haunted by everything? Why wouldn't you be? But are what is it the killing or the seeing? No, it's, you know what it is. It's, it's haunted by stuff that's probably not going to happen. But I'm anticipating it. The, uh, the October 7th style attack on a gun free zone in Arizona, when suicide bombers go to an elementary school, um, when the sleeper cells activate and they, they're cutting heads off somewhere. That bothers me. It doesn't bother me to come after me. I can handle them. I got them. Yeah. And I'm so morbid. Sometimes it's like, well, they give me at least that's an ending. Finally. But, uh, no, I mean, I got shot guns like we said yesterday and whatever, but just thinking about, I don't want, I don't like the idea of innocent Americans getting killed here just because, uh, political, uh, ideologies left our borders wide open. And they're here, and they haven't forgotten about us. They, they've always said to us that, uh, you know, the Americans have the clocks, but we have the time. And they're not going to forget. They hit the world trade center 93 that came back in 2001. So that, that bothers me. And it's almost like the idea of something bad happening bothers me. And it probably never will. Like, shouldn't be worried about stuff that won't happen, but right? That's part of my PTSD. It's, it's always struck me as weird that combat veterans kill themselves, which they do with a, a much higher rate than non combat veterans. But, you know, they survived and some of them really beat the odds to survive. Yeah. And then they went up killing themselves. Why? I think that I think again, it's the, they can't live with a guilt or a lot. I know some guys have killed themselves because they had traumatic brain injury and they can't live with the headaches. Yeah. I began cures that too. I mean, guys need a shot at this. They don't need to be taken all the, uh, the pills and VA gives them. What do you mean the guilt? Um, I think just just talking to some guys like some of some Marines, I know from Fallujah just just the killing the watching guys get killed. It's like, uh, could I have saved my friend? Cause like, I'm fortunate. I don't think I've ever killed the wrong person. I've actually never seen one of my friends hurt in front of me, which is crazy going to that much combat. But some guys have some guy, I mean, I was talking to guys that were trying to put their buddy back together when he was blown in half. Like his best friend, like just that guilt. Um, I do, I'm tired of living through this. Is there guilt over killing? Not, I don't even think even guilt. I do think about that one guy every day. But he, again, he was a bad guy. But could I talk to none of it? Like, was it worth it probably? Maybe not. But um, the unknown. And then just one, you know, again, wondering how did that affect them? How did that woman that the dog bit, you know, bitter arm or whatever? Yeah. And just just, I mean, because again, why are we here and why are we doing this, this, this group of people right now? And it was, it was never the, uh, weapons of mass destruction. And now I'm fighting for the guy that came in the room behind me, the guy who was in front of me. That's what fighting for when we went. Yeah. And Americans went every, every fight toe to toe. But what's the reason we're here? You said this, this hit you and it commonly hits people. I think you said seven years. Years after their safe and living in some leafy suburb with a pretty wife and like everything's fine, but that they're not fine inside. How many conversations did you have in all the years you were in all these 12 deployments or whatever, about why you were there about the meaning of taking another man's life? We didn't talk about it at all. Um, not when we were in. It was just the job. But the only person brought it up was one of our personal trainers. Cause we had these trainers that will, you know, do everything from strength coaches to helping you stretch bad back types of stuff. Yeah. And then remember he said, uh, everyone of you guys has changed. You just don't realize it. Like every single one of you guys, you're not the same as you were when you checked in here for selection. Like you guys are all different now. And it was just because of the, because of the missions, whether, whether they admitted or not, I mean, it's a, it's a, it's a lot. Was, we were good at it. Well, undoubtedly, you know, the best. Yeah. Just think it's interesting that the US government or your officers, I mean, why is it left? Why is it left to your personal trainer to note something that often? And I don't, I don't think they have interest in, in, in mental health or even helping you separate because you're not sticking around to do the job they needed to do. And then they might be getting better now, but I doubt it that they're certainly not doing psychedelic work. What about the moral questions? Like how many people you served with were, like, you know, faithful believers in God? Um, a low percent, maybe five percent. Wow. But the, the further we're out now, more guys are going back. A lot of Christians, a lot of, I'm, I'm, I'm Catholic and I'm going back to church now. I didn't go to church. I don't, I, the only time I went to church in the Navy was funerals. And it, and it doesn't make any sense. You think I would have been better with Jesus? Yes. And even when they would bring a pastor out to pray before a mission with like, whatever, let's go kill these fuckers. But now it's kind of like, all right, maybe take a rap off that to the right. Fair. But yeah, it's, um, I guess I'm making a point, which is it seems like they're treating you like animals or machines. They're not considering the effect on you. That's just starting to say that, but that's the way they, I mean, they cared about a professional development. They cared about us going to sniper school. They care. Of course, right. Doing training, but I can't remember, I mean, they, okay, they started to get good with retreats. I remember they would do some retreats like you get a take you, you're, they would pay for you and your wife and kids to go to like great wolf lodge and do the water park and, and they would have classes about like, there's more marriage counseling because we're all in nuts anyway. Um, so they did, they did, they, I don't want to say they didn't do anything, but they, they certainly aren't keying on. It's almost like if, if someone's got a psychological problem, then do we, do we trust them to be the lead jumper on that jump? Do we trust them to be the one, man? You know, um, as you see people go crazy. Yeah. I saw, I saw people freeze. Um, it, it's a different animal. What does that mean? Freeze? Just freeze. Like if someone shoots an AK 47 at you in a house, it's really loud and scary. Can't imagine. And I've seen guys just stop. Um, it's, I mean, nothing on them. People react differently. I, I just say I was just dumb enough to go after, but some, some guy, I mean, sometimes, some guys quit. Some guys, I, I'm not doing anymore. As soon well, after a new Robberstell out of helicopter, a lot of poster child seals hit it, beat it. What can you tell that story quickly? I'm not familiar with the thought. Um, that's when they were going after Al Qaeda operation, Anna Konda. Yeah. And, um, it was mainly, it was like the 10th mountain, some army infantry, Delta and SEAL team six. And they were trying to put SEAL snipers on top of a mount called Tucker Gar. And they went and they were being flown by TF 160, the best pilots in the world. Al Mack was actually flying the best pilot in the world. Um, Razor's zero, three is his book. He's stud. He's, he's so cool. I had a shirt made that said, I know Al Mack, like he's a badass. But and he's saved everyone's life. But when they were inserting, they started taking fire. They could hit with an RPG and Neil was on the, on the, um, the ramp. He was going to be the first guy off. He's carrying a saw squad on a man who happened, belt fed machine gun, and he fell out. And he fell so hard. He actually bent, we have the gun, it bent the barrel. So he's without a gun now on the mountain, the helicopter takes off without realizing he fell out. So now Neil's by himself without Kaitan. They, they did him dirty. He fought for a while, but he, he ended up getting killed pretty bad. And then they came back in to get him. And that's when, um, uh, Brits Lewinsky and, uh, jappy was, um, John Chapman, CCTV guy who, they were both of the world war, the medals of honor. John Chapman should have been awarded two medals of honor for what he did on the mountain. He actually, and they ended up fighting out close quarters of like inside bunkers with each other. They found Neil, they ended up, they left John Chapman, ranging went up and got him later. Really shitty fight, but Neil was the first, uh, casualty that everybody knew and loved. Like he, like his, his old course time, he was the fastest obstacle course runner at buzz is on his headstone. And so he was the first one to die. That's when a lot of guys started like when we started training after that fight, everything that we'd been trained on, change it. Because you're not going to do that stupid shit. You're not going to stand up, peril went and say, center peel. You're going to get the fuck down because these bullets are coming right here. Uh, so change everything. Now we're going back and we're fighting in the mountains guys. We've been fighting their whole lives to the point where like I, I remember fighting guys were saying to my guys as we're getting ambushed. This is going to end one of two ways. We're going to die or we're going to win. That's it and save one bullet for yourself. Because you do not want to get captured by these guys. So it's, it's, it's very intense. I mean, I'm in one fight. I was in I ran into a guy that looked like me. Red hair, red beard, shooting a belted machine gun at me, yelling a lot of aqua. And that realization is, okay, that's a kitchen. And those dudes are very serious. That's al Qaeda like 100% al Qaeda. And you, you're going to have to kill him or kill yourself because it's on. And, um, yeah, that, I mean, I was on a border bombing. He's you kill him. Yeah, with the Air Force. We ended up getting, um, we got ambushed for a full hour. I'd actually, um, I'd heard about from Vietnam guys. They used to wear, they used to wear a gear in lines like third line, first line, second line, third line, uh, first line gear is on your body. It's the most important shit you have. So it's on your belt in your pockets. Um, so your second lines, your second most important, so like bullets, grenades and water, third line is your least important stuff in a backpack like foot powder, extra socks sleeping bag. The reason you carry it that way is so if you're running through your life, you can start getting rid of it. Third line, first, second line, you can sprint. And I never heard of anyone doing it, but I dropped it and had to go to my radio guy because we're getting ambushed on this mound. It's just a horrible day. Um, and I told them to call, you know, we got to, I can see this checkpoint up top where the leadership is I went bombed them first and they said, well, we don't have any, uh, there's no air support. We got nothing. So we had a lay there and take fires. They're surrounding us. And they got close. I mean, tracers flying in between my hand and my face like, and in between two tracers is five real bullets. Zipper, we're almost thinking like, um, now, is it, is it going to hurt when I get shot in the face or do you feel it? Or do you go to heaven or what's what happened? Or do you like that's like air burst RPGs and stuff going off? And finally he'd snap me out of it by saying I got one. I got a jet and I said, cool, hit that checkpoint and he said, I can't because the battery's just died. And I'm a big believer in not micromanaging. And I said, change the batteries. He said, I can't. I'm not carrying the spares, remember you are like, Oh, shit, it's in the backpack. I dropped 100 meters that way. Now I got to run and get that damn thing as they're shooting at me here and that, you know, got the batteries and throw them to him. And he called it. I think it was a B one because it's it bombs away two minutes out. And like two minutes out, what did space shuttle drop these things, we need them on us. And then he just here him sizzling and like bacon. And then we just start bombing the side of this mountain and they start running back into Pakistan. We pursued him into Pakistan and bombed for three hours because we could if we had positive identification, troops and contests so we can bomb them. But then we get back and Pakistan, we killed the 11 Pakistani soldiers and I don't know how many al Qaeda. And they started saying an unprovoked ambush Americans started bombing Pakistan. So the boss I talked to said, well, here's the deal because I was a ground first command for that. He goes, well, you're either going to get a silver star or you're going to 11 worth. So we'll let you know, it's like when like how do we three weeks to find out if I'm going to jail now? But yeah, did you get this over store? Yeah. My first I got to. But I mean again, but those it's not it's almost like I'd give the silver star back to not have that memory. No, I bet. So when you're tormented by what we refer to as PTSD, like what are you thinking? I wouldn't say tormented. It's just more it's just the awareness and the just thinking thoughts that I don't need to be thinking, just knowing if someone got to, someone I loved what they would do. And I don't think about that. So it almost again, not tormented more of a protector like an over protector. Yes. And you know, just make sure everyone has guns. So that's a lot to go through in your 40s. You know, and to consider like I just joined to get out of town. It's like that poster of the dude Chuck and a grenade and says, I just joined for the college money. So given everything you just told us for the last two hours, how do you feel when you're driving in your car, looking at your phone and you see some political figure saying, hey, let's have a war with country X? Well, good indicators if anyone's referred to as a warhawk, they've never been to war. And they just love the idea of the military industrial complex. They're going to get paid. They're friends are going to They've never been to war. And they just love the idea of the military industrial complex. They're going to get paid. Their friends are going to get paid. They have no skin in the game. And they've never been up close when, I mean, getting bombed in a house or in has got to be the worst thing ever, buried alive in that heat. And they just love doing that because we'll get a contract to build more bombs. And just the threat, I mean, as long as I've been alive, there's either been war or threat of war. And if you keep people afraid, we'll slowly give up our liberty. The Patriot Act sounded great on 9.12, but the week later it's like, wait, what are you watching? Why are you watching us now? Did you guys ever talk about that? No, it did. No, because it was red, white, and blue, and apple pie. We're Americans and we're the good guys. When you were in the service. Yes, like the whole time. You never... No, I didn't question Iraq. So I wanted to go. Let's get me in there before this ends. When did you start rethinking? About seven years or the most famous trigger puller. Trigger puller in the war on terror. I think that's hard to say. So, and a lot of positive reinforcement, because people are impressed by your bravery and amazed by all the things that you saw. And you are kind of the forest. Come for the war on terror. I think that's true. But at what point did you start to question like, what was that? Yeah, seven years. I know after Iraq, after we pulled that started to pull out an ISIS was formed, it was like, at first for me it was more of a, we never should have invaded, but we also shouldn't have left. Yeah. Like that. And then you got that line, the convoy of ISIS coming in from to create. It's like, bomb them. We have eight ends. That's ISIS kill them all, but they didn't. And then ISIS turned into ISIS. And it's all part of the Islamic Jihad. It's all the ISIS and even though the different sects, Hamas has been on all those, everyone down to the Houthis. It's all... But then they're fighting us because we're there. Guys were leaving countries like Jordan and Syria to go to Iraq because, well, we can fight Americans. I got nothing else going on. Just it's easier to kill them there than it is a good to Afghanistan. Of course. And so we're just fighting to fight. You know, we forgot about W&D, but a couple of months into it. And then it turns into a surge and it turns into, we got to kill ISIS and we got to kill our Khali. Well, we got to kill, you know, it's first it's who's saying who they and who would say and then it's our Khali. And then it's now ISIS and then it's Baghdadi. And then you got, case of Soleimani from Iran and then you got, the Iranian influence, everyone in Afghanistan, you know, they're all in Pakistan. I'll kind of just work with Iran. Soon in this year, it's like it's, you know, it's a mess. And hopefully now it's going to get better. I mean, yeah, well, that's always the hope. I mean, it's the hope. If the bombs in Iran worked, great. I mean, you know, Iran's one of those things where I don't want them to get a nuclear weapon for sure. For sure. But then I was also saying if you're going to bomb them, you better be all in and be right. This intel cannot be wrong. And the hit them and it's like, well, I mean, and again, I wasn't necessarily, I definitely didn't want to land war in Iran, but if you're going, now that you hit them, now I'm 100% in with you. Because no matter why we're here, we are. Did it work? Because you're betting a lot on that. And if, you know, I don't want troops on the ground there. What would that look like? Well, I mean, it will look like everything. We go in, we kick someone's ass, but then we decide a nation build. And that's where they get us. No one's going to mess with us. But like the Marine Corps is not there to build schools. Marine Corps is going to break stuff, kill people. The way we handle Iran is great. To punch them in the face and tell them no. And then leave. And that's or just destroy the whole country. That's it. But this whole nation built it. We've proven, I mean, it didn't work in Vietnam. We're still in conflict with Korea. What happened in Grenada? What happened in Panama? What do we do in the first time Gulf War, second Gulf War? Afghanistan? You know, we got a lot. But he was in Pakistan. You know, why are we giving money to Pakistan? If they're harboring terrorists. You know, very complex. Why are we doing that? I don't know. I don't know why we give Egypt all that money. They built a wall. They won't let any Palestinians in what we're doing at the request of another. I mean, we're not doing it for Egypt, right? We've been asked to do that. Of course. But like, why do you think we went into Iraq? Were you almost got killed? Yeah. I think because Saddam Hussein said he was going to assassinate George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush, you know, loves his dad and never let that go. Yeah. And I had friends that were flag officers in the Pentagon a week after 9-11 and they were already planning the invasion of Iraq. And some of these officers like why what are you talking about? They had nothing to do with this. Why are we going to be in Iraq? And that and we shifted all of our assets. So Iraq instead of Afghanistan when we should have been fighting al-Qaeda here, find a lawn kill him. And then hopefully that's it. But now where Iraq bogged down. No. And I mean, even taking down Baghdad, it's like, what are you going to do next? Well, the, you know, the, the, the, the, the, they'll rise up and then they'll start their own government and we were saying, well, what if they don't? Well, they will, but yeah, but they might not. What if they don't? But they will. No, they won't. And then they didn't. And it's chaos. Oh, they didn't? No. They're in the Robin, the museums. But it's almost one of those things too. Like the, the devil, you know, is better than the devil you don't. These people have been under a dictator and maybe they need a softer dictator because they're not ready for democracy. Oh, and even enough, Afghanistan. You think the people in the Shuriyag Valley want our style of democracy? I've talked to farmers. I've eaten rice out of the same bowls these guys and had a, had probably Taliban guy saying, why would I send my son to school when I can teach him on a farm? He doesn't need to sit in school. Why would you build us when we don't want that shit? Because it's different. And, and our, we don't do any research. We don't know the history of places. We just think, yeah, we'll go over then they love you. I love the break into a lot of the politicians. Most people don't like the United States. And especially in that part of the roof. Wait, you, there was no research done? No, they, they, uh, there were officers that thought Iraq and Afghanistan were the same. They, they did officers not that. Oh, yeah. What's the difference going on with the other? It's like, it's a huge difference. Like if you run, if you run into a dude from Saudi Arabia in Afghanistan, he's a foreigner to them too. Big time. He's a foreign fighter. Like, no, I ran into one dude. And I think the only reason I didn't shoot him is because he made me laugh. He didn't speak English, but his teacher said, I can't, not kidding. It said it's not a beer belly. It's a fuel tank for a sex machine. Oh, yeah. He didn't know what said, but I thought it was this. That was in July of Afghanistan. One of my first missions in Afghanistan in a house in the city. He had no idea what it said. It was awesome. Give him a quick gut punch to tell me. I'm going to show you how many shots of money. So, but you think there were, you know that there were officers who thought Iraq and Afghanistan are basically the same. I had an officer. I told you about the L ambush. When we were sell, you had to sell your mission. Here's what we're going to do. Here's who's there. I was selling this to him. And I said, we're going to insert here. And we're going to set up an L. And an officer said, what's an L? And I said, an L is the second thing they teach you after you join the army. The first being there is your bed. This is an L ambush. And he goes, who invented it? I'm like, Sun Zoo in, I don't know. The art of war, man. And an L. I'm going to hop out and stop. He's like, what if he doesn't stop? I'm going to kill him. Why am I talking right now? It's an L. It's not hard. And yeah, but I mean, they're, they don't do, not all of them. I've worked with great people, but there are people that are making decisions. They shouldn't be making decisions. Like I said yesterday, once you stop carrying your own luggage, you shouldn't be in charge of anybody. Just just surrounded by any gets political. Like you get to that level, like a captain in the Navy or a colonel. Now they're just trying to make admiral or general. So they're doing the politics. And if you don't do the politics, you're not sticking around. So then you're thinking about my next star. When am I going to go work for Dinecore? What's my political thing going to be when I get out? So it's just political shit. And then the guys below them, they're just yes, man. And they're going to tell you what you want to hear. Not what's real. They don't want to tell you the truth because you might actually know what's going on in the ground. Go talk to some e-form Marines. I'll tell you what's happening. And we're not winning this war right now. Because we're out there building schools or we're not going to be in the war. building schools or giving people a shit ton of money to embezzle. And they're saying they're building a school. But they're buying a house and cutter. Like you go into Afghanistan where they don't know what time is. They don't know how old they are. But give them a briefcase full of cash and see what they do with them. The corruption. I mean, it's horrible. But they don't think ahead like that. Because they think everyone just like us. People are different. Do you think that those wars had a corrupting effect on the United States? No. I mean, I think the invasion of Afghanistan was good. I mean, but we're right back where we started. Yeah. Then Lon's gone a lot of al-Qaeda's gone, but they're going to get replaced. The almost 30 training camps over the terror training camps. And Afghanistan again, God knows what's going on in Iraq. I mean, how does that make you feel? You fought in both. You'd been a lot in. I mean, no, I mean, it's fulfilling because we were able to prove that if you're a bad guy, we have people that will come find you. We proved it. And we cut the head off the snake. They know that we can do that. So it was worth it. We took a lot of al-Qaeda off the battlefield. I think we slowed down their ability to attack this country for a while, but they're getting close to coming back. You say we're hated in a lot of the world and don't know what wire we hated. You know what? It's almost a jealousy thing because we are the most powerful country. And we just proved with what we did in Iran that like we can China and Russia watch it. Like we can fly pilots over you. You'll never know that they'll hit you. They'll be home the next day. They'll leave from the middle of the country, anyone in the world. And you can't. There's nothing you can do about it. So I think a lot of them are jealous in that aspect. But we're also the we're the big dumb tough guy in the bar that doesn't know he's tough until he has to be. So I mean, in the Middle East is because we're there. And like forward defense, I know that the world's a safer place with a strong United States. And the forward defense and alliance solidarity is great. The carriers are awesome. But you know, just people get sick of us. We're still in Germany. It's only been 80 years. What are we doing there, by the way? Do you know? I mean, I've been there. It's gone. We're going out to over fast. That was awesome. Yeah. It's great. I don't know if it's been great for them. But did anyone ever explain, you know, you're at the highest levels? And we're saying, you know, we're in Germany for this reason. We're trying for this reason. No, we just had a unit there. And we can forward stage out of there so we can be somewhere like Bosnia quicker. We can we can fly to, you know, we stop in Rampsstine on our way to Iraq and Afghanistan. So we can get there quick. We get air force bases over there too. I mean, we have a great relationship with the Germans. You must you do with a lot of you've met a lot of politicians. I know that you worked at Fox for a while. Always politicians there. Did anybody ever apologize to you? No. There's nothing. No. I don't know if there's anything. What do you mean, they sent you? I mean, you signed up for the seals. You know, you're going to rescue your life. That's on you. I think that's fair. But what's on politicians and policymakers is to only ask you to risk your life for really good reason. I think that's fair too. Yeah. No, no one really has said anything. George Bush wrote me a handwritten letter, which was cool. Just thanking me for it. Cause I said that that quote freedom itself was attacked this morning. So we thank me for remembering his words. That was cool. I mean, and I don't think it apologies necessary because at the time I wanted it more than anything. Yeah. Seriously, but 9 11 1 1 1 1, let's invade everybody. I'm ready. Everyone felt that way. Just I mean, it's again, you know, time goes on maybe there. A lot of them are thinking well, we did make a bad decision. But at the time everyone was ramped up. You had Democrats for war. Oh, well, not they love war now though. So I got all but one, but I believe Berkeley. I mean, you live still in a world surrounded by people who had jobs similar to yours. Yeah. Are they rethinking their views or rethinking what they went through? What it meant or they're rethinking their lifestyles. Like I was always impressed when some of my friends told me they quit drinking. Yeah. They left out the park that it was because they did I have a game. Yeah. I saw all your quit drinking. That's great. Well, I did I began. And so they're they're rethinking their lifestyles and getting getting into more healthy stuff. Yeah. But I haven't heard a lot of my friends talk about Iraq the way I talk about Iraq. They don't. I'm not sure if I mean we went in there just because that there was a vendetta. There was nothing tactical about that. Does it make you wonder like they're all these theories about bin Laden who he was really working for? Was he behind actually behind 9.11 was that really him who you shot? Do people ever say that to you? Um, yeah. I have someone tell me it was a body double that I shot and I my response is, well, I killed a guy that was in bed with bin Laden's wife. So either way he had a comment. But it was 100% him that was definitely him. Um, you know, even meeting the CIA people before we went like I was convinced because especially that one woman that was it's him. Definitely him. All the stuff we found he was definitely still running al Qaeda. But how the hell did he live in Pakistan for 10 years had to be with the ISI. The Intel service had to be monitoring because I think they have vested interest in keeping al Qaeda a little bit out bay, which is good for everyone because you know, you don't want to kind of get in their nuclear weapons. But they're a massive recipient of USA. Yeah. But they're basically our enemy. Well, I mean, we were funding the moja head in the 80s and bin Laden was part of that. Tell because the big enemy was was the Soviet Union. So let's fight them in Afghanistan and start pumping money in there through Pakistan. So they've been involved forever. What was roll of opium and all this in Afghanistan? You know, that was that was kind of dumb because all we're doing. I mean, heroin's bad, but you're taking away someone's livelihood. So what are they going to do if they can't grow opium? They're going to fight you. They're going to be Taliban. Why do you care? Stop worrying about the opium. Let them grow it. Who cares? But that became a major thorn in our side because we're worried about opium. But we just killed the Taliban in al Qaeda. Who cares? What about female literacy? Was that a good reason to go to war? No. For war? No, that's more. And I don't think that's for just joking. Well, I'm just saying. You always hear people say all the people ever see rates that up. But it's like, okay. That's on there. Take care of your own house. I don't. Yeah. If your women can't read, I'm not coming to shoot people over that. No. Do you never thought of that as you broke into someone's house? No. Your girls can't read. It's almost like when we went women to vote. I'm like, why? Did joking sort of. I'm half joking. I'm not. But sorry. Were the guys pull it. Did you ever talk politics? Not really. Because I remember I would read political books before 9-11. Especially on the ships. I remember reading like Sean Hannity's books. Yeah. I read Alan Combs book. Just to get try to get both sides. That's kind of where I got my politics. Like, well, this is crazy. That makes sense. But no one was really interested in that with me. I couldn't get anyone to play chess either. But yeah, I've always been political. Not political, but try to pay attention. Yeah. So, we believe that media was telling us it's true for a while. Until, again, COVID. Or whatever. Yeah. You don't believe that anymore. No. No. That was a scam. So last question on a happy note. So you made basically me in the case without saying it that a lot of the flag officer is senior military leadership. Not impressive. And that's very obvious to me. Who is the most impressive senior officer you've known? No, McCraven. Wow. That didn't take long. And I knew him, can you tell people who he is? Admiral McCraven was in charge of Joint Special Operations Command. When we took the Belod and read, he's the one that sold it to President Obama. He's a SEAL Team 6 guy. And he just, he'd always, I think he was, I think he was an Admiral the whole time, I was a damn military. But every time he showed up, he looked and sounded like an officer. Oh, and the way I described, like he looked like a SEAL, he sounds like a SEAL, he's really sharp. Tacked, like, and I shouldn't badmouth off leg officers because he's included, he's just a badass. He knew it, really good at everything. And the way I would describe it is like, I understand why Al Qaeda was afraid because like 23 Bel McCraven just came in your house at night to get you and that's scary. So, but just he was just sharp, sharp as a tack. And honest. Oh yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah, he's the guy. It doesn't take, it didn't take me a second to answer that question. But how did he get to that, how did he become an Admiral? I don't even know how that works. I, you know, obviously got to take command of different places. So, you know, run a platoon at a SEAL team, run operations, you know, you get promoted to an executive officer that a commanding officer, which is an old five level, have a command move up to like the group level. So you got like a couple different groups. And like Dev Group being one of them, SEAL team six, commander there and then just start getting stars. So he was the second four star Admiral ever. I think Admiral Olson was the first one, the great officer too. We were, I was fortunate, my SEAL officers were for the most part really good. Like a jocko. He was one of my guys. No, I was one of his guys. And he was a dude that I learned, when I learned from him is I've never seen him lose control or Yale. But what he was really good at when you screw up is, man, I expected so much more audio. Oh, yeah. I'm never going to let you down again. That he was incredible. He realistic me in Kuwait. And then yeah, I've worked with some, I've been fortunate to work with really good officers. But McCraven best. Yeah. By far. Rob, thank you. Of course you can. Thank you for having me. I appreciate it. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy, and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could find about it. It's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.