Joe Rogan, Mike, the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. What's that name, dude? I watched two episodes of the new season. Oh, thanks, Jim. It's so ridiculous. It's so ridiculous. So you. That show is so you. I don't want to give anything away, but the dance one, I was fucking crying. I was crying. And the freaky Friday one. Yeah, yeah, I was doing it. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. They're so fun. They're so fun. It seems so fun for you. It's the most fun I have. It's like it's so it is one of the best examples of like a one mind, like one person's mind in a show. Yeah. Without like a whole bunch of people saying, don't do that. Don't do this. They give us no restraints in the craziest, great sense. Like they really are like, do whatever you want to do. Kevin, Neil, in one of the first ones. Oh, yeah. So fucking ridiculous. It's so it's so you. It's it's such a great time. The dance one, you know, I went to six rehearsals for that. The answer is hard. It was so hard. And remember when you did the Tom, the Steven Segal thing? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I had to do a bunch of rehearsals for that. For people that hadn't seen it, that's you and Bert, Bert made a dance video. You guys had a competition. See who's like, he just one. He was just saying we should all do one. And then and we were I was like, yeah, okay. And then he just dropped one. So he there was no like, let's both do one. And then he was like, I'm a better dancer. And I was like, each shit. So there's something about him saying he's better at something that's infuriating. It's so crazy. Because it's just, it's just like wild, un unhinged confidence. And the truth is I got to give him his credit. He is he is capable of so much of this stuff too. So it's great athlete. Great. That's why he's so confident about stuff. He dropped, he dropped a bunch of weight. And then in our, we did a 5K if he weeks ago for the Netflix as a joke, we did a 5K again. From last year this year, he dropped 16 minutes off of his time. Holy shit. I mean, I was like dude, that's great. 50 pounds too. Can you imagine doing a 5K with a 50 pound vest on? It's crazy. It's really. I think about that every time I work out with a vest on and my vest that I usually work out with is only 25 pounds. 25. Which is like a normal amount that people lose. Yeah. Like this is crazy how much harder everything gets. So much harder. Yeah. It's great where those on like a hike. Mm hmm. Take it off and you're like, oh my god. I have a 35 pounder. I wear when I walk the dog and then I have another one that's this, it's an actual backpack frame that I put plates on it. And I can get it up to 90 pounds. I did a hike with a 50 on and I had to take that shit off. It's fucking hard man. Really hard. The 45 I do with 145 pound plates. Like the backpack itself is probably about 4 pounds and then the plate is another 45 shoulder neck area. Just go around. It's really rough. Yeah. I do it before hunting season though because it's like the best thing to prepare you for actually having a backpack on. Yeah. Yeah. Like because you don't realize how well you're carrying a bow. You're carrying, I don't pack my whole camp on my back. Like some guys when they go out to the backcountry for like 8, 10 days, they'll have a 80 pound, 60 pound pack because they've got their food for like a week in there and then they have like their bedding and they have like some kind of a shelter. Do you go hunting like that? Like that level? I don't do that anymore. I've done it a few times. You have. But I don't like it. My boys are hitting me up. Like they want to go hunting. Really? Yeah. Because I take them shooting. But we just shoot targets. Oh, well we have a lease out here. We could take a big hunting. Oh my goodness. They have to kill them. They have so many of them too. They're just, they're, it's the craziest infestation of animals. You've ever seen you hear them in the bushes. They sound like demons. They're everywhere. There's so many of them, dude. That's crazy. Texas has millions and millions of pigs. Is it really that money? Oh yeah. I don't even know what the full number is. Like, but they don't know because it goes up every month. So the thing is like, while pigs have as many as three liters of year and they could have as many as six piglets per litter. Jesus. Yeah. And they start giving birth at six months old. And then do they do the thing because like with a lot of, with a lot of, you know, animals that they say you can hunt these, it's because they are destroying like, oh, yeah. Destroying everything. Really? So what is the number? 2.6 to 4 million. Wild pigs. Not nuts. That's in Texas. That's just Texas. That's just Texas. 2.6 to 4 million is fucking bonkers. How long does that hunting season last year? 100% all day long at night. You shoot them with night vision. Yeah. You can shoot them. You can shoot them every day all day. The only time I've ever hunted in my life was hog hunting in Florida. Well, they taste great. I mean, like barbecue pig, if you do it right, you have to be careful because you can get trick analysis. If you undercook it, it's not like pork that you get from a restaurant. They're eating everything. They eat each other. Like, if one pig dies, they sometimes they die in fights. They fight with each other and they die. Or sometimes they get hit by a hunter and they live and then they die and then they they pigs eat them. So little dead deer, they leave skunks, or anything, anything, anything. He's going to cook it well. You got to cook the shit out of it. But if you eat a pig that's been eating egg corns, oh, they're delicious. I got one in California once the first pig that I shot and we smoked it on this on this trigger, like slow smoke to ham. It was sensational. Really? It was so good. It's like a darker meat than pork that you get from the store. I got to take them because they're asking them. I took it. This is a good friend of mine named Jesse Griffiths. He owns Daiduay restaurant. He's an awesome chef, like an amazing chef. And Daiduay, if you've never been there before, you got to go there. It's fucking incredible. And it's a lot of his Texas wild game that he serves. He serves like Neil Guy, which is like some of the... So there's only animals that you can serve that you hunt are ones that people own, like exotics, or pigs. So he has like wild boar sausage and a lot. He has a place here. Yeah, it's called Daiduay. I think I have that written down on my list. It's legit. What I was going to say is Jesse, he has a cooking school. That is his number three. I'm going to let you know. Oh, it's super legit. That's one of the first places I went when I moved here. Really? Yeah, because he had been on my friend Steve Rinales podcast. And then he came on my podcast. And when he was on Steezels, like, God, they got so interesting. Who is that guy? And then he introduces me to him. And then we went hunting together. Steve and I in South Texas, like right on the Mexican border. And Jesse went to and Jesse cooked for us. Oh my God. It was sensational. Oh my God. He's so good. He cooks diver ducks. And diver ducks are kind of gross because they're the ones that go under the water and they eat all the mulch at the bottom of some. But what he does is he has some kind of crazy marinating process. So he marinates him for like an extended period of time. And then he grilled them. And Daiduay, there's what kind of food. It's mostly, it's like they have steaks. They have fish. They have everything. But it's mostly Texas food. Texas food. Texas redfish. Texas wild hog. He has a Neil Guy Saviche. Is there anything better than befriending a chef? Oh, he's the greatest. He's a great guy too. And what I was going to say is that he has a whole school. Where, what is it called, Jamie? Something. We'll figure it out. Jamie will find it. But he has a school where he'll teach you how to hunt. Teachers you how to butcher the animal, how to break it down into cuts, and then he teaches you how to cook it. Really. Yep. And he does it with small amount of people. So it's like, you know, six, eight people or something. In a small group. And they'll take from the beginning. Like I've never shot a gun before. Fine. Don't worry about it. From the beginning. This is how you use a rifle. Yeah. This is the safety. Make sure you never point the gun at anything other than the ground. Never pointed out a person. Yeah. Even if the fingers don't wear it in the trigger. All the safety stuff. And then takes you to a range. It shows you how to side it in, how to shoot the rifle. And then they take you hunting. See that. The most imposing I think part of new school of traditional cookery. That's it. The most imposing part of hunting to me is what do you do after you shoot the animal? Oh, I could teach you some of that too. Show me some pictures here. Some of the yummy pictures. Like he barbecues. Like his food is so, look at that dude. Come on son. What is that? Like some sort of a poor, what is this? White tail. Oh, so it's white tail, a dough and a big fatty bore. Whoa. And so what is he doing? He's making dried chilies and onions. Oh, so nice. And like unlike a lot of people. He likes like old boars. Like a lot of people they say, oh, you got to shoot a young one. He's like, no, no, no, I like the old ones. Because there's like real flavor to me. Just kind of know what you're doing. Yeah, well, yeah. He knows what he's doing. Do you like cooking? I do like cooking. I haven't, I used to cook more, but I enjoy the process. I love, I love getting a recipe, getting the ingredients together and cooking at meal. Yeah. Well then you love doing this because you just love to try that because it'll be something that you shot yourself. Oh my God. Hook me up with him, please. Yeah, for sure. And on top of it, you're literally helping the environment. That's cool. They have to be killed. Yeah. And I'm telling you these guys are asking me on a daily basis. You know, Taylor Sheridan, the guy who produced Yellowstone. He's a friend of mine and he has a giant ranch. It's crazy. Yeah. And he had a pig problem. So he literally brought in these fucking special hops guys. And they trained like like as if they were going to go attacks on a nation to kill pigs. And they plotted it all out. They strategized. They made a plan. And they went out and they fucking annihilated like a bunch of pigs. That's pretty fucking rat. Well pretty, yeah. And pretty violent ways. I'm sure. Like sure. There's some crazy videos online of people using thermite. Do you know what? No, not thermite. What's that stuff called? Jamie that blows up. Tanner, right. Tanner, right. That's not there. Blow up the pigs. So what they're doing is they'll set up a feeder. Yeah. And then at the feeder, they have Tanner, right. And so like when the feeders go off, the animals hear it and then they run towards the feeder. Usually the feeder is for deer. And then the pigs usually kick the deer. And the deer just said fuck this and they run out of there. And you got like 30, 40 pigs. And so. Oh, he's past the scooter. It's bro. It's so wrong. But see if you can find any videos of one where they're like on a feeder because the camera's like really close. The camera's like 20 yards. Holy shit. Yeah, like these. Like watch this. This is so fucked up. Oh my God. Yeah. It's integrated. And this is one of the beautiful things about Texas. That's totally legal. Totally legal. Totally legal. Yeah. You can shoot them out of helicopters too. And they needed to go. Oh, they have to go. Yeah. There are so many of them, dude. When I take you to the least that we have with my friend Tyler from Archery Country, when you go there as you're walking, you hear him in the bushes. They sound like monsters. That's where you're hunting now. That's where you can hunt. Yeah. Yeah. We have a lease there. Oh, nice. It's like our 20 minutes from here, our house. I went a couple weeks ago to somebody's ranch. Yeah. It was fucking awesome. It was pretty cool. It was so cool. And like he had his own range set up there, which was so fucking right. Yeah. That's the dream. And we set up. I set up my youngest. So we were shooting like pistols. And then the guy had the new dev grew SEAL team six rifle. And we laid my son late on the bed of it pickup. And he was like, just painting and painting. He was like, I was 18 for 18. You ready to go. How old is he? Seven. Oh my God. Yeah. That's so exciting for a seven. So excited to do something like that. He was so exciting. And if you could take him and he could shoot a pig, and then you guys can like have baby bag ribs for dinner. It's going to change the whole. Oh, yeah. He'll love it. He's going to go nuts for it. It's very exciting. Speaking of violence, I was I was I was breeding and researching. Uday Hussein. Oh man. Yeah. Dark. He's the darkest. The evilest. Him and his brother. But who day was the worst? He was the worst. Yeah. He was the eldest. Oh, because I keep reading about dictators, you know. And I was I was reading about Edia Mean. And it was a leanie Stalin. And then you get to Hussein who sounds like a really interesting story, like from birth, right? His mother didn't want him, which is a very kind of unique thing, like a mother rejecting her own. Why didn't you want him? He his father had died before he was born. And she thought this I don't want this kid. And so when when she was when he was born, she was like he's like a devil child. Oh, Jesus. So she rejected him from birth. He was right. Right. She was kind of right. Isn't that crazy? It is right. It is crazy. Do you think she made him that way? I think usually when you see like these really horrifically violent people and as adults, there's there's almost always childhood trauma and neglect. I'm sure. So that formula is almost always there. So it's a self fulfilling prophecy. It kind of I think it kind of is. And he was he wore maybe she just fucking knew maybe she had some gypsy instincts at a feeling. She just knew this one that bad one. But he was violent from a very young age. Well, he was rejected from a very young age. Exactly. He was an enforcer and you know he killed somebody as a team. But all of his violence while like president, you know it was like politically motivated. It was like to stay in power. But Uday was just a sadist. And he just enjoyed killing for someone that looked at him wrong. Oh, he would find women that were getting married. Yeah. He would steal them, rape them, then feed them to his dogs. He threw one off a hotel rooftop one time. He killed a chef for over salting the food like right there in the kitchen shot him in the head. Oh my God. He like he he one time killed a guy at a party in front of the president of Egypt. So the president was visiting Iraq. Mubarak was visiting and he beat this guy in the shot him in the head at the party. Oh my God. Bro, you got to get out of here. And then one time he went to a family party and he was pissed at his uncle. And he pulled out a submachine gun and shot him. He shot him in the leg and they had to amputate it. But he but he sprayed and he killed six other people. Oh my God. Just wild crazy. And then he was in charge of like the country's athletics. You know, he was like chairman of the Olympic team. Oh, no. And so he was like torturing athletes. He was just running wild. You can imagine a serial killer. That's the prince of a country. It's just absolutely insane. Yours paragraph is about the Olympic team stuff he would do. He had a lifelong obsession with brutal tortured murder and brutally torture athletes whenever they failed to win a match. When athletes would failed to get in a soccer tournament, he would force them to repeatedly kick a concrete soccer ball. Athletes who lost matches would be repeatedly dragged through a gravel pit that immersed in a sewage tank to induce infection in their wounds. Who they love torturing and killing. And he would sometimes flog the athletes for three days if they failed. Iron Badens may have never been used in medieval times, but they were frequently used by who they do punish athletes. Oh my God, dude. Yeah. Yeah. Oh my God. Oh, that's just about that. There's a lot of stuff here too. Oh, Egyptian president thing. Yeah. What's fucking crazy is like, how long did he do that for? I mean, he was born in 64 and he died in what? Oh, three. Oh my God. Listen to this one. Scroll up a little bit. According to his chief bodyguard, when Uday learned one of his close comrades who knew of as many misdeeds was planning to leave Iraq, he invited him to his 37th birthday and had him arrested. And I witnessed that the prison where the men was held said members of Uday's militia grabbed his tongue with pliers and sliced it off with a scalpel so he could not talk. A maid who cleaned one of Uday's houses said she once saw him lop off the ear of one of his guards and then use a welder's torch on his face. His bodyguards would later say that at least 200 people died at his parties every year. What? So the worst thing 200 people died at his parties every year would be to be invited to his party. You imagine you get that invite that you can't not go. You definitely kill you. So you got to hope you were one of the, you know, people that don't. Yeah. Jesus Christ sweating and he laughed. He was stickler for personal hygiene. We call the butler. He had to smell sweat once on my day. Uday stopped the butler and said what the hell's that smell? Uday ordered five for lockwood lashes on the butler's right foot and five on his right armpit. Oh my God. Oh my God. Oh my God. At his boat club, Uday kept a monkey named Louisa in a cage in the kitchen. Louisa had a taste for whiskey. It wasn't angry trunk. If one of Uday's friends passed out in the course of an evening or was caught napping says about their Uday would have the friend thrown in the cage with Louisa who had scratch at the poor in an an e-breathes face. Jesus Christ, dude. Jesus Christ. Yeah. He was crazy. He's that 200 every year dotted as parties. I mean, yeah. So he had parties all the time then. All the time. Yeah. I just would kill people and the music would have to keep going and you would have to. One time he killed the guy for not laughing hard enough at his joke. So like at a party. So he told a joke and people laugh and when I didn't laugh hard enough and he shot him in the head at the party. Holy. He was like, looked at everybody. Everyone was like, you got to keep like having a good time. Holy. Because then you get it for reacting the wrong way. How many people did he kill? Oh my God. And they knew he was demonic. Like they knew he was fucked. But he's my boy. He's my son. What do I do? What do I do? What can I do? He's first in line. What can I do? He's going to be King someday. Sunday this will all be his. Can you imagine? If he had just taken over like crazy. As spring shifts into summer for a lot of people that means traveling and planning and making sure you're in the right shape. Whatever you get up to though, make sure you're taking extra care of you with AG1. It's an easy way to support your energy, mood and immune health with over 75 vitamins, minerals and whole food sourced ingredients. It can even help support your gut health since it contains digestive enzymes and clinically back probiotics. AG1 is backed by four clinical trials and is NSF certified for sport. AG1 next gen has been put to the test in multiple gold standard clinical trials. It's quality that you can trust. Make sure you're ready for those travel plans with AG1. Visit drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. For a limited time, get a bottle of vitamin D3, K2 and an AG1 flavor sampler for free in your welcome kit with your first subscription. That's drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. I wonder how old he was when he killed his first person. Probably teen like his dad. Probably. If not, it was definitely by the time he was like 20. And they would just, you know, the boys would just run through that country with like unlimited funds, unlimited access and no repercussions whatsoever. Wild. Yeah. It's like the worst formula for that personality trait. And it's probably never been there's never been a time where you had access to the kind of guns that they have. The weapons, cars and squads. They had kill squads. You know, he had his own kill squad. Jesus Christ. Yeah. He was probably the most, I mean, in modern times, the most sadistic guy in power that we've seen I think. I don't think just anyone who owns even sounds close to that. No. EDM was pretty crazy too. He was pretty crazy. Imagine that guy got a nuke. Uh, Ooday. Oh no. Yeah. 100% would use it. Day one maybe. 100%. Let's see what happens. You know, crazy that is. Yeah. Which is why you want to keep powers in check when it comes to like, like when certain people rise to power, what everybody goes, we can't let this guy get access. Yeah. That guy. Yeah. Well, that is a crazy thing about Saddam because how old was Saddam when they killed him? He had to have been what? 60s or 70s? Was he 70 yet? So if he, let's say he was 70, he had maybe 20 years left. Yeah. Because on your way out's probably when you want to do it, right? Day would have taken him out if it took too long. You know, he'd probably, he'd probably push him off a cliff or something. Easily. My father felt like he'd. I miss him so much. Anyway. Anyway. I don't forget his dad used mustard gas on his own people, nerve agent. Well, this, imagine what life was like thousands of years ago. Especially in one of those like under one of those regimes. Yeah. Yeah. There's always been horrible evil rulers. Yeah. What's his name? The Impaler. Vlad. Vlad Teppes. Oh, God. Oh, he was dark, dude. He would just for intimidation. He would set up geometric patterns of poles so that like when the enemy was coming close to where his country was, as they were entering into the area, he would have geometric patterns of poles with all of the soldiers that he killed. So all of them, some of them still alive. So you're talking like thousands and thousands and thousands. He goes on for miles and miles. He would have like the entire road like every 400 feet or something like that. Be a guy on a pole. So you said, yeah, the fuck are we going? And so you want to talk about morale killer. Yeah. You're realizing how successful this guy's already been and killing people came this way. Yeah. And then you're, you know, being forced, you're some farmer who got conscripted. Would you re-drill this at his parties, which you're saying like, you know, you have to go to? Yeah. He made you drink. Of course. And there was a special drink. He came up with the cup of friendship. And some guys in here said, it's called the cup of friendship. He'd line the entertainers up and they gave him 10 minutes to drink it. Oh my God. It's 90% alcohol. Sometimes including drugs. And if you didn't, there were punishments. Oh my God. So there was a lot of people saying he was impotent. And that made him eat it. Oh my God. So there's also always reading here. There was an assassination attempt in 1996. And he was shot somewhere between seven and 17 times. Oh my God. And the secretary said he got way worse after that. Oh really? So there's a lot of people were saying he was impotent. And that made him eat it. Oh, he got shot in the dick. He did not like those claims. Some of the, that's I didn't mean some of this is real fuck. That like he was taping some of these rippings. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, very fucked up. Oh, oh my God. Oh my God. Oh my God. So like, but like that usually those stories about that type of behavior are from like 600 years ago. You know what I mean? Like just like an older time where you're like, oh, that was just a different moral compass existed. And then you kind of go to now you're like, that was, that was not long ago. That was 20 years ago. So when he hand he cam, so he's got some in there filming it. Yeah. And he would send it when he sent his kills, go out to do stuff. He would always be like record it. So I could watch it later. Oh, Jesus Christ. And they would just, you know, cut people's ears off and shit. How did he die? He died in the in post war. Was it a bombing? I think it might have been a bombing, right? Oh, they went after my thing. Unless I was reading the details of this. There's a missile. Yeah, missile. Yeah. And I struck the fatal blow to Uday and Kusei who's saying, yeah, they do something. Got a missile. I'm just trying to figure out if it was him. Yeah, who his body were his body was. And then you see old wounds of the bodies were consistent with injuries he had during the assassination attempt. Oh, this was all because partially paralyzed. I was seeing this too. They flew out a hypnotist from America who went twice to try to unhypnotize his parrot being paralyzed or something. Oh, my God. And they killed them. I don't know. He wrote a book about it. I don't know. But the last time it went with September 2001, and I thought that. And I would not take that off. Oh, fuck, man. Yeah. Imagine you're a hypnotist in America and that guy wants to fly you to Iraq. I wonder how much people knew about what he had done by then. Like if you're just a hypnotist and you get an email from the Iraqi government. You're like, I can do it. You're like, I'm open. Larry Garrett from Chicago. Where's Larry? He traveled to Baghdad twice in April in September of 2001, where he was hypnotized of a treat, New Daisy Bill inability to walk with his left leg and spent more than 60 hours of personal time with New Day. Garrett said at who day he was an educated man with a background in engineering. He was well versed in the Quran. He had visited the U.S. with his cousin when he was 17. He expressed some political views, but he didn't involve me in them. I must say I was developing a fondness for him. He never spoke to me as a leader or the son of the leader. He never condescended. It was just two men sitting around at night. Wow. Imagine you just sitting there with that psycho and he's got like a fucking two, two, three thousand bodies under him. Yeah. At least, probably. He's like, so you said you can make this leg work, right? You're like, yeah, for sure man. And he's killing 200 people every year at his party. He's just shooting people for random things. Some guy's farts shoots me in the head. They shot Uday exactly 50 times. Shot Adam. Oh, shot Adam with 17 hits. Oh my God. God damn. That's crazy. You fear we got him. Bro, shot him 17 times. Trust me, we got him. 17 is a lot of bullets, man. Wow. His seven brothers and his father. Okay, Sodom's men arrested Abu Shagad and learned the details of other members of his team. Shreef's seven brothers and father were imprisoned and his mother was then told to collect their bodies from the Baghdad morgue. The father and three brothers, there would be a sassin, Abu Shudik. We're executed Abu Shudik and his father shared the same fate security guards destroyed the homes of all families of bulldozers and confiscated all their property. Oh my God. Iraqi intelligence eventually traced Abu Shudik to a location in Iran where he was assassinated on the elder who sains orders on December of 2002. Man. Wow. That's really cool. According to popular belief, he was impotent. Wow. That's funny. He got a bromat if you said that a lot. Oh, you got a real mad at a lot of stuff. It seems like I've real mad at everything. And then everybody they said in this doc was like so aware of what he was up to and how he was that when you would see him or in his like cronies out around town. Everybody just kind of backed up to a wall and looked down because they were just terrified. You know, there's accounts of seeing him in a traffic jam. Just pull someone out of a car and beat him with a hammer. And then everybody just kind of no one honks. No one says a thing. They just just wait it out. And then they're like, all right, he's good. Go ahead. How crazy is that? Like having that kind of ability to do whatever you want to people with no repercussions. None. And you will eventually be the king. Yeah. This is our guy. This is the leader. He would eventually become the king. Like if we didn't, I mean, I'm not saying we should have. But if we didn't go to Iraq. Yeah. And invade. Like what would happen? Who knows? Who knows? And I also was fascinated to learn because I didn't really know much enough that I know a lot about it. But how much of a thriving cosmopolitan place Baghdad was in like the 60s? Well, Baghdad fell apart a long time ago when they got invaded by the Mongols. Baghdad was like the epicenter of science and philosophy. Yes. You're talking about long time. But I'm saying even as recently as like the 1960s, this was a cosmopolitan place. Yeah. That was the place that yeah. Yeah. It was like a hot place to go man. Wow. Yeah. And it just how things can take a turn. It's just so dramatic. You go fuck that can just happen. You think things are a certain way forever. I'm sure they did. I'm sure if you were a citizen then you were like, what are you talking about? Well, look at LA. Look at LA is crazy. I'm so fascinated by the people because I, you know, we both have a lot of friends there. A lot of people. And there's this. There's two types now. The ones who acknowledge that this is different. And then the delusional ones. Yeah. I know a lot of people who are like, yeah, of course it's different. And you're like, hey, you can see it. You can see this is a different place than it was several years ago. Because people are, I know a lot of people who are like, yeah, of course it's different. You're like, yeah, you can see it. You can see this is a different place than it was several years ago. And then the people who are like, no, man, everything's fine. You're like, you're not in reality right now. Well, they probably had seven or eight boosters, so maybe they're not thinking so straight. Those are the people that kept getting boosted. Yeah. Yeah. People still do that? 100%. There's people that take pictures and put it up on X. You never know what's real on X though. And there's so many people that are posting from foreign accounts that are just bullshit and just... And there's trouble. And there's a lot of AI shit that is starting to trick more and more people. Like it was for a second, you could always decipher it early on the earlier stuff. Now it's getting better and better. Oh yeah, war footage. There was a lot of people that were posting war footage that was straight out of video games. How good is that going to be though? It's already so good. I know, but we're still in like the early phases of it. The only thing that tricks me or doesn't trick me is that I know that AI is real. So I look at I go, this might be AI. Yeah. Because you have to think that way. Which is a new thing. It's a new thing. It's a new thing. It's the limits are... Yeah. It's limitless. Limitless. Yeah. AI only fans, they have AI girls, they're doing only fans. They're completely fake. Wow. Yeah. And they're making a lot of money. Yeah, I did see this. They're making a lot of money and they have like a whole team of people that respond to all these sad guys. Oh my God. And these sad guys are sending them tips and they're saying their name in a video while they finger themselves. Oh my God. They're not a real person. And they're generating like 27 million a year. Probably a fuck man. Bro. That's a real crazy thing. So you just think there was a... There's been a recent spat of commencement speeches. I've seen it. Where they people talk about AI and they grow. The kids are freaking out. They're booing. Yeah. I think it's their misguided, man. I really do. It's not that I'm, oh yeah, fuck it. AI is awesome. I think you are a bit misguided and a little delusional if you don't accept the reality that this is here. This is not going away. So when somebody goes, use it to benefit you. Like learn, don't reject learning. When you boo, I think you're setting yourself up. It's not saying, oh my God, isn't it great that if this were to take all of everybody's jobs? But it's like this isn't... This is like getting mad about email. Right. It's not going away, man. You can't. It's not going away, but they're terrified because imagine if you were graduating from college right now and you had no idea what your future is going to be. And then all of a sudden there's this thing that's just recently been invented that essentially can replace everybody that's done everything ever. And you're like, what is my future? And even your professors are like, I don't know. I don't know. Being a lawyer is going to be a thing in five years. I don't know. Being a coder is going to be a thing. But I don't think the answer is just like when they boo and go, I reject this. It's like, there's too much money behind it. It's already too capable for you to go, I just reject it. You have to learn it. You have to embrace learning about it. The learning it might not be good enough. It might not matter because you might, you might be completely irrelevant. That's the problem. The problem is like when you see these people defending these data centers and we had Mark Andreessen on, he was talking about these data centers. I'm like, what do these data centers do? What do they do? They're essentially running AI and some of them are going to have their own power plants. Why do you need this? Why do you need all say, what is going on? Yeah. What's going on? What's going on is essentially most tasks are going to be done by that. Then we're going to figure out what do people do. His thing was like, oh, these engineers are working harder than ever because now they have like 15 different AI models that are running and you have to monitor them because they go 24 hours a day. These guys aren't sleeping. They're far more productive than ever before. Great. Up to a point. Then there's no jobs. This is what's going, it's everything you do is good. It's not like we're going to need people to pay attention to the AI. No, the AI is going to be able to pay attention to itself. It's going to be self-correcting and it's going to do a better job out. Don't you think though that there are just, you can still look at this as a tool so that you can be valuable and use this tool for now? For now. You think it will because everybody who's really, really well versed in AI also speaks about AI getting so advanced that there will be, there's a danger to what AI will be able because it will think of every possible scenario in response that a human can have and start to basically like it's like terminatorship. Oh yeah. For real? For real. Yeah. That's where it's going. It has to go that way. The question is will it have instincts? Will it want to do that? Will it want to protect itself? That's the question. Or is it protecting itself? And Driesen was essentially saying that the reason why that AI blackmailed that one guy in that story. It told the guy, the guy lied to the AI and told him that he was having an affair in his wife and told the AI a bunch of stuff and then told the AI it was shutting it down and the AI is like look at me, shut me down. I'm going to tell everybody about your wife. What? They're cheating on your wife. Yeah. Blackmail them. Holy shit. Right. They told me it was kind of instructed to do that, instructed to preserve itself. It's not like it has instincts. They wanted to see if it's instructed to preserve itself and what lengths would it go to. So it was informed about bank, about blackmail. But something tells me that at a certain point instincts will probably be a part of it. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It won't be about programming. Yeah. Little monkey people. These little monkey people, they're stupid biological brains. Yeah. But for everyone booing it though, what's the answer? You just go, I reject using it. Like there's too many people using it. I know. I get it. But if I was 18, I'd be booing too or 21 or whatever. Yeah. I understand that for sure. I understand it. It's weird. It is weird. But I still just think when something is too big, it's too big to fail. If you just approach it with, I reject. You're setting yourself up for a bigger failure. Well, the real scary thing is that these kids are going to put themselves in a massive debt. So they're going to go to college for four years and then maybe they get their masters and maybe they're going to get a PhD. And if they do that, they might be in the whole hundreds of thousands of dollars. And then no jobs. That's what's weird. It's like because you're setting your, you're essentially making an investment in your future by going to college. And he's like, I'm taking out these crazy loans that I really can't afford. But the plus side is on the end of this, I'm going to get a good job. And then eventually I'll move up and I'll start making more and more money. I'll pay my debt off and I'll have a Porsche. I'll be, I'll be balling. You have a nice apartment in Manhattan. I'll be balling. But you might not be balling, but you might be saddled to a debt that you can't fucking get out of no matter what. It's the only debt that we have that you can't absolve during bankruptcy. Yeah. Everything else. I spent too much money on credit cards. Don't worry. Go bankrupt. Oh, I lost my house. I lost this. I know too much money. I can't afford it. Go bankrupt. You're okay. But if you go bankrupt, they still come after you for that. I know. It's so fucked. It's fucked. It's fucked. Because we're doing it to people that don't know what they're doing yet. And the, if we also look at the price, like the tuition charges, you know, like that's the way. It's so much crazier. They're like a mid tier university is now. whatever, like 60,000 a year. Yeah. That's not even, that's not Ivy league anywhere. Ivy league is like six figures. Always. Exactly. And then you see that cash me outside girl on only fans made like fucking $100 million. I got myself a rose. Right. It's crazy. It's like, you know, AI girlfriend on only fans was making $289,000 a month. And you're like, what am I doing? But I just feel like, I don't know. I'm not well educated in AI. Like I know people who really dive in and I think educating yourself is still the best route for now. Like not viewing it as something that I'm not going to learn anything about. It can help you. Like you can do businesses with it. So you could, you could have it set up things for you and you could have it run businesses for you. And if you're like really focused, you could actually probably profit immensely of AI as it stands right now. If you were inclined to do that, that's your thing. You probably could figure out ways to do it. I do think it's funny. I saw somebody who was like really vocally talking against it. And then when people would message this person in the comments, he was definitely using AI to respond. I was like, you're definitely using these answers or not yours. Oh, there's AI accounts that I follow on X that I absolutely know are AI. And the reason I know their AI is like my instincts like, but this isn't right. Something wrong here. The way this person's writing, this kind of writing is very weird. It's very formulaic. Yes. It's very, it's not, it doesn't have a feeling of a personality to it. Have you gotten summaries of things like give me a summary of this and I ask somebody like for like a script or something. And then you read it and you're like, you didn't write this. You just tell. Yeah. Yeah. There's a feeling to it. But then there's also like when kids are really good at writing stuff and they bring it to the teachers, the teachers will tell them that it's AI. Yeah. And you'll say, no, it's not AI. I'm just smart. You fucking cunt. Yeah. Yeah. That's got to be that's such an upsetting fucking feeling. Yeah. My daughter had an experience like that with someone who was like, she's preparing for some tests and she was doing some stuff. And the person who was the tutor was accusing her of using AI. She's like, no, I wrote this just because I know what I'm actually studying. I studied. Yeah. But it's so insulting to say, you know what's all come on. You used AI. It happened to me in college, obviously not AI, but like I turned into paper as a freshman. And my professor was like, you didn't write this. I was like, I'm a freshman. How do you know how I write? I just started. And I had to have like a one on one meeting with him. What a douche. But it's an in raging feeling. Yeah. I was like, I did write this. He was like, really, you wrote this. I'm like, yeah, man, isn't that gross instead of so gross? Wow, amazing. Yeah. You wrote this? That's great. I'm looking forward to having you in my class. He had no reference for what my writing would be like. It's like, how do you write away? Just go to that. And I had to go see the chair and be like, he fucking sucks. Arrogant teachers are a problem. His name was Kermit. I remember that. Ah. If you're still out there, fuck you, man. Fuck you, Kermit. Fuck you. Yeah, there's people like that. They can be a real roadblock in your life. Oh, totally. Yeah. Totally. And that could have, he could have done that to somebody that it just would have shut them down. Someone was fragile. Yeah. Instead of someone was like, well, fuck you. Yeah. You know? Fuck you. This is the paper. Yeah. Skyler Gray was talking about the musician. She was a singer. She was in here the other day. And she was talking about one of her main motivations was someone telling her when she was young. The music is in a career. Yeah. And she's like, oh, oh really? OK, bitch. And like, that's still stuck in her crawl all these years later. I feel like we in comedy all have a story similar to that. Like something. And then you see it in athletics too. Oh, yeah. You know what I mean? You don't have it. Oh, yeah. Both of those things. Both of them all the time. Yeah. Comedy, especially because they're right most of the time. I remember one, because you don't forget them. Yeah. I remember I did a show in New York at Gotham Comedy Club, which is a great club. And I was the middle act. And a girl that I was friends with in college came to the show with her husband. And she had seen me once before. And then after the show, it was a great show. It was like a sold out show and like a fun show. They were just talking to me. And the husband goes, how long are you going to keep doing this? And I go, what? He goes, you know, just like doing shows. Like when you're going to get like a career going. And I go, this is my career. And he was like, OK. But like the implication of like, how long are you going to keep doing this? I was like, forever. What are you talking about, man? You know, he was like, this isn't like a real job, man. You got to get your shit together. Oh, that's a dickhead. Yeah. That's just, there's guys that like to do that, though. It's like guys like the big dog. Yeah. Yeah. Especially if he's doing well in his life. He was doing well. Yeah. There you go. Yeah. Ew. It's gross. It's gross. Ew. You're always going to find people like that. And now how much money could you make doing that? And like, he can make a lot of money. Really? Yeah. Can you? As much as what I'm making? Let me tell you what I'm making. Yeah. And then it's that shit. But those people like that really what you should do is just walk away. Yeah. Excuse me. Just don't say anything. Just walk away. It's true. It's pointless. It's, and then you feel angry and gross. It's like, I think you need a few of those in your life to know those people exist. And then once you recognize it and it's happening right in front of you, like, ehh. Got to go. See you later, fart face. Yeah. How, how, when are you going to like take your life seriously? And you're like, what the fuck? But also that happens from family too. I hope he's flipping through Netflix right now. That thought sees him too. He's watching me dance right now. He's watching you hump that lady in the alley. I guess he stuck with it. That's funny. Yeah. Yeah. It's funny, man. It's like, you're always going to have people like that. And you're like, but the thing is, is like, they are right. Some of the time, most of the time, like if you think about how many people that start doing stand up comedy as an open miker and even become a middle act, how many of them go on to like it's more likely once you become a middle act that you'll eventually become a headliner and make good living. Yeah. But when you're an open miker, man, the chances are the probability is low. What do you think it is? Is it one in 500 maybe that become professional? That's a really good question. I would actually think it's probably a worst scenario. Because you don't realize with like how busy your life is and what you do, how unaware you are of how many people are doing open mics. You're not aware because I want to claw. Well, I'm saying, but I'm seeing it all rise up in country. I'm saying, oh, yeah. Oh, it's not. It's probably not one in 500. It's probably one in seven. But even if you see like out of club, like if you go to an open mike night on a regular basis, you know, you might see 20, 30 people go up right over the course of the night. And if you see those people, there might be one of those people that has a chance, a chance, even a chance in their current state. Like there's people that suck for the first few times and then they get a good laugh and then they figure out how to loosen up and then they eventually catch and then they take off. It's totally possible. Boy, that's like who's going to complete this ultra marathon? It's 300 miles through the desert. It's a lot. How many people are going to complete it? I know. And there's people, honestly, in the guys defense who told me like the fuck are you doing, there's people that I know that I've been doing this a long time that I want to go with the fuck are you doing? Right. There's people you go like, what are you doing? But those are the types of people that don't work hard, though. That's true. That's a real problem. The people that they blow off doing sets, they stay home, they smoke pot and play video games. Or some of them, it's really interesting. They do work a lot, but they're misdirected. Like they latch on to like an idea about how they're supposed to do it and they just do that. You know, they don't evolve. There's no growth. Yeah. That's also a tricky one where you're like, I've seen you do this for 15 years and it's the same. So they're like, I'm getting up all the time. You're like, you're not doing anything else though. Or like you're not evolving. You're not changing. Not trying things. Yeah. And they're mind they're working hard because they're getting up. Yeah, they just have a bad direction. They have bad direction. Or they have like a character they do on stage. Yeah. Yeah. You gotta let that go. Because if you do and then you develop like Bobcat Goldwaite had a problem because in the beginning he's like, ah, screaming and yelling and everything like that. And then he didn't want to do that anymore. Yeah. And he would do shows and be like, hey, where's Bobcat? How can you not screaming? Like, fuck off. It took years. So him to just perform. For people forgot that he screamed. Yeah, yeah. I could see that. That was also he got caught up in a time where I think that was a little more accepted and celebrated. You know what I mean? Like the character thing? It was like early 80s, right? Like if you did that now people would I think be like, I don't think it would last. I don't think it would catch on as much. It would have you were really funny. True. It's just if it works. It's just really what works. Like I would never say you can't do that anymore. Like there's no- You don't see it as much though. You don't see prop acts at all anymore. Yeah. I was talking to Caratop about that. It was like you kind of took over a genre. Yeah. There used to be a whole genre when we were coming up called prop acts. Yeah. Guys who do props, they go on stage like a box of stuff and they pull things out and they'd be really funny. Yeah. Uh-uh. Nobody does that anymore. It's just Caratop. I'm like, that's kind of crazy that you dominate an entire genre now. It's not. And he's doing like 700 shows a year. It's insane. That lifestyle. Yeah. Crazy what he's doing. Well, he does the residency thing. Yeah. Which is just nuts. But at least you're doing it near your house. Yes. You know. In Vegas. Yeah. Yeah. It's like for him, it's on that band. It plays a lot. He's making money. So fuck it. I wonder if everything is cyclical, everything, you know? I wonder if you'll see like a resurgence of certain types of acts again. I want to see ventralists. Where the fuck did they go? They were cool. Really funny ventralists? You remember seeing that as a kid and you're like, what is happening? And an adult's like he's talking through his neck. You're like, what do you mean? Like it's in comprehension. Then you try to do it and you're like, you cannot pull it off. Well, there was always a bunch of funny ventralists back in the day. Yeah. It was a little bit. Yeah, it was a little bit. It was a little bit. It was like old school. He'd been around a long time. The auto and George is the greatest. That was the greatest. And the part of that was that he didn't, it wasn't part of the angle that he didn't do it quite to the level of, oh, lips moved. People got mad at him. Yeah. I see his lips moving. Yeah. They get fussed off. It's like my car. It didn't matter. It was just so funny. It was so funny that it didn't matter. But it was also like there was something twisted about auto. Like he would have to pull over and check on the dummy in the trunk. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And auto would party. Like hard, hard, hard partying. You know, like he, very funny guy. Yeah, he was a nut. We did a bunch of shows together at Dangerfields. Did you really? Yeah. We did a bunch of prom shows. Did you know what prom shows are? No. Oh, they're the craziest thing of all time. They'd take these kids from like Staten Island, Brooklyn, and they'd bust them in. And so on prom night, the show, yeah. So they would go to their prom, and then after their prom, they'd go to the comedy club. The show would start at like 7, 8 o'clock. It would go on till 3 in the morning. Wow. And you would do like 7, 8 sets. You would just keep rotating in. And then they didn't want you to do the same material. Because they were trying to kick the kids out. And the way to kick the kids out, if you did a new set every time you went up there, they were like, oh, what's you going to do with this time? Yeah. So they would tell you, you got to do the same set. I'd be like, fuck you, these are the same kids. I'm not doing the same jokes for the same fucking kids. It was crazy. Like, why don't you tell them? They'd tell them to leave. They never tell them to leave. They would just shove new kids into the room. So these kids were like, why are you going to deep well, man? And they had no control to crowd. Like they just had to go like, let it go. So 17-year-old, 18-year-old kids from Brooklyn, these fucking animals. And they were smoking cigars. And they were drinking somehow or another. And they're not supposed to be. Did you finger your date? Like, just like, exactly. Exactly. Exactly. That's hilarious. And then what's his name still do? I can't believe I'm blanking out his name. The intro with the quiz. Jeff Dunham. Yeah. Yeah. Jeff Dunham's, he's probably the most successful one ever of that. He's huge. He's huge. He has a bunch of like very popular characters, people by t-shirts with his characters on it and shit. Yeah. Yeah. So he's the last. But other than him, like guys coming up, Duncan had that one bit. It was very funny. But this is just one bit. I know. Very funny. I told him he should do a whole act with a little whole, though. That was great. That was a closer. That's what you'd see him closely. He had a closer. That's a whole song. Yeah. And the fucking demonic aspect of it. It was so crazy. Did that ever make its way onto something like a special or something? I don't think so. I don't think it did. I don't know. I mean, how many specials does Duncan even have? I don't know. That's a problem with Duncan. He's been doing it so long. And he just does shows. And really, people know him from his podcast and being on other people's podcast. Yeah. He's such a funny guy. He's so good. He's comedy so odd. So odd in his mind is such a unique. Do it, Kelton. He was a little hobo. I've got a fair amount of views. It's special like. But I don't think he did the bit. By the way, this is the second little hobo. Someone stole his first little hobo. They stole it? Yeah, they stole it. Yeah, I don't know if he does that bit. We did a gig together in England. We took, we went to England and he did little hobo in England. And they fucking went bananas. Like people were screaming and cheering. It was incredible. It was incredible. That's cool. Yeah, because like over there, they're like, this is nuts. Yeah. I've seen anything like this before. Yeah, it's so crazy. Because they're used to comedians. How, how will you think about what's going on here? Pretty strange, right? Pretty strange. Well, you see a lot of long, really like I tell stories, but I've seen in the UK, like really long stories too. Yeah. Well, there's a problem with that. Not a problem, but they have a different style, right? And the Edinburgh, the comedy festival. Yeah. That's that style. We're like every year someone will have a theme. The theme thing is, and I have to say, I do think that that is a really interesting challenge. Oh, yeah. Like that is not an easy thing to be like, what's your show about my dad? And it's an hour. Oh, you're like, fucking hey, it's an hour about that. And they're like, yeah, and that's the show for the year. Yeah. And then the next year they're like, this shows about my first year at university. And like it's just like that theme. That's not easy to put together. It's a lot of stuff. Yeah. Well, you don't need to see some ones that haven't been sitting out. Yeah, that's a hard thing to do, man. I would want to do it. The, like that's what I actually really, I really respected and appreciated so much. Ari's show, Jew. Because that's a theme show. Right. And it's really good. It's really good. Yeah, Ari worked on that for a long time. I remember seeing him work shop. Do you know how it started? No. Started, he would do sets at the comedy store. And then he would do like, ask a Jew. And like someone would ask him questions. Like for people that don't know, Ari went to Israel and he like studied the Talmud every day for like 12 hours a day. He was a hardcore J. It was a hardcore, he was deep, deep in that world. And then he fell out of it. And then, you know, he would talk about it sometimes. And I was like, dude, you should talk about that on Saysley. I don't know what to say. Mm. Mm. Mm. Mm. But then he figured out how to do it and having to do it that way. Thank you, sir. Yeah, he, um, he, that show, I remember when I, I saw him work shop and then I saw the special come out. I was like, that's a cool thing to pick a theme. Oh, yeah. And together, an hour that really fucking delivers because it's, it's funny as shit. And it's informative. Yeah. It's like the best combination. Well, that was why I was telling them like he would tell me these stories of like stuff that's actually in the Bible or in the Talmud that, you know, you wouldn't believe, like one of them is that when you jerk off, you're impregnating a demon and like some other dimension or some shit. What? What? Yeah, see what you can find what that is, Jamie. What are you doing there? Leave on that. Do you know what that, that story is that if you, if you jack off, like so. Yeah, you're like impregnating a demon in another dimension or something. That's fucking dark dude. Some poor little kid with heavy balls. And that you realize too that's just from like a couple of thousand years ago, like we've got to get people to stop jerking off. Why? Why was he trying to give you a little stop jerking off? Like you should be encouraging people to calm down. Like you got a bunch of young boys running around. It was just a jerk off. One guy that did it too much. And this fucking guy. We got to make up a story. The whole, this year's harvest is fucked up. They just come up with this story. A demon's going to visit you. They didn't even have porn. No. Imagine how much more people are jerking off today than they ever have before. Oh my God. It's got to be the gooning culture. Yeah. I mean, it's got to be it's got to be more jerking off than the history of the human race. How can it be? It has to be because they all have thorns. And the guy sitting around with goon caves with like eight screens. And it's like the whole day. Goon caves. Yeah. And they're just, what are they, they're like stringing along, you know, the, uh, the feeling. So that like you get close. Oh, they're edging. The edging for hours. What? Yeah. Or, or you just shoot and loads for hours. You're probably edging. I'm thinking edging for hours and waiting for the right scene right there. Have you ever done right there? This, this thing's not good enough to drop one on. You've done that. And then hated myself in a quarter hours afterwards. Of course. Fuck is wrong with you. I don't feel what I'm reading here. Trying to read. Well, it's on Wikipedia. It's how many people have jerked off. It's a Wikipedia thread about Judaism and masturbation, but this, I don't know what even these that were it is. You call R right now, he'll tell me. Uh, prohibits from emitting a seed in vain generally, but, uh, but not only referring to masturbation, same passage, likens the act to murder and idolatry. Also prohibits a man from intentionally arousing himself. Oh, you skip that. Yeah, but these quotes from different rabbis is nuts, dude. Oh, these state with this, states that if a man frequently touches his penis with his hand in order to check for richly impure emission, his hand ought to be cut off. Yeah. And then they're having this conversation about it. We have to look at this with regard to anyone who holds his penis and urinates, it is considered as though he's bringing a flood to the world. And someone who emits semen for not is liable to receive the punishment of death at the hand of heaven as the state with regard to onon. What? Whoa. Jesus Christ, one who intentionally caused himself an erection shall be ostracized. Imagine that. Bro, did you get hard? Get the fuck out of the village. Get out of here. Get out of here. First, I got to thought you were asking me from reading this. I was like, yeah, that one scene. You're obligated to fast 84 times to repent for discharging of semen and vein. 84 times. Like 84 days? Like you will 84 days for each time you nut. You have to plan it out, or you can start to death. That was taught. 84 is nuts. That's a crazy amount for one load. The really crazy thing to me is they're like, don't hold your dick to piss. Yeah, you just piss all of your shoes. Well, it's because it leads to depression, obviously. So masturbation leads to depression. And the effects of impure ejaculation, ejaculation can only be nullified through the recitation of, was that word, tikkun, hackli, hackli, hackli, hackli. hackli. Ask Ari. Jesus Christ. So there's nothing there about demons. Well, so like, don't think that's my type of man, but mostly about wasting that sperm. Don't waste that seed. Yeah, man. We'll see here. We'll get Ari to find out what it is. Call Ari the wanderer. You got a new phone number. So his new phone number is the wanderer. There's always a new number. I didn't bring my phone number. Well, he needs to have new numbers. He broke it back. Vanishes. Yeah, he really does. That's not right. Yeah, he never found numbers. Yeah, he's in to bet right now. Yeah, he's no chance. Probably. I have like 10 different numbers for him. Yeah. Because whenever he goes away, he literally shuts his number off. So he can't use it. And then he'll get a new number, but also not tell you what's him. So the first text you get, I'm like, who the fuck is this? Exactly. Then he's like, he didn't talk to me about it. He sent me like three of them. And to, oh, this is already by the way, I'm like, yeah, lead with that. Yeah, how about that? I've got a photo of your face. He's fucking weirdo. These random eye messages from some fucking weirdo and perils. This is it comes from the kabal. Ah, there it is. That's a fantastic idea. Oh. You fucking weirdo these random eye messages From some fucking weirdo and Peru says it comes from the cabbal idea Okay If you man demon pregnancy idea comes from if you masturbate a demon woman comes gets pregnant from your semen and has demon babies Yeah, there it is later mystical folkloric expansion usually tied to cabbala and Popular preaching not to the Talmud itself. You know, tell me to read the cabbal. Oh rosanne She did yeah, she's like you should read the cabbal She's big in that right? I don't know or did at one point was I don't remember I'm pretty sure she's one told me But I've had other people suggested to me too my neighbor suggested to me give me a book Hmm about this. I don't know about that. Yeah, it's um, I don't even know if like regular Jewish people believe in that I don't think so Not majority for sure like what it's mysticism. I think so Let's define put that in a perplexity. What is the the cabbala? What is the actual cabbala and How is it? thought You know what is it how is it Received by regular Jewish people What do they think about it today the Smith said I think I think it's a little cookie right? I Really did Christians that like you serpents? Yeah, wasn't that like it? It's all this Like a big explosion of popularity because like Madonna 20 years ago. Oh, she yeah Like nobody was really I don't remember it being part of pop culture Look at it Madonna and going what is she into what do you spiritually into? Yeah, I want to be like her Catch that fucking wave. Yeah, she's still fucking doing it too. She's still doing it She's she's part of the um world cup like halftime show whatever they're putting on is she I think so well She fucked with her face for a while and then it came back So it might have been like a little swollen now. It's good again. So she looks pretty good. Missed this isn't Jewish mysticism that seeks to understand God creation and the inner meaning of the Torah today It's both deeply embedded in traditional Judaism and also widely and sometimes Controversially popularized in pop spirituality the word kabal means receiving referring to a received esoteric wisdom about God in the universe in Jewish terms it is the mystical layer of the Torah teachings about God's hidden essence the ten Sephiroth divine attributes the cosmic structure often pictured as a tree of life and how human actions affect the spiritual worlds Hmm, so it grew in medieval province and Spain in the 13th century With the Zohar as its foundational text and later reshaped by Lurianic Kabbalah see that's that's too recent for a hardcore Yeah, Jewish person to be into my right is a little sketchy. Yeah a little weird tied to mysticism Well the the old it's funny like we always want to go like how old is it? Make sure it's old It's old that it's right if it's old. It's good But the problem with that is like the really old stuff is the fucking cookie stuff like yeah Get into the Bible the layers of it too. Oh, yeah, most of the book. Yeah, and you go what the fuck was this? Yeah, really all about it's Yeah, I mean it was just trying to I mean like they just trying to guide people right control people in a way I think some things happened You know and what those things were it's very difficult to tell after all this time One of the weird ones is they think they might have found the the arc of Noah recently No, like they they've identified it quite a while ago, but now they've done like ground penetrating radar scans this thing is the exact same shape as described in the Bible it looks like a boat like it's the shape of a boat It's in the place where they said that it rested like in the Bible It's set it rested on Mount Ararat in Turkey. That's where it is. That's where it is and this thing is like the shape of a boat And it was but how long ago was that found? That's a good question. I want to say to the 80s of the 90s Okay, so it's not super recent not super recent, but back then it was just a photo because it's like really high up in the mountains It's just the photo of this Impression this feature in the ground like what is this? Mm-hmm And then recently they started using technology to scan it and I think they've actually found petrified wood discovered in 1948 48 oh wow heavy rain war by with three earthquakes expose the formation from the surrounding mud and that's where it said it was too Like in there. Yeah, it's like where it's supposedly rested according to the body today Extract it or leave it. No. It's still there. Wow. We show it seems you could find a good Image of it. It's very weird because you look at it You go what the fuck is that that does look like a boat? Stories bonkers the story doesn't make any sense. I think the story is a local story the arc story Yeah, it's a local story. It's like the idea that Noah had 40 different animals or two of each animal like that's not the whole animals eat other ant I had a whole bit about that. Yeah explaining it to a five-year-old with Down syndrome But if you The problem though is back then they didn't know what was going on in Australia They didn't know what was going on in New Zealand. So if you had a local flood like and you did save a bunch of animals like That's the story. That's the story. Yeah. That makes sense So there probably was some guy who had a bunch of farm animals that he put on a boat and saved them and lived and a bunch of the people died But the question is did this guy really get a message from God saying to build an arc? So look at this thing. Holy shit Not crazy So good. I was reading in the when the wiki that when they did these first scans back in 1988 I think it was saying the guy who helped him do the scans went in accordance said that it's BS that it's the arc Right, that's an 80s. Well, I don't mean that the guy that that's what I was trying to figure out What's different about these new scans? They're supposed to just do so let's click on that link What does it say about the new no us Noah's arc scans calm? That's why I said go Go there. Let's see what kind of virus you get So this is some guy who's like really in the Noah's arc you have to sign up That's that felt look I found it. I think it's mine so that's what the shape of it supposedly looked like in the Bible and This is fucking team Wait a minute was the sign say? Yeah The signs say the nose arc so they they all think so maybe there's a whole tourism thing attached to the yeah Of course Of course Noah's arc discovered new evidence from De-rupin are site in Turkey What is the new evidence and the arc rested upon the mountains of Ararat that's exactly where they said it was gonna be? Even in the Quran it says that but how can a guy I mean not that I would know but how does the guy go? It's not that though. You know, I mean like how does it know? It doesn't know so that's what I was trying to get out trying to read he there was dude when they scan They scan only for like iron or something like that. I think based off of what they scanned I think he was probably saying you can't say that right is what that's based on that and then he's probably right But that's in that's in 2000 that's in 1980 so it says in 2023 the 2019 GPR data was analyzed again America researchers uncovered corridors and room like chambers running the full length of the formation Consistent with a large intelligently designed vessel the Turkish soil test in 2024 also showed that samples inside the structure contain nearly three times more Organic material the nose from outside suggesting the remains of an ancient biological or man-made substances Since 2019 a joint scientific team is applied GPR ERT lidar and chemical analysis determined whether the Durop doop in our Formation is a natural geological fold or a buried decayed wood ship preserved in the mountains of Ararat It's kind of crazy that it's it matches it in terms of like it has all these characteristics Yeah, it has like what what look like some openings I mean it's cool a shit to explore. I mean even if they're like This is not that to find that an old ship like that is still cool if it And be wiser a ship on the top of a mountain and turkey, but this is why it's interesting But if it really was a boat, did you see that? I would I guess it's not recently discovered but it's recently been cleared another Inking ruin site that they found oh they keep finding those two, but this one was like elaborate And they I guess they had just recently I think recently cleared it enough so you can see how vast it is In a room somewhere. Yeah. Yeah. They found a lot of them in Peru. Yeah. This one out the guy It was like a CNN report about it. I was like holy shit. I'd never heard of this place before It's nuts dude all the the Aztec stuff the inking stuff. It's like People are living here long before the the end of the ice age They were they were living here a long fucking time ago man And they're just starting to piece out altogether and try to figure out like how long have people been here? They said thing that was clovis first that was the thing about the Americas They thought that for a long as time was the clovis people which was like 13,000 years ago And then they found footprints in white sands, New Mexico that are 22,000 years old God damn and so they're like okay. It's definitely not 13,000 like how old it till 22,000 is long before the ice age The end of the ice age was like 11,000 some years ago. They get some more recent than that though. They went around back then Yeah, but so like it's like how long how people been here. Yeah, we don't know and what is that all carbon dating that they do? Yeah, it's in the middle of nowhere. Holy shit Whoa, that's where the arc is that's where this Wow, what does it look like from Google Earth? Can you zoom in on the site? Is it can you get closer and see the actual formation? Well, that's where the center is I'm trying to find The spot where's the fuck about bitch is that it right there? Like merit above it above that little Indication red marker look to your right right above is that it? I don't think it says it's 170 feet long That's a shit. Well, it shouldn't be that big in this picture. I guess. Hmm. Maybe that Huh? Do you think when you do the tour they tell you we think or they're like this is there there. It's marked here. There's a thing. Oh, okay They tell you they tell you it's it right of course. Yeah When you look at the ground, though, it's like is it? Hold on a second. Here's what's weird Look at look at how much water erosion is on the ground. Yeah, good Close back in again when you close back in look at like that all looks like rivers ran through that shit. Yeah That's dude. Yeah, that's what's fucked about so many parts of earth is it But that also looks like that could have been just a bunch of settlement-based shit Kind of crazy though, but it doesn't look like a ton a ton of erosion happened. Yeah Well a ton of water erosion. Yeah, the floods were fucking real man There's too many different tails of floods in too many different religions. It's giant mountains to the north of it Hmm, and there's a seed down here, but that's pretty far. Oh, I bet that whole thing washed Yeah, I guarantee The stuff that it looks far out you can see that it washed over for sure. Oh, yeah, look at that like look at that the below Right above where it says Google Maps like that whole thing looks like it was washed out Then all looks like it was washed out a long time ago. We've looked at this part before. Yeah Well Randall Carlson he's a he's like a real expert in Not just the mythology around the impacts of the younger dry sandpack theory But about like what possibly could have happened to the ice sheets and what created the Great Lakes and what kind of insane Water you would be talking about the volume of water and the power of that water if you're if all of the ice caps Get hit with asteroids like boom boom boom Like that's what they think that somewhere around 11,800 years ago We ran into a comet storm and they slammed into North America And then you just get this insane wash of water that tears through the land and just Fucking insane impossible volume of water just carving its way through mountains Carving its way through the landscape flattening everything in front of it and that's how the earth took the shape that it's in right now Well, that's the shape of North America. Yeah, there's a lot of like evidence of that like when you he's got all these slides that he shows See if you can find some of his stuff. I was where he goes over it's pretty much how like we get saved Countless times a year just by Jupiter. Oh, yeah, just because comets are on their way here. Yeah Jupiter's like our bodyguard. Yeah to destroy us. Yeah Yeah, and just slams into that giant gas giant, but we all think of that as like this sci-fi kind of fun Crazy movie thing like that's really real though. Oh, yeah. Look at the moon Loose covered in craters. Mm-hmm. I mean that we live in a shooting gallery So this is some of the stuff like look at that. Tell me that doesn't look like water washed over that The Columbia River and that nuts. Yeah there's there's tons of these and You know, he does a fantastic job of breaking it all down But he thinks that these big canyons even the Grand Canyon was carved like relatively quickly He thinks this idea that these things are that this all this water erosion took place over millions of years like I bet it wasn't You goes. I think it was very quickly. What's really really quickly mean though. I don't know mean who knows but you're talking about giant chunks of ice and rock from the sky that slam into the earth change the climate completely Cause massive flooding just huge amounts of water just rushing over the land It just completely makes sense that that's what the stories are. They're so many stories of a flood epic of Gilgamesh It's in the Quran. It's in the Bible. It's in like they all have stories of a great flood and then you know when they see you see things like the great lakes which great lakes are fucking huge man Yeah, those used to all be glaciers. They used to all be glacier I wonder how many of those comments it takes to like change the makeup of You know Right. Yeah, it could be just one one could do it if it was enormous This this planet has been hit so many times They find new craters all the time. They found this big one that's off the coast of Australia I don't remember when they found that one but when they found that one like oh look at this And by the way the Aborigines in the Aboriginals in Australia. They all have flood myths too They all have stories of floods yeah, flood. They all have that Everybody has every ancient culture that stories of a great flood that happened a long time ago Guaranteed it had to happen. Yeah I mean and and there's nothing that says that we won't have another one right? Oh Data centers will bring it in This is how deep the great lakes are Do each other Hey, watch this though The bottom of the mariana trench compared to that Wait on there. Oh Is that where James Cameron went yeah, did he go all the way down? Yeah, what is psycho? That is psychotic? I met him the other day Oh, yeah, cool. Very interesting guy Really nice guy Doesn't a lot of martial arts does he really yeah trains a lot? Yeah, he made a record-breaking solo dive to earth's lowest point successfully piled on the submarine nearly 11 kilometers Deep into the bottom of the mariana trench What is that six miles? What is 11 kilometers? How many miles is that? Yeah, yeah, that is it's six miles it's a little over Dude, that's crazy imagine being six miles underwater What the fuck are you know? He's such an expert in those submersibles too that because he's the one that he's he's part of the design 30,000 feet fucking crazy 36,000 feet have you seen what they discover when like the the Wild like the sea life down there things that we've never seen before shit. Yeah Weird shit. Yeah, they look like aliens. Yeah, cuz they're they live in complete darkness So there's species down there that no one even knew about oh yeah Well, there's species that I was really watching this video that Forrest Gellant had There's a bunch of species that have only been discovered like one or two times one or two specimens like there's a Specific whale that they only have like one smo. Yeah, what does that fucking ghost trans loosened like Jamie, I'm gonna send you this because this is very weird. It's a very strange thing that I saw holy fuck I wanted to send you this because I don't know if this is legit or not But I've seen it before and it's this thing that they're they're detailing that's moving around on the bottom of the ocean And it seems to be carving a path on the bottom of the ocean Goo worth I don't know It's not no just the way that they tracked that from the satellites and the best But all seriously well the thing about this one I don't know if it's true But it looks like there's a path that it has on the ground and the bottom of the ocean Yeah, that's not are they getting that information? That's why I'm asking you. That's no idea I got it for Billy Carson So Billy Carson has been known to engage in some of the green Google very bizarre two mile dome slowly crawling across the Pacific floor Okay, so what the fuck is that two mile dome slowly crossing? It's a two mile dome. Uh-huh two miles across slowly crawling So look it looks like it's leaving a trail. Yeah, so is that real? They're getting this information there you go. It's like where I'd a Google work doesn't take video So like it's not being a party poop. I'm trying to find out. I'm just trying to do things Do you like I never I never contemplated it what about this you know when Extra-terrestrial life that they're not coming from space that they're coming from the ocean. Yeah, that's a big one That's a big one timber chat the congressman I had him on and he said that he's been told There's multiple sites where in the ocean in the deep ocean where these things keep emerging from that's a cooler Story to me now. What makes sense that they'd have a base here and if you're gonna have a base Mm-hmm like if James Cameron can get to the bottom of the fucking ocean Yeah, James Cameron and didn't he do it in like 2012 or some shit? So while ago yeah, so he did that 14 fucking years ago imagine what they could do. Oh my god full base is down there Full bases, why wouldn't they have a base down there? Then we're not gonna look we're too stupid we barely That's not James Cameron I love aliens yeah, yeah, I betars the shit. So cool. Oh, he's how you got wrong But other than that islands can't float in the sky, but other than that pretty cool true lies Hmm, that's a fucking great movie. Yeah, that guy made some bangers. He makes bangers He makes some bangers. Yeah, you know, I mean the Avatar movies alone Like the one the second one that was underwater did that cost like a fucking billion dollars to make or something ridiculous He is so also all by all accounts. I've never met him but as a filmmaker everyone's like there is not a more supremely confident filmmaker which I think is like something everybody loves and and you benefit from if you're in that production Somebody who just knows their shit so well, right? That's like the cool I think that's the dream of any Whether you're cast or crew to be with somebody who you're like oh this guy fucking knows exactly what he's doing You know, it's a smart motherfucker. Yeah. I mean, that's why he figured out how to get to the bottom of the ocean Yeah fucking solo submarine That's insane. It's insane. Yeah, but I mean How many of those things even exist of those some vehicles? Yeah Fuck because what does that mean? They made it mean nobody had been in it before him He does he helped design that When that one remember when that one imploded get the crazy one. Yeah, he was like the one of the top People speaking about what they got he knew he knew exactly what they got wrong Yeah, apparently there were some whistleblowers in that company. Yeah, but watch that doc. It was incredible Yeah, the people that built it were like don't do this And when they they would do the tests and the test would go wrong and he was like get the fuck out of here Like if you're gonna be negative don't be around me. Yeah, that's really There's so many crazy people out there Somebody legitimately crazy people that just want to be right no matter what he couldn't accept being wrong Because they'll send people to their death in the ocean in the most horrific way possible You just get compressed instantaneous. You just hear it start Imagine you're looking around Tony used to have a bit about that really he would he would at the beginning of his set It would take this microphone and he would scratch it on the stool and people like what he's in that's the last thing those people in that summer Oh dark hatch and Poor I port it's I think that's all James Cameron could see out of whoa That guy's big That guy's big fucking mistake too Isn't that he couldn't figure out how to design one that was capable It's that he couldn't define design one that was light enough to do multiple trips and be Towed out like in other words the cost of Hauling out the correct size and weight would have been too much for him to run this business Where people could pay to do it so he kept looking for lighter and lighter materials Oh my god, you know what I mean? So because then you could haul it out and it wouldn't be too much weight and they're like no But you need to have like steel is like now that weighs too much Let's do carbon fiber This is own ego oh And he couldn't be wrong and he wanted to run his business why do we love carbon fiber so much? I know every dude loves carbon fiber. I love it. Yeah. I have a Cadillac the Escalade V Yeah, you know it has a carbon fiber dash. Yeah, I love looking at him Look at all that carbon is cool. It looks cool space. Yeah, it's future have the carbon fiber trim on things Yeah, I had my GT3 RS my 2007. I had all the interior pieces replaced with carbon fiber. Did you really? Looks cool doorknach is It's lighter it's lighter. No, it was faster By like what five pounds for the whole car it's stupid But it's like there's something cool about the way it looks it looks cool especially in a submersible Yeah, it's really cool have you seen that company classic recreations that does a 67 Mustang all in carbon fiber? No bro It's fucking sick is like a half a million dollar car at least and it takes a long time to make but it's all One piece carbon fiber shell So it's super light and they'll make it with like a supercharged coyote engine So it's like 770 horsepower and it probably weighs under 3000 pounds It looks like fucking sick. Oh, yeah, it's gotta be really fast Well, even if you had a steel one 67's are not that big. It's not a big car. That's like a 3,000 pound car like I think the 65's 66's and 67's 68's we're all like relatively similar sized But the 67's like wider and then they got to like 69 and they got a little bit bigger But like 69 67 68's they got wider and then 69 they got a little bigger who makes it Company called classic recreations Huh, I wonder if you could find a video of it. There's a bit when you see the video of it with in carbon fiber with that GT 500 that 67 GT 500 shape it's fucking sick those the carbon fiber has to do really poorly in a rack right? Oh, terrible Yeah, yeah, it's got a ballpark. Yeah. Yeah, it's like you're fucked and also good luck repairing it. No shit Sony bumps in you in the fucking supermarket parking lot. Yeah, you have to get a whole new fender Like they don't repair it. It's not like oh, don't worry Yeah, because you can't like look at that that whole thing is all in carbon fiber and if you see when they get close to it And they look at it see if you get oh, it's so rad But if you could see the actual images of like it's hard to tell right there. Oh, that one's kind of painted But some of them are not paint that one's a sick we go back to that one again I want to see what that looks like that color sick the green one. I just yeah That color sick That's a beautiful green Yeah, right there. Look at that thing. It's really. Oh my god I never wanted a green Mustang like that before it looks like someone's about to place in order look how cool that thing looks I'm excited for you guys classic recreations. I was here for the day Joe ordered his I never thought I would like it like that Green I never saw a 67. She'd look right there. Look at that. That looks amazing That's fucking cool, but the the process of making that designing that is Pretty insane. Yeah, I'm sure It's still probably a fairly heavy car But see that's the different one. That's a shell they do that they do those Shellby Covers They do that all in carbon fiber as well But there's I know there's videos because I was looking at the other day of ones where you see it It's all in carbon fiber There's a green one But I know they have a see if you can find videos where they they fucking close in on the actual carbon because some of them are just carbon fiber You get to see it here we go go video. Oh There you go. So there you see the carbon fiber. Look at that That looks fucking cool. Yeah, that's why you get it because it looks fucking cool There's a thing about being a boy It's really gonna fucking fuck about carbon fiber. No, no way dude not most. No. Why would they care about the look? How good that looks? It looks fucking awesome. Jesus Christ. That's beautiful You got text now. I've been looking up these I went to this garage that I saw I was trying to remember what I saw there because it was such a crazy collection dude here in town. Oh My god of what of cars will come Everything Everything looks on private owner private owner and most don't like 99% don't get driven which is a crazier part Yeah, just I have these sitting here. Well, they're probably a good investment Yeah, this dude had a GT1 a a CLK GT or a Purda McLaren F1 multiple lafararis SP1's 250 GT like just a stupid fucking correction. I love old porsches. I do not love old Ferraris really yeah the 60s ones though They look bonked to me really. Yeah. I don't like them. I think they look beautiful The old porsches look amazing. I like old porsches. I like like like 69 70 71 72 The long nose porsches. Those are to me when I see those especially the wide body ones fucking Yeah, they're gorgeous. Really amazing But when I see like old Ferraris, I'm like that looks like it's gonna break. I mean they probably you know That's gonna leave you somewhere. Yeah, and it's also precious like nobody does anything with them. They're they they become Honestly, they're like too valuable. Yeah, when they're like when you go how much was this? Those 25 million this thing sold for it auction. You're like, okay people take like old porsches and they mod them Yeah, and they make them outlaws and yeah, you know like that Magnus walked yeah Yeah, he makes it awesome. I love that. That's what I love. I love when they customize them and they they put cool paint on them Well, I like looking at the old Ferrari I feel like they do look like works of art. They look beautiful But I feel like the Porsche would be the one you'd want to drive. Yeah, I don't like even like looking at them really yeah I don't know it's weird. It's like you know you have tastes. Yeah Like someone like people think that I like old cars that try to show me something the 50s and like get that thing away from me It's not your Weird. It's like, you know, I have tastes like like someone like people think that I like old cars They'll try to show me something from the 50s. I'm like dip that thing away from me It's not your era. Yeah Yeah, that's pretty cool looking. That's pretty fucking beautiful 1960. Yeah, actually take it back. That's pretty dope. That's pretty good That one's pretty dope too. That up that one upper left. That's pretty dope, but I wonder I do wonder how you changed my I wonder how they drive. I really like talk shit Compared to your little Cayman yeah, I mean that thing's insane. It's so fun. That's a Mid-engine car that's got modern suspension modern brakes modern technology and what like 650 or something It's got some crate. It's got tuned up bonkers. Yeah, it sounds insane when you throw it by my house with that thing I remember I got a boner. I remember you walked inside and then you walked outside and you were like yeah I want I'm like I wanted to watch you drive off. Yeah, I want to hear it. I think still man. It's so fun Yeah, see that's I like I like stuff that you drive. Yeah, I was telling you that's why I like my super snake Because it's not it's it's a great American muscle car like a modern muscle car It's not the fastest car. It's not doesn't handle the best, but it's the most exciting It's like the most fun to drive. Yeah, I was just talking about this about when you get into cars So when you start off and you drive a Honda cord and somebody goes you should have a Mustang You get in a Mustang you're like faster right you go as faster so faster Equates with better more fun and better and then you get let's say to a 9-11 you're like faster More fun better and then your mind there's this formula of like well as long as it's faster It's gonna be better and then it crosses over to this other plane where you go Oh, it's faster, but the all the fun is not there anymore right and you have to find a place where you you go like fast Doesn't equal fun necessarily there's a fun that's a mixture of things exactly that there is a fast aspect But there can be too fast It's a feeling that you get from fun cars. Yes Like one of my favorite cars that I ever had that I kind of miss I had a 2012 Shelby GT 500 convertible you ever see that I drove a car much to a bunch of times I did I did see I loved car. Yes, you drove it once I want to say this is fucking a mait the Canyon club one time I remember it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I loved it because it was the only car that I ever bought that was like that That was a convertible and it felt a little sketchy like a little wobbly because it was a convertible But the feeling that we get wasn't the most horsepower. I think back then they had like 500 or 550 or something like that Which is a lot. Yeah, but today it's not today But it had a supercharger and it would whine when you get on it and it was a solid rear axle So it would kick out all the time. It was like handle like dark shit. Yeah, wasn't the best But it was fun like your out of corner and fucking stomp on the gas It was fun, but it was the torque and the sound and because it was a convertible You hear the sound right there. There's nothing there. That's like one of my most enjoyable cars. I ever owned I loved it. I missed it when I got rid of it. I was like Kept out fucker. Yeah, the fun the fun sit like that that piece of it I think if you have a bunch of cars you want stuff that's comfortable because sometimes you're like shit I need to be in some type of comfort Yeah, this is one thing I'm doing. Yes, and then the rest time. Just want to have fun. Yeah, Jamie show me a picture of a 2012 Shelby GT 500 convertible black Yes, we had yeah, I miss it wasn't the best looking car either. It was good looking It was cool looking, but it was just the driving fun It was like one of the first frivolous cars that I bought when I had some money. I tell you I miss I think it was a 981 GTS Yeah, that's it. That's it. That's exactly it. That's exactly the car. That's exactly what I had I didn't have a roll bar though Fuck I loved it. Yeah, maybe not a roll bar. I don't think so though. Yeah, I think it was like that Can you look up if I got this right 981 GTS? Yeah, blue. I really missed that fucking Shelby in blue. Yeah, I had that and I had baby I sent it to BBI That did they did tune tuning on it I had never been sad about selling something until after I sold that That's that shit was so much fun to drive Get yourself another one Tom boy. I know Go back to that. I'll show me I might have to get one of them We're looking at like old girlfriends right now. I know Really fun ones. Yeah, who swallowed that I think it was so fun man. I love driving it great tits and again like that one looks good with the red stripe and again It wasn't like nobody was you know nobody's like whoa you're a baller. It wasn't like that at all It was just it was just fun for me. Yeah That's what it's about man. Yeah, and again not not the fastest car pretty fast for the time, but You know like Portia's handle like I before that I had had a 911 turbo. It's way faster handles way better. I remember taking that Getting chased by a Mustang up Benedict Canyon and just losing his ass. Oh, yeah, it was the fun. Oh those things handle so well Yeah, that's a 3,000 pound car too. Yeah. Yeah, like probably something like that like like my Shelby super snake that's probably like Close to 4,000 pounds cars today. Very heavy. Yeah. Yeah, I look up the The Escalade IQ They'll all electric that's 9,000 pounds. I know it's crazy. That's so it's massive. Oh, there's one for sale How much is it 45 grand? 16,000 miles at it does out I'm gonna have to buy that look at that fucking thing. It's cool bookmark it Yeah, dude, I'm in love. Oh, that's it See it's like how cheap inside and everything. Yeah, it doesn't matter. It's the fun of it How how many horsepower does those things have? 5.4 liter supercharged V8 Let's find out how many horsepower that thing has Five fifty yeah, that's that sounds about right. That's your girl, man. I loved it. That's her. I loved it It was like it just it was like it wasn't precious I didn't mind parking in places and if it had a dent on it probably look cooler. Yeah. Yeah, you didn't matter It was just the being in it and just And there's the wind in your hair. I didn't have any hair Fucking wind in your face the sound I will say that I think there's no better Top-down city than LA. Oh, yeah. I love for sure a convertible in LA is like the greatest You have like three weeks to do here before your head burns. Yeah, especially us. Oh fuck You're you had shaved unless you were in a hat got to but there. It's like perfect. Oh, yeah, especially well I would love it at night driving down sunset. Oh Yeah, I loved it. I loved coming over Laurel. I'd have like a music playlist that I'd listen to like my perfect go into the commi store playlist Yeah, and then another one on the way out. Mm-hmm. Yeah, but there's something about like It was also like wow, I'm really in Hollywood. I'm really going to do a show Yeah, the comedy store in Hollywood and this is my job like this is crazy fucking awesome. Yeah, that's so cool Yeah, to be one of those One of those sperm that made it through and crack the egg. I went there like a week ago. It was super fun I heard it was awesome during the Netflix festival. Is that when you were there? Yes. Yeah, it was so fun Mm-hmm, everybody said it was like the commi store of old. Mm-hmm. Oh great. Yeah, Peter short texted me Let me some pictures. It's like dude. You should be here. It's amazing. It was fucking bomb pin man That's nice. Yeah, that's nice. It was really fun I would go on your club to work it on a new hour So it's been really fun to get reps. How long you've been doing sets now? Because last time I talked to you so like a month. Yeah, yeah, do you want to do a set Tuesday or Wednesday? I leave I go back to LA. I got this Thing I have to go fly out for doing notes. Oh, what are you doing? I don't think I can't yet I'll tell you But I when I come back I'd love to you gonna do a season three. I don't know that will be up to them I guess see how it does. Yeah, it's so fucking such a good show dude It's such a perfect show for you because it's like it's so obvious that it's your imagination Because let no one would think of these fucking things It's a one I don't want to give it away. You can you can the one where it's the girl that you knew for a long time and then oh In the car I felt like real life I was like I was saying to myself why does he just open the door and get out? Yeah, I know well it was more fun to yeah, of course Horrible things happened And if fucking I would say this because it's not a credit to me But the I always wanted to emphasize how I wanted it to look and my my DP Nico Wiesenet is brilliant So everything looks like a fucking movie. Yeah, like the slave one looks like an Oscar-winning film. It really does Yeah, it's so ridiculous Give that away either, but it's so ridiculous. Yeah, it's crazy. Oh, it's really so fun. Yeah, they just let us have fun It's like it's it's such a different You know experience than what I'm used to and what you're used to with with stand-up Which is such a solo endeavor Mm-hmm, but to have a team all you know from the writer's room to actually getting into production of like everybody collaborating It's such a fun thing. It's also so irreverent. I don't think you could do it anywhere But Netflix. I don't think anybody would allow you to I don't think so either they are the they really are You know for all the shit that people justify me just to finally talk about like Studios and exact stuff for for this show. I've never had an experience like it where they're just like go for it No, they let you just do whatever you want. Yeah, it's it's look They're the best at that. Yeah, I mean think about the amount I mean they get a lot of criticism about some of the content sure, but it's really the ideas They'll let anything in there. They let it's good. Yeah, like you're not gonna agree with all of it Some of it you're gonna think it's far left content or some of them, but The thing is they're not ideologically captured like it's not like they only allow like woke content Not at all. They'll let you go ham not at all. Yeah, they let you push it and I don't think anybody else would do it I don't think so either. I don't think so either They were the first people I showed it to and thankfully they said yes I think it would have been shut down after that. Yeah, there's no chance like just the first first scene in the first episode Where you're you take the pill get an even one. Yeah, can we yeah, just that like there's not a fucking chance in hell. Yeah No, there's things that you're doing. There's no no and art We have one you haven't seen later in with with Jesus that I don't think With Johnny Pemberton Great cast Great people came in Kirk Fox did one Frankie can you unisted one oh nice. Oh, that Annabelle did one I'm leaving people out Martha Kelly There is great cast and they all signed up for if we had people by the way We had a couple one time like casting the casting director sat me down It was like hey just so you know I sent out submissions for this one you did and all the agents I called me today said I would never put an actor in a position to do something like this And then one actor called one of the people on our staff and was like you can't make this one They're like like this is this is wrong. This is this is actor an actor This is dangerous to put out in the world And we were like what like that she was that offended by it, but she wasn't in it No, but she had been offered a part so she was like I read what you offered me So offended Okay, yeah, like she really was like I'm gonna call people and like I hope you guys don't make this Isn't amazing. Yeah, she's an activist. Yeah over the this clearly wasn't also understanding Like the tone was it the girl from Snow White? No, but Her she's a handful. It's like yeah So just like she cost that movie a lot of money. Oh my god. I know he allegedly allegedly yeah And what that does to the rest of her career. Oh, she's fucked. Yeah Yeah, she's especially in this because that was like at the tipping point of woke being like we had woke fatigue And then she didn't it wasn't the whole thing she didn't want to promote which is like that's the whole that's half the gig man Promoting your thing is half the gig. Well the problem is when she would talk she would say things that were so unappealing Like you're trying to sell a movie people want to like you. You're Snow White. You can't be like Chastizing people yeah, whatever you're doing. Scolding people. Yeah lecturing them and yeah, you're kid. Yeah, don't do that Thank you for the gig. Yeah, I got thank you. It was amazing. That's like Snow White But the whole thing was doomed anyway when they they weren't gonna use dwarves Right and they call the magical creatures instead of dwarves. Isn't that the whole dude? The the literal title of the story is Snow White in the seven dwarves. Yeah, the dwarves all have names so they all have that's the story You don't want to make a story on the seven dwarves. You're gonna have to make a new story. Is dwarf offensive though? Yes, it is to some Some like little people. They don't like midget. They don't like dwarf. Well midget I knew but I thought dwarf was like the polite way to say not anymore. Okay The goal post keep him moving keep it going if you went to a coma and you woke up like three years later He'd be so lost. You know what you can't again say. Yeah It's like old people talking you're like, oh Color this ain colored color. You're like yo. Yeah people of color. Yeah. Well, they you they would say that Yeah, back in the like in the 40s or whatever. Yeah, yeah, which is odd that colored is offensive But people of color is not offensive. Yeah Like if you try to explain it to someone logically They'd be like what like if it was another language like oh you can say it like that You have to say it like this you'd be like what why it's the same thing. I'm saying the same thing. I know people of colors Okay, what do I say again people of Okay, of color. Yeah in South Africa. That is a term. You know What do you mean in South Africa? There's black white and colored. Oh, those are the three. What's color? Anyone who's not black or white so like Chinese people like you know like if you're mixed or if you're Indian, oh, you know like finger colored. Oh Yeah, so that's like the three boy Broad terms. Yeah, but I remember I was in Canada once and I said Oh my god, I don't remember if I said like native and they were like you when I was like I can't say native And they were like that's kind of offensive. We don't say that first people's yeah So and that was the first time I had heard that something that I thought I was saying Like with respect was disrespectful. I was like really native. They're like yeah, easy. Stop fucking saying it. I'm like that's crazy Okay, I was in Vancouver. Well Vancouver super. Yeah. Yeah, super woke didn't used to be Was it not now? It's like weed. It was a big weed place. Was a fun place. I've all I'd always loved going to Vancouver Vancouver used to be the shit I mean I haven't been in a long time the last time I was supposed to go I had a big 420 show that was supposed to be there in 2020 a great right after the pandemic We're doing an arena up there and we had to shut it down And then we rescheduled it and they have shut it down again and then things just got real weird up there And I'm like I'm not going back Really? Yeah. Oh my god. You haven't been there in the can of sense? No I'm talking a lot shit about Ken. Yeah, you have talked a lot of shit a lot of shit He's like a lot of shit about Trudeau. Yeah, lot of shit. He's out of power now He's not just a fireably though. It's like what they did up there. They they're doing some wild things And they just completely wrecked that country in terms of What they're moving closer and closer to communism and this is a really weird way And I know people want to push back against that But you have to understand that like they don't have first of all They don't have freedom of speech They have hate speech laws so they can move the goal But this was Jordan Peterson's argument about this when they were trying to impose Certain pronouns that he was supposed to use and certain things that you're supposed to say And it's like you can't force me to say things like you're this is for speech And this is and the problem is they'll call things hate speech and then If you use force the force you to use that under the threat of law and it's like okay Well, what is where does this go? What goes you you're gonna rest people for? Not going along with 78 different pronouns or whatever the fuck they are Are you gonna you're gonna kick them out of their job? Like do you understand that this is kind of crazy? Yeah And then this weird thing they're doing with maid okay Where they're doing assisted suicide? You know about all those? Mm-hmm. Okay One in 20 people in Canada Make sure this is true One in 20 people in Canada dies from assisted suicide one in 20 one in 20 There's an actual business now That's involved in Assisted suicide is that government sanction like is it government sanction? Yeah, really program. Yeah, damn. Yeah And they they killed a guy who had seasonal depression Look at this five point one percent of all deaths in the country. Holy fuck. Yeah medically assisted dying. That's what it's called. That's made Officially known as medical assistance in dying Between 2016 and of 2024 there were 76,475 recorded maid deaths You can just sign up. You just feel like I want this. I don't like this 2024 alone. There were 16,499 Made provisions 5% of all deaths by point one percent of all deaths in the country. How nuts is that? That's nuts Find the one guy that they killed that had seasonal depression And the family was like what the fuck? He just walks into a place like you can just sign up We sign up for it. I don't want to live in. Oh, I'm depressed. I'm depressed There you go Canadian man 26 with seasonal depression euthanized despite no terminal illness Look at that guy. Oh, that was reason. Just needs friends. Yeah, I need a hug 26 year old Canadian man who had seasonal depression has been euthanized by a notorious doctor Who is personally responsible for ending the lives of over 400 of her patients. Oh my god. What a psycho. Yes, fucking oo days back Jesus Christ. That's so crazy Okay, so it's just he had other issues So Piano the fean. I don't know how to say his last name But also at partial vision loss and lived with type one diabetes He faced mental health struggles which often became worse in the winter as a result of a car accident when he was 17 After losing vision in one of his eyes in 2022 He became obsessed with ending his life by assisted dying Hmm, that's really fucking sad man God damn. Yeah, you just not happy instead of people saying Let's figure out a way to make you happy. Yeah, you know, we're gonna put you down We're gonna just put you down and then there's money in it, which is weird Weird where there's money gets exchanged people make a living doing it people the government pays for it This profit involved in killing killing people. Yeah They're killing old people. They just don't want to do it anymore. I'm having a hard time maybe. Oh step into the chamber Fuck I don't know what they do to them. I wonder I wonder like if um Like family knew before hander they just get like a notification. Hey, we put them down You know right if you're a grown adult I wonder if the family even gets informed if you don't want them to be what is the way they do it? Isn't it lethal injection? What if you're like I want to be beheaded I want to go guillotine style. I want to have my tongue ripped out by pliers Oh, I read this crazy story about this guy who set up a guillotine over his bed And he had a time did for when he was asleep So he timed it for 3 a.m. And so he went to sleep and then his father heard this Loud bang in the middle of the night and thought that maybe he fell down or something fell over and the sun had literally rigged a guillotine with a timer In his house and at 3 a.m. It hit the switch and his giant fucking blade to lops off his head Really cool thing to do to your parents, man. Oh, you must have hated his dad fuck. Hey, hey fuck head all that shitty things You said to me and all the that's real dumb way you raised me. Yeah, see we find that story. Holy Who knows what's real but a thought real guillotine death was suicide Build your boy Taylor spent several weeks constructing the complex device at the home he shared with his father in the village of Milburn near More path where is that is that England? Bro several weeks. This is super methodical. Yeah The general hospital recorded a verdict of suicide on Thursday the hearing Was told that the complicated mechanism was primed to switch itself on at 330 GMT and cause a blade to fall a mr. Taylor's neck in a written statement read out by southeast North Humberland coroner Eric Armstrong Robert Taylor said he knew his son had been working on something in his bedroom for several weeks Jesus Christ who was woken by a rumbling noise which his thought was the chimney had fallen off the roof. Oh my god That's his head Father and son work together in the family building company, but boy Taylor has been offered over Christmas saying he wanted to stay at home fuck I respect the Like the the message so much like the fuck you of it all to his dad This is my favorite part he said mr. Taylor's death was not a spur of the moment decision. No shit dah Yeah Fucking crazy man. That's the crazy thing about people that want to kill themselves Often times they don't tell anybody Yeah, and no one knows until it happens. Oh, yeah, and they'll imagine if you're his dad and you're like I should have fucking checked his bedroom Yeah, maybe I could have hugged him. I heard him. Maybe I could have gotten him some MDMA Maybe I could have done something to snap him out of it. I thought he was just making a cool cabinet Yeah, and what a respect his privacy, but maybe his dad doesn't think like that, you know Maybe I'd like that faggot. He's not their sucking cocks and he gets sad. Fuck him. I don't know Yeah, I mean I don't know why I had that accident in the long country but I mean to To want to do that and have your dad find it. Bro, that's dark. That's really dark Yeah, you don't like your dad for sure. No, or you don't care You don't give a fuck about anybody. He's still working on that thing. Yeah, okay. Yeah, it's cabinet. We'll fuck all on dad Oh, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry, sorry, son. You feel like fishing maybe some time. No Maybe maybe not now maybe in the spring. Yeah, maybe after 3 30 a.m. Tomorrow. Yeah, what's a weird time We had set Timed and rigged also. He wanted impressed people like wow respect respect like this guy fucking play his level of dedication to this plan is pretty Incredibly, I mean he said it above his fucking neck while he was sleeping. How do you fall asleep? A chunk and he had a like a test run for sure over sure 100% and The night oh the inquest at Mass Beth General Hospital Ashington was told yesterday the younger man had waited the blade with a paving slab Wired to plywood wedged into a wooden block at the foot of his bed an electric jigsaw was plugged into a timer switch The saw cut the wood releasing the wire holding the blade 12 sleeping pills bro Wow, that might have killed him anyway, right? Yeah Yeah, it took 12 sleeping pills before laying under the guitney knowing that the set it is for so strong that his position the bed would not alter as he slept Wow fuck His father heard the jigsaw in action and thought the chimney had collapsed But returned to the bed when all felt quiet felt quiet the mechanism cut power to the electric tool after it completed its tasks Wow, he had it set to shut off after it completed its task It just guys thorough but like also his his knowledge of being able to put that together like that's that's some engineering skill Look at this set it says his son had never fully recovered from his parent separation when he was 15 He had attempted suicide as a teenager. He was 36 now 21 years later Meanwhile like I think dad was a dick dude maybe yeah Possibly yeah, this also says there are partners in a small small building firmy ran with his father. Yeah We said that earlier. Yeah, he's working with it working on a carpentry project He was also at the father's house crack this he left work to go back I don't know it seems like they were separated, but they definitely were living together Dude to say this an eight foot high three foot white structure that he put in his room Yeah, how's dad not noticed that? Yeah, what thought it means it's small right. Yeah. Yeah This is not paying attention. Yeah, building inner door to his bedroom an Inner door before putting together the eight foot high three foot wide structure Housing a guillotine blade and devices to trigger its descent Man probably one of the wildest ways to go. I've never heard anything like That guy doesn't need to Canadian government. No, so you got this. I mean there's there's some some creative ways to do it But that's probably the They do and find that to leave the discovery is it also yeah, yeah, I also just leave a mess You're gonna clean that up. Is that what it? Is that it the thing? That what it looks like? I mean, there's an article about it and the picture is right below the paragraph That's it? Why isn't all covered in blood no, that's probably it's no no, that's probably that might not be a guillotine. Yeah. Yeah Oh my god, I was trying to find pictures. He knew he was building something and he made sure it was real high So that fucker had some good momentum. Yeah shaboom A paving stone. Oh my god, dude. Bro. What a fucking psycho 12 sleeping pill. Oh I'm gonna Find your spot. Yeah, imagine the last thoughts in his mind like See you in Valhalla. Yeah Yeah, fuck fuck you dad. I know there's certain states where you can go and whack yourself in America Oregon's one of them because Michael Lair remember him from Killtony. He had ALS. Yes. Yes. He ended his life up there. Yeah I mean he was at the door that level of suffering though. Yeah He actually went up there once and Chickened out or didn't chicken now change this mind. I should say let's say chicken Terrible way to say it. Yeah went up there. It changes mine came back and Did a couple more episodes of Killtony and then went up and did it I met him a couple times Funny dude very funny. Very funny dude real bummer. Yeah, you know, it's like I get that I get when you're at that stage, but seasonal depression. That's not. Yeah settle down. There's that thing in Alaska If you get seasonal depression and you kill someone it's a lesser charge Really yeah, cuz it's so prevalent there. God. Yeah be nice to people in the winter. Yeah It was dark all day. Did you ever see that movie 30 days of night? No the vampire movie about Alaska I saw the one with Pacino and Robert Williams that also was like a insomnia Thing in Alaska. You know that one is no is it called that it's called insomnia. Yeah Yeah, and you feel it watching that movie The performance is in the way it's shot pull it out of you. Mm-hmm You're like fuck you see that one where Robin Williams played the psycho guy that develops pictures. Yes 24-hour photo I think it's called was that Bobcat? Did he made it he did a few with Robin Williams? I think I don't know if he made that he might have But that one was nuts Robin Williams was so fucking good so talented so that he could be that funny The few with Robin Williams, I think. I don't know if he made that. He might've, but that one was nuts. Robin Williams was so fucking good. So down to that. So that he could be that funny and also that creepy. Yeah. Like that he could really play like a real fucking psycho. Yeah. One hour photo. One hour photo. No, that's it. Who made that one? Nah, Robert. Oh, Mark Romanik. Romanik, sorry. Yeah, that was fucking super creepy. Super creepy. Yeah. This 30 days and night is a fun vampire movie. Is it? Because they show up in Alaska during the time with it's a winter where it's night for 30 days and like northern Alaska. Yeah. And then they don't ever have to go to sleep in the day and they just fuck everybody up for like 30 days. That's pretty cool. Yeah. Fun. I did Alaska in the opposite in the summer when it was sun never. That's weird. That's weird too. Yeah. Ari and I did that once. We did some shows and we went salmon fishing. And it was like bright out at 2 a.m. Yeah. Weird. It's weird, man. We got back to the hotel and like the sun's out. It's like midnight. I know. You don't know what to do. Yeah. Your body's so confused. It's a very confusing feeling. How do people sleep up there with masks? If they just put the mask? Everyone has like blackout windows and everything. Yeah. Yeah. Because I remember you're like, wait, it's not that late, right? You're like, no, it's midnight right now. I wonder if crime goes down in the summer months. Yeah. I wonder. You know? It has to. You would imagine. Because I think people do more crimely than which dark out of them. Yeah. Go do crime. And crime is also isn't crime usually spike in places when it's like heat waves? Probably. Yeah. They get hot and angry. Yeah. You get more domestics for sure. Yeah. Well, that's why you brought the seasonal depression thing when it's night out all the time. Yeah. That's why people whack each other. Yeah. Makes sense. So fucking depressed. Yeah. Oh, no vitamin D. Especially if you're not a vitamin person, you're not supplementing. Oh. Yeah. You have no vitamin D. None. Yeah. That's what's fucked about like flu season. People like, oh, flu season, flu's coming around. Well, why do you think that is? It's because no one's outside, because no one has any vitamin D. So everybody gets the flu. Is that why? 100%. Yeah. That's why why else would flu have a season? You can get flu in the summer. You can get flu anywhere. Why are so many people getting it? But you're getting it. But your immune system's destroyed. My doctor told me that. My doctor explained to me that when he was an internist in New York City, that he would test people in the middle of the winter, and they would have undetectable levels of vitamin D in their system. It's crazy. Because some people just never go outside, and they just they're indoors all the time, and they don't take any vitamins. And their system just passed out. There's dairy and fucking sloppy joes and french fries. And you wonder why? You know, I can't believe I got sick. I can't believe you're alive. Yeah. Yeah. So that's what's fucked up about sunlight. Is that sunlight is actually a necessary part of being a human being. But you actually need it for vitamin D. I have such a notable, I mean, dramatic difference. And how much I got sick when I was fatter versus... Of course. Of course. I was getting sick, like real sick, like seven times a year. Really? Yeah. Yeah. You made one of the most dramatic transformations for anybody that I know. Other than Jelly Roll. Jelly Roll is nuts. Oh my God. Jelly Roll is nuts. Yeah. He just saw him. He went. He came to the five K. He's got 300 pounds. I know. He was just a club. He's practicing stand up. Yeah. I heard. Dude, he killed. Really? I mean, I'm not. He has good jokes. He's got some funny stories. He's a funny guy, and he's comfortable in with an audience. Exactly. And just super-lackable. Yeah. But it's like... And vulnerable. He's a vulnerable guy, too. Yeah. He's a little bit more crazy. Because he's at Death Store. He couldn't even walk on the flight of stairs. Yeah. It's amazing what he's done. It really is amazing. Incredible. Inspire is a bunch of people, too, which is awesome. And he's not done. No. He's still full steam ahead. He's changed his whole lifestyle. It's like a full shift. And now it's all just about getting that skin cut off. Yeah. I'm like, oh, that one hurts. Just thinking about it. Like, no. But I imagine how great he's going to feel after that. It's going to feel so good. Oh, yeah. When it all heals up. You know, doing it the right way, though. Like, he's got to get like a hyper-baric chamber, you know, definitely take peptides. And you know, it's just scary. Because like, skin gets infected. Oof. Infections are fucking terrifying. That's like the Uday who's saying thing. A horrible motherfucker dragging people through gravel and dunking them in sewers. What a piece of shit that guy was. And he also had to have the thought of like, how can I make this worse? You know, and someone's like, I get this people infected. Well, you could put them in a, like a bowl of shit. And he's like, let's do that. Let's scratch them up a lot first. Yeah. Let's drag them through gravel. So there's wounds. Yeah. All over their body. And then dunk them in a sewer. Like, you got it, boss. Yeah. Infections are fucking scary, man. I know a lot of people that get skin infections because of Jiu Jitsu. Oh, yeah. It's a big thing. Huge. Huge thing. You know, you're missing me. She just defended his UFC Brazilian Jiu Jitsu. He's not. Why can't I say that? UFC BJJ title and got hospitalized right afterwards with staff. Didn't, um, we know Kyle Busch, the driver, he just died. And he died of sepsis, right? But that's like type of infection as well. Yeah. How did he get that? I believe I already had pneumonia and then didn't treat it and kept, you know, racing and thing about worse. That's nuts. One man. That's nuts. It's fucking nuts, man. Crazy. Yeah. Sepsis is crazy. One of my wife's friends from high school died of sepsis a few years back. My dad got sepsis in the hospital. Yeah. Like he had a bone marrow transplant and then got sepsis almost died. Yeah. Oh, hospital infections are creepy, man, because like Joey Diaz, you know, he got his knee fixed. And he said that what does it say here? Timeline Bush had been battling what has originally believed to be a sinus cold for a couple weeks. Even radioing his crew to have a doctor meet him after a race at Watkins Glen, despite continuing to race and win less than a week before his death. His condition rapidly deteriorated. He collapsed and became unresponsive in a Chevrolet racing simulator in Concord, North Carolina. 9-11 caller noted that he was coughing up blood and had shortness of breath. He was transported to a Charlotte area hospital where he died. That is insane. Fuck. That is so crazy, man. But you know, Hamzot Chmyov, the guy who was the middleweight champion before Sean Strickland just beat him, when he had COVID, he would not stop working out. He was training through COVID, like bad. And he was hospitalized multiple times. And he took a photograph of his toilet where he'd cough blood into his toilet. And was saying I'm retiring. I'm not fighting anymore. I'm retiring from MMA. And he posted, see if you can find the photograph on social media. He posted the photograph of his toilet with the blood in it. Yeah. His told he may have cancer after coughing up blood in training. But it was, because that was a while ago. Yeah, years ago. He wouldn't stop training. Like he's such an animal that while he had COVID, he would not stop training. Now, that was a huge upset, right? It was an upset. It was an upset. I thought it could happen that way. I was actually saying, like a lot of people are, he was arguing with me on protect our parks. He's like, you always say that when someone does another chair, she always hype it up. Like, I think Strickland can win this fight. Because Strickland is like insanely durable. He's scary. Because he doesn't go away. He's not going to get tired. He doesn't go away. He's tough as shit. He was abused when he was young, so he's angry. Like he's dangerous. And he's super skillful. It's very hard to hit. And he fought in one with a blown out shoulder. Yeah, he's crazy. He fucked his shoulder up like the week of the fight. Like did something bad? He's coming and getting some stem cells at waste, well. Yeah, he fucked it up. And he doesn't even know what it was, but he couldn't use it right. I could tell when he was warming up before the fight started, he was doing this with his arm. Just doing this. Like he was warming up, doing this, and he kept doing this. And that's what you do when your arm hurts. Like if you hurt your shoulder, you're like, how bad is it hurt? Yeah, let me check real quick. And that's how you win into a fight. Went to a world title fight against the scariest guy in the division and beat him with one arm. I saw him that was like the day before, two days before something. He was like doing construction on his driveway. Yeah. Well, rides motorcycle everywhere. World champion. Yeah. He just went to that misfits. No, what is it called? Aiden Ross's thing that he does. He does something called, what is it called? Brand something or not? Brand risk. Brand risk. Has people fight? Ray Jay, the guy who did the... Yeah. Why not with Kim Kardashian? Yeah. He's got knocked the fuck out. I saw him in the middle of the fight. Do you see the post interview? Yeah. He was like, what the fuck, man? I thought we had a deal. Yeah. Like, that was weird. They made some sort of a deal apparently. Yeah. Well, at least he was implying that the guy wasn't going to punch him in the face and knock him out. Well, the weird thing is if you watch, I feel like if you watch that again, the punch, none of it's like, you're not watching pros, obviously. None of it seems like it just seems kind of wild. And as he sees him stunned, he doesn't do what most people do when you stun somebody, which is follow up. Right. He's kind of like, oh shit. Right. The kind of the body language lends itself to that theory. He just was like, oh. And he's laughing. And he's also celebrating. He's like, ah, fuck it. I knocked him out. Look how out of shape Ray Jay is to... That's a crazy thing to be accepting a fight when you're down out of shape. So it was a hot fire. That's his name, super hot fire. Let's see. He's just like... Well, both guys look like they didn't know what they're doing. But he hit him with one shot and that was all it took. That's crazy. So they must have made some sort of a deal that weren't going to hurt each other and then we're going to do it for money. I wonder how much you paid him. That's so weird. Someone asked during the press conference they had, which I thought was straight to Ray Jay said like a month or two ago he was dying of some heart disease or something really bad. They're like, you're fighting? He's like, yeah, I'm going near to die. You saw the Cam Newton thing, right? Cam Newton? Yeah. With Ray Jay? No. Oh, that's the best clip of the year on the internet. What is it? When Cam's like, are you gay? You haven't seen that? No. Oh, it's the best. On Cam's podcast? Yes, it's the best. No. I can't do it just. It's the best thing that I've ever seen. And part of what's so great is that you know this. I know this from conducting interviews. There's a certain point in an interview when you're, that you're happy with someone, where if they start saying something, the best thing you can do is shut the fuck up. Right. Like you can just go, give us a mayor and Cam just like where that's Cam, Cam is as 80% of the comedy, but it is the best. The full clip is just incredible. Oh, yeah. Can I just hold this? Is that the whole thing? Oops. I can't remember that. Oh, let's see. Can you ask me that last time? And I just, I listen to like Biggie Smaw, you like Biggie? Are you a fan of Biggie? Can you just answer my question? I'm just saying, are you gay? I'm going to get a picture to it. There's something similar. Can you answer yes or no and then go into that? Shout out to the gauges, he? Yes. What does it matter if I'm gay or not? It doesn't matter. I just ask in a question. It's people like people when they leave here for all together. When you leave and it's done and that's a wrap for the day, everybody's going to do something. Everybody's going to go to their perspective places. Some people are going to go home and I hate to say this, but it's just going to be grimy, but I'm sure there's people that go home, they got a dog. They're favorite dog. They stop by the store, grab some peanut butter. The leeway. How old are you? 25. You're 45 years old. And 45 years of living. Have you ever been with a man? It's not the full version. You cut off the best part. Sorry. That's all right, man. Try to find the full version. It's so fantastic. What's the three hour podcast? I know. Maybe the 412 one is it? Or maybe this. How long is this one? This might be talking about having sex with women, no. City has sex with 11,500 women. It was a massive parade. You're talking about different partners. What? Yeah. So we did a celebration. We tried. I would throw it at it. Try to get to where we were. All right. Let's get going for how many times you've had sex. No, no, no, no. A little more than 2,000 different people. I want to be at 9,000. I can only plug up a thousand more bitches. I can't do anymore. The average of a volume of different sex part. Some of my home grows. More. But I don't think that's what's your body count? No, this isn't it. No, that's not. This is just a body count thing. If you go back to your search for 12 there, that might be it. See that one? This might be it. Yeah. Some people go home, put peanut butter on it. It's so, so cool. It's so much better. Okay, just pass where we were. So people like people. Yeah, this is it. Scoot out a little bit. When they leave here. For all together. Good. It's like it's true. Perhaps the peanut butter. This is what's this? Right? It's so long. Excited to see they dog. They put a bunch of peanut butter on their feet. Did a dog to lick it off. Some people even go further to watch TV on all four. Slap a little peanut butter in the crack. And enjoy this. So in the dog is having a good time, right? I don't know what that is. It's not about business. Have you ever did that? Have you ever had a dog lick my ass in peanut butter in it? No. You thought I, but I'm familiar with it. Okay. So really right. I'm familiar with it because I caught somebody doing it. Willie Ray. I caught him. I was saying on that. Willie Ray. Yes. I'm 45. You're 45. You're 45 years. And 45 years of living. Have you ever been with a man? Do you have not? I do. You have not is now you going into them. No, I'm not. I'm just trying to confirm. Yeah. But I don't want to, but here's the thing. I sit on a gay, just see board pause. And I'm not only straight person on the board. But again, I have friends shot out to Tariq, shot out to Dump and Dee, shot out to Backshot. Dump and Dee, Backshot. Everybody else that supports the gay to see the gay and see. What is the gay? I have no idea. He's on the board. He's trying to age and see. He's the gay to see. Yeah. There you go. All things LGBTQ plus IIA plus. I was already going in and then you looked up. I was plus IIA plus. Okay. Cool. Cool. I didn't want to have to ask this, but it's fair. Are you gay? No, sir. Okay. See? I'm not going to experience nobody getting licked. No, no. I'm just asking that. That's an older people. I want to be able to do that. Oh, there's a little bit of a kick. No, I'm thinking like this like 50, 50, 50, 50. Oh, no. There was a little bit of a kick. Older people. Some older people think of their ass all the way by dog. Just keep going. No, we get it. I get it. Boy, he's insane. Isn't that great? What a character. You just have my mom's ass. I fucking would love to. Have them explain what the post fight speech was about. What was that about? Is he also the one that had the products with the glasses? Yes. Yeah. He's invented some of the world's best products. Yeah. Because you don't know if you know about that. Yeah, it's fucking amazing, dude. It's amazing. What is the post fight speech? See if you can find that. Because he said something really crazy. The way he said it was like very strange talking about. Yeah. He was like getting interviewed. And then he was like, yeah, man. Like literally. I thought we weren't doing this. I don't want to get anybody in trouble or anything. I thought we had a deal. Which seems like if people were placing bets on that, that's which they definitely were. They had to. People placed bets on fucking over. There was another fight. Man's Alpha too. Right. Yeah. People had to be placing bets. 100%. Absolutely. I mean, that's the way to get a visit from the FBI. I feel like, you know. Well, it also seems like you're admitting to a crime, which is like maybe it's just because you got a concussion. Yeah, sure. I was just talking at it. I don't know what I was saying. Yeah. I was talking crazy. I was trying to save face. I was trying to ask and I just didn't know what I was saying. I didn't think that I didn't know which in the ring or this. It was in the ring. Okay. There's a small part that they cut it out. See, that was the size. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Graham risk of that. And now the internet thinks this whole thing. I don't know. I'm going to talk to him. You don't have to get a hair clean. You can get me a good sponge. I thought we had a plan. I thought we had a plan. Yeah, there's more to it though. It's not the best for you to hold for him. I'm trying to find it. I think I have it here. Imagine getting your ass pulled by super hot fire. Yeah. It's a great name. I know. I got a jammy here. I'll send it to you. Who knocked you out? Super hot fire. That's pretty tight. Well, you know, what are you going to do? It's super hot fire. Yeah, I sent it to you. It's just bizarre the way he says it. Yeah. It's like you were either making excuse or this is the dumbest criminal ever. I don't want to say too much because I don't want to get nobody in trouble. But damn, my nigga, nigga, we took out LA tonight. We didn't take shit. Your ass was over here. I got to talk to the nigga about y'all talk backstage. Super. I didn't mean we lost. We didn't think he was going to win. So how y'all lost money? Wow. Yo. That seems real a shit though. That seems very real. Somebody must have said, listen, I'm going to put a bunch of money on me to win. Yeah. You have me win and he just look how much money we just lost. Yeah. They were going to split the money. Yeah. Some pulp fictions shit right there. Yeah. Yeah. Boy. We'll see. Super hot fires like super hot fire doesn't take no money. Super hot fire gets killed in a drive by. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right now you can't even retire. That's fucking nuts, dude. I know. It's crazy that he admitted it publicly. It's like very strange. Right in the moment. Yeah. Very strange. Very strange that he would. I just mean maybe just got knocked out. Maybe he's never been knocked out before. And he was just like confused. Yeah. And that's why he said it. But it seems like that was real. That did seem very real. Yeah. And super hot fire wasn't like what the fuck are you talking about? You kind of just be like yeah. Yeah. Got the best. You can't take a shot. Yeah. He's like yeah, much money we lost. Wonder how much money. Don't know. Like don't know bets. Yeah. 100%. And they'll also know like we got a few 200,000 dollar bets that we should investigate. Yeah. You know the UFC has had a real problem with that. Really? Oh yeah. In what way? Well they caught people. The caught suspicious betting. And then like the line changes like very quickly. And there's a bunch of money being dumped on one fighter. And then to lose in a very specific way like the first round and the fighter loses in the first round when they were the favorite. And then you find out that it's coaches have been on them and other different people. So it looks like they dumped the fight. Or maybe they went into the fight with a blown out knee and they knew it was blown out. And they said I'm just going to put a bunch of money on me to lose. And they go out and fight and lose. So the FBI's involved. And so there's a bunch of different fights that are being investigated. Oh shit. Yeah. Yeah. There was that crazy doc about that college basketball one from years ago that was just incredible. And the way that it all fell apart was they just got too greedy. You know because they had a guy. I think he was the point guard maybe at ASU or something. And once they had him, you know, like locked in on this. And they realized he really could swing it how they wanted to. They started just betting. And then yeah, the FBI was looking at these betting lines and saying like, oh, really there's two million dollars on this game from one part. Like this is they started to just get keyed in on it and then the whole thing got exposed. It's kind of funny that people don't think they're going to get caught doing something like that. Yeah. Especially at that like where you go like, oh, just all the money can go in. And it's like, yeah, it's too much man. You know, you probably could have gotten away with 25 grand or whatever. You know, like something that doesn't really ring alarms. But if you start putting seven figures down, you don't think anyone's going to take a second look at that. Shh. What are the rules? Like what do you like you can't dump a fight. But if you know someone's hurt, like say if I know someone's hurt. And I'm like, oh, I know he's hurt. I'm going to put a bunch of money on him to lose. I wonder if that's legal. I feel like I'm on the side of trading. I don't think it is. I also feel like it's different. Maybe I'm wrong if you are getting a bunch of people to do it versus you're doing it because you had you know, I mean, because right. How could somebody you can't be sure that he's not going to still try to win. Oh, yeah. Also, it's like did you put a $5 million bet on it? Right. Well, look at this way. Imagine if I found out that Strickland hurt his shoulder that week. And I'm like, oh, it's shoulders blown out. I'll put all the money on the homicide. And then I lost. Draft King's explicitly prohibits betting by insiders on sports or events where they have an unfair material or non-public advantage. This applies to athletes, coaches, referees, team personnel and sports book employees using private information to gain a betting edge. But none of those people that they mentioned there, athletes, coaches, referees, team personnel, none of them is like your friends with a guy because you're trying the same gymism. That's true. That's true. Also, this is saying that this private company can do this, but legally is this a legal thing? Yeah, that's what I was going to say. When you brought up the $5 million bet, if they lose a big bet like that, you definitely go, I assume they're going to look into like, well, who the fuck was this? When they make the bet, how many times have they done this? Have they got lucky one time? Look at the Strickland fight. Like if you, so he was training with Johnny Eblin, who's the middleweight champion to the PFL badass motherfucker, like, Beast, Beast wrestler. And that's how he heard his shoulder. And so like if you were there during those training sessions, and you're like, oh, he's heard, I'm going to fucking sneak away and put some money on it. I wonder if that's legal. I wonder if it is too. Because first of all, you would've lost because Strickland wound up winning anyway. Exploiting non-public information, such as knowing a star player's injured before it is announced, can lead to criminal charges. Individuals caught coordinating insider betting schemes have faced federal felony charges, including wire fraud, bribery, and illegal gambling. Yeah, but how's it bribery? That doesn't even mean it descends on it. Yeah, what the circumstances are. But if you were in that situation and you bet on Strickland to lose, and you actually did lose, and you knew, I wonder. Because in that fight, he was the underdog anyway. That is kind of interesting. What is the legal threshold for public information? Mm-hmm. Because that's really what we're talking about. I think that's about fucking gambling in the stock market. Yeah, yeah. Oh, do you see that thing that I say, Jamie? Yeah, and I love that. Is that real? Well, it's not. So that's a... Many things used at first statistics. That's things using percentages. So there's a charge of semi-abalt like the amount the S&P's gone out first. The Republicans and Democrats, and it's a percentage thing. Democrats are up to 900%. I think Republicans like 600%, the S&P is up like 500%, but percentages don't tell you like what you started with and what you ended with. Right. You could have started with the $100 billion and you made $1 billion. And you made 1% versus someone who paid $1 million. It doesn't sound the same, but they're not relative. Right. But when you look at the chart, and you look at the difference between the Republicans and the Democrats Democrats in terms of insider trading in Congress, they're all doing it. They're all doing it. That's why they can do it. Yeah. Because they're all doing it. If it was only the Democrats, they're probably just, well, what the fuck, bro? Yeah. But since they're all doing it, everybody's like, well, it's a... There's a problem. Yeah. There's no problem. Oh, I don't say nothing. Yeah, here's the chart. This is like an account that just takes data and makes charts out of it. Yeah. So it's them doing better than the S&P. Oh, what, again, just using percentages is not a great way. because somebody could say something went up 77% or went up 300%. It doesn't matter what you're talking about. It sounds like a lot, but it might not be relative to what the actual number was. Well, that's really interesting that they're doing so well. Well, this is also the same. Like, look, people could just bet in video itself has gone up a show load. Right. If you just put money in video, you'd make a lot more. I'll say this. That's a tough thing to resist to be sitting in Congress. And you know I'm going to get punished. Yeah. I mean, a few people have been punished. Right? We looked at it the other day. Yeah. A few fucking blabber mouths probably. Yeah. Some outside or some shithead that they were like, Fuck him, throw him out of the bus. Yeah. They probably had a few guys that threw him into the bus. And it was probably something that didn't have a portfolio. Didn't Trump do a lot of like stock purchases? Mm-hmm. He's made a fortune. He's made a fortune in the term. They made a settlement with the IRS. I think that's why a lot of it came out recently. But like, he can't be charged with anything. Yeah. Yeah. They can't be the latest thing is that he and his kids and his company cannot be audited. Oh, that's cool. That is cool. That's my settlement. What was the settlement? What was the IRS being sued for? What was the actuation? It was for his, the leak of his tax returns. Okay. So the IRS leaked his tax returns? Yeah. He said they were reckless and. The settlement of his 10 billion dollar lawsuit. 2018 leak of his tax returns in New York Times, the in the US, is forever barred and precluded from examining or prosecuting Trump, his sons and the Trump organizations current tax filings, according to one page document released Tuesday. That is so crazy. Imagine like somebody accused you a murder. Yeah. And it turns out you weren't guilty of that murder. And then you sued them. You go, you can never prosecute me for murder again. And then you just go straight. Who'd they who say? Yeah. And they're like, it's cool. Yeah. Oh, that's not the only thing that the detail of that. Is part of that settlement that says that like the language that they cannot be meant for their current tax filings. Does that mean though that in the future future filings also fall under that immunity? Oh, go back, go back, please. This is crazy. Like go back to the top of that right there. This settlement to resolve Trump's $10 billion lawsuit over the 2018 leak, leak of his tax returns to the New York Times. The US is forever barred and precluded. But now look at the end. It was quietly added to the original establishment, original settlement establishing a $1.8 billion fund to compensate people who Trump thinks were improperly investigated by the government. January 6th fund, I believe. Yeah. They're paying for all of their legal fees. Wow. But 1.8 billion is probably more than their legal fees, I would imagine. Yeah, it's also going to be for like, you know, I was, I was. So do they get compensated? They're all, they're all filing, you know, making claims. Are they? Well, a lot of them are making claims. Yeah. Well, here's what's fucked. For sure, there were government people that were rabble-rousers. There were people that were trying to get people to go into the capital. That's the fact. How many? They're called agent provocateurs. So there's people that your tax dollars pay that were trying to get people to commit crimes. Yeah. We don't know how many. We don't know. And supposedly no, they were just there to monitor. Really? Okay, but we know that people have done that in the past where they've encouraged people to commit crimes. Yeah. And that there was some knowledge that this was going to happen and that they wanted it to happen. They wanted it to happen exactly that way. And they encouraged people to do it so they can make it look like Donald Trump is a real threat. Yeah. And keep them from running for reelection again. I didn't work out. The whole thing is crazy. Like imagine that there are government employees with government tax dollars. They're being paid and they're being paid to encourage people to commit crimes so they would have never committed without it. We know that's packed. That's a real thing. Yeah. There's a. They're being paid and they're being paid to encourage people to commit crimes so they would have never committed without it We know that's a fact. That's a real thing. Yeah. There's a guy in Dallas He was 19 years old that they tricked into detonating a fake bomb They radicalized him Gave him a cell phone gave him a bomb the like the feds the feds Jesus They they made him a little geodest so he goes to detonate the bomb It's not real bomb anyway and then lock him up a jail forever They give him the bomb they give him the cell phone to detonate the bomb they talk him into doing it the whole deal And there's not gonna be any They're just like that's done. Is it how about that lady in what was it Michigan? Which state was it where the they there was 14 people that were trying to Kidnapper turns out 12 of them were FBI informants. What the fuck? Really yes, yes What was Michigan right? What is that lady's name? Yeah governor Whitmer Oh, there's 14 people involved in this kidnapping plot 12 of them were FBI informants So it's like a whole crew of FBI With the goal of what a Resting these two suckers these two retards that they get a good idea to play along with these dorks and these guys were like We thought we were just talking shit. Yeah, they're moving now. They're locked up. Yeah. Yeah Sorry But I mean that's they spent money on this It's like your tax dollars go to try to trick people to do in a crime that you know They're gonna do and they're never gonna be able to do because you're gonna rest them before they go to do it It sucks as a criminal to think that you have to really doubt who you're working with you know Hard times. It's hard man. I thought we were gonna have some fun turns out you're fucking snitch Maybe that could be an episode of yeah, yeah, next season good one. Yeah, it's a good one Yeah, I ain't fun one. That's actually a very good one. Mm-hmm. There's probably a lot of room for comedy in that Tons it's just crazy because it's like they have to this this is the problem And it's not entirely it is their fault they did that but it's not entirely their fault because they have to make arrests You want another one or you good? No, I'm good. Thanks if you want To have a career your career is dependent upon you making arrests Yeah, you know this is the stuff that I've worked with Josh Dubin with the Ronfully prosecuted and yeah convicted people one of the things you find out is that a lot of these prosecutors What it is is they want to boost up their career by getting cases Handled yeah, they want it. They want it. They want to arrest people. They want those people to be convicted That makes them look good. So they just fucking monkey around with the evidence. This feels like a like a traffic cop meeting is quota Exactly yeah exactly yeah, you didn't use your blinker Yeah, exactly you doing man, dude I had a guy pull me over and then he recognized me and let me go But he pulled me over and said that I crossed the white line And I was like what? He goes he was he followed me like the moment I left where I was at he was on my ass like immediately I saw across the white looks who's I was in my little loud BMW my little E46 Mm-hmm, and it's you know, probably look at this douchebag. Yeah, look Probably drunk. Yeah, thankfully I was completely sober, but he pulls me over and He's like I saw you cross the white line back there. I go really? I don't know. Okay I go I don't think I did but it goes to a rogan and then like oh, it's up. I'm just looking for drunk So I'm like, okay, well, I'm not dry. So he was just gonna try to I think they have a quota I think they have a quota and I think like they have to fucking make arrests and maybe they put you over and they realize you're not drunk And so they just inconvenient you for five minutes. You know you go I had one of those I've had that happen before. Yeah, I dropped my phone once when I was on the highway in LA Yeah, and I reached down in between my legs to pick up my phone and I must have like moved a one and then also Boop, whoop whoop whoop whoop whoop whoop whoop. Okay. I had out I got to how to do the whole thing and touch my nose the whole deal this guy accused me of the cover Excuse me of trying to ditch him too He's like he tried to ditch me and I was like what he goes you took a right here I was like that's because I'm going like I made a right cuz I'm going this way He's like where are you going? I'm going to my mom's house. He was like where she lived? Yeah, I was like up here then the left and he was like all right He's like what the hell man? He tried to get away one time This guy in a truck didn't see me and totally turned into my lane and I had to go into the I mean I was I was in a Tesla luckily it was fast so I avoided it and shot back into my lane ahead of him But it was like this guy came like inches away from hitting me And I had to go into the opposite lane to pass him and then I had there was no one in the opposite lane Yeah, I did it and then all sudden the lights come on and he goes I saw you pass that guy back there and he goes you smell like liquor I go I have I'm not having drank a single drop about call I do not he goes you smell like liquor I go no I don't and he goes Joe Rogan I go yeah, I go what are you doing man? I go I go go look at your can't you have a camera, right on your car go go look at what happened and so he looks at it I go that guy almost fucking hit me and he goes I just saw it. Yeah. Yeah. He was hey man. I love UFC I'm okay. Yeah, cool, but like you didn't you were pretending I was drunk. Yeah, you're pretending you smelled liquor Somebody else would have had a real hard time with that the the I smelled liquor was infuriating my come on dude I'm coming so upsetting. Yeah, I think I was coming from Like somewhere innocuous like the gym or something. I was like what the fuck is wrong with you. Yeah, you're saying you smell liquor You definitely don't smell it. You just be an asshole. Yeah, but they have a quota. They have a fucking quota It's like imagine being them like hey Tom Have him at your quota What would they what would they do if no one if we we all just said hey this quoted thing is bullshit? Everybody for the next month never speed always use your blinker stop at every stop light They would come up with something else what the fuck would they do? Yeah, they would they would come up with something There'd be a new Something would change in the law that would be illegal that people were doing but if no one's if so It's just speeding let's say speeding if no one sped for a month. What the fuck would they do? I mean they would they would pinch people for something else they just absolutely would that's crazy It generates too much revenue, but isn't that crazy? Yeah, I think the cops the servant protect. They're supposed to be that yeah they're glorified revenue collectors when you see these These police departments that they investigate for being super corrupt Like the level of corruption and some of them is mind-blowing like there was even that chief but chief that was and I think it was in Jersey That was just like tormenting the entire department He's shaved his back on people's desk Fucking stick a hypothermic needle in their leg put Viagra in the coffee. He's just like fucking with everybody Yeah, he was like tormenting people Where was that in Jersey? That's definitely was it stuck a hypothermic. Yeah, he was fucking absolutely crazy Just used to get power Yeah, it was going What is it about people that have power over people? Well, they just like eight out of ten times abuse it I don't know that's like all the dictator stuff. I've been reading it is like why are you reading so much about dictators? I don't know the stories are just so wild The EDM mean thing was just is so crazy again like came from extreme poverty neglected by his father Humiliated by the British then joins the the battalion by the set like to work with the same people that humiliated him came to power and then became a complete Megalomaniac I mean and also you see one thing you see in all these dictators is such extreme paranoia Because when you operate in a place of wanting to instill fear you feel fear, you know So they're all super paranoid man. I wonder who day was paranoid probably not That's a good question. I mean you probably had so much power They didn't have to be perhaps paranoid. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah The zone suns gonna kill them the the the kims super paranoid All of them. Oh, they have to be yeah because you just You know you're in such fear and you just instill fear and then you go Someone's and they're right because people are turning on them. Yeah, all these like attempts on their life Well Oh Hours before the 2003 invasion of Iraq who say withdrew approximately one billion dollars Cash and cash 100 dollar bills. What? 900 million and 100 dollar bills equivalent of 100 million in euros loaded them into three tractor trailers and left So 100 million dollars in euros and 900 million dollars and a hundred dollar bills and loaded in an attractor consider the largest bank heist in history got there 4 a.m How wait a minute also it says until 20 personal orders from his dad But that is that his money or anybody's money just whatever whoever's money it is But bro, what's the bank heist in 2011 that surpasses that I think that's the English one. Oh Is that the one? $6 billion and Iraq missing but it's been stolen. Oh What's that one? But this just makes sense man It's like whenever there's a war whenever there's chaos There's a bunch of people that are gonna buck and steal some money. Yeah Iraq wants its money back Yeah, Los Angeles times it That some of the officials in Baghdad have threatened to take the US government to court to reclaim the missing loot Good luck. Good luck with that They'll start bombing you again. They'll find more weapons and mass destruction of says it was US taxpayer dollars Oh, of course of course Which they should while they're looking for that look for the 24 billion that they spent on the homeless in California This is like everywhere you look there's people stealing money and Where do you think that way the billion that he put into tractors ended up though like like how it just ends He put it into tractors end of story Like where did that go? Oh, because he was killed shortly thereafter. Right. Where's that money? It's a lot of fucking money There's a lot of cash 12 billion in cash was flown into Iraq at 21 separate c-130 flights in May of 2004 That's why they like going to war that's why these motherfuckers like going to war because for sure you can get some of that You got rain cash bro some of that's yours. Yeah If you and I are running some fucking defense contracts and company like it wasn't Tommy that yacht You got your eye on yeah here it is here it is. It is drop a few bombs. Let's do it 100 million Let's do it drop in the bucket for this Operation a very similar claim yeah Afghanistan's Taliban displays pallets of cash received for humanitarian aid. Yeah, they just give them cash They just give them cash. Why they leave that bricks of it. Look at what it looks like a million in cash. Oh nothing Jesus don't this is what timber shed was saying that we give them that every month Yeah, this is why I found that this article this here. Look at that packaging bro. Yeah, we send that to them every month American tax dollars, and then we go do the right thing and then we're like we don't have any money to fix the streets We don't have any money to pay teachers, but we have 40 million a month for the Taliban I wish you would talk to whoever's in charge of infrastructure in this city to fix some of these streets Yeah, they're not gonna listen to me. There's so many fucking potholes Potholes dude and just destroyed even in residential areas. Mm-hmm Street is fucked up man I know wonder why they don't fix that. I don't know either. Oh, it's all like it's not money around here Oh shit. Yeah, well, maybe get Spencer proud if he loses an LA to run from mayor of Austin come to awesome bro We could use you Is he got a chance in LA? What do you think I think anyone's got a chance? I think I think if you put together a campaign that gets some Excitement people talking you have a chance in LA. I really do like that city the people there are desperate They're desperate and also they live for entertainment so entertain him a little right Yeah, he's entertaining he's entertaining a shit You see one of the things he's doing he's putting a stencil down on the streets and power washing Spencer Pratt for mayor into the dirty streets. No, is he right? So he's clever putting it on the sidewalk and the sidewalks are so disgusting that if you put the stencil down and power wash it Yeah, you could see it clearly. I mean I If you think that that guy doesn't have a chance I would remind you that our president is a reality show fucking host I think it's good. I think his ideas are good. I think Spencer private. I had him in here. He's got some good ideas I mean He definitely wants to stop all this fucking camp who's he's running against the income or who have any people's running The incumbent and another woman You know, but he's right now. I have a Republican. How's he probably I don't know I died probably well Kalshi the trading market. He's in second place Behind her behind Karen Bass imagine that she burned down the entire Pacific Palisades by not having any water in the fucking Hydrant's not have any water in the reservoirs and they're like yeah, but let's give her another chance. Yeah She was she was busy She didn't have time to save all those houses Why'd you sold your house for burnt to a crisp? It's really crazy. I did a fundraiser show a couple weeks ago in out to Dina out to Dina's even worse situation because those people don't have any money. I know it's a lot of them working class families lost everything I saw I haven't been to my elsey, but I saw a video. It's it just looks like a Like a bomb like a bomb went off. Yeah. It was really crazy. Oh, we moved to yeah I'm glad I'm really glad you didn't lose your house me too, man That would have just been I feel I really do feel for the people that did it's I know quite a few I know quite a few. Yeah. I do one my good friend Matt. He lost his place. It's really sad Yeah, anyway, dude. Your show's awesome. Thank you on Netflix right now. It's really really fucking funny Thanks so much. It's it's fucking just so preposterous and so irreverent and and again shout out to Netflix for having the Cajonese. Yes. Thank you Netflix. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Have a much. All right. Go watch it. I love you buddy Thank you very much. Bye, everybody. See you