[Music] My neighbor had mushrooms growing out of their wall and I was being blamed for it. It's perfect. Yeah. And I thought it was a joke. It was one of these things where the uh the super like bursts into my apartment holding this mushroom and was like, "What did you do? What what did you do?" And uh and I've of course have never talked to him about mushrooms. So it was I was surprising that he would even make the association. And uh I was like, "Oh, that's a good one. It's pretty funny." And then I realized that he wasn't joking and that he actually thought that I had like infected the building with spores in some way. Um, so they kicked you out. No. No. I mean, of course, the real issue was not This also obviously wasn't a psychedelic mushroom. Right. It was like some some like compellis species actually identified it for him and but it was indicative of severe water damage. So So there's like okay that's not good. If you at the point where there are mushrooms bursting through the drywall. It's like what else could be going wrong? You might want to check for mold, too. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that that was part of it. And uh Yeah. Cool. Manhattan, huh, dude? So, um, obviously I've been a fan of yours and your show for a very, very long time. But it wasn't until a couple years ago that I made the connection between you and your dad. Mhm. Because I was also a huge fan of your dad's documentaries. Mhm. Like, and my mind was blown. I was like, "Noing way. That's incredible." I mean like some of those documentaries that he does like the way he does documentaries is so unique and so like he just has a very very cool way of like the cinematography that he does where he has the interviewers talk directly down the barrel of the the camera. Sure. Sure. You know how he interviews him like right behind the lens sometimes with his older ones. I think Mr. Death I think he did it during Mr. death where all of the interviews like typically people when they're doing interviews they're they're looking to the side right to like a somebody talking to them but he has this unique way of having people look straight down the barrel of the camera or having and having multiple like the interatron is what it's called Oh the interatron. Yes. I forgot that's what it's called. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. A name coined by my mother. Yeah. Oh, your mom made that up. That's so cool, man. Yeah. Some of those stories like the Mr. Death story is just soing bananas. Yeah. And uh it is really bananas. Yeah. It's a great That's a great film. I think I think so, too. I really love that film. Yeah. Yeah. I don't really hear people talk about it very much, but I think it's like nobody talks about it. And whenever I bring it up to people, they've never heard of it. It's a bad name. I think that's part of the has a forgettable name. And the original name was supposed to be called Honeymoon and Ashvitz, but they thought that was too controversial or something, so it was changed to Mr. Death, but that's sort of a forgettable name. But it's an amazing documentary. Yeah. Yeah. So, the guy Fred's hypothesis at the end of it, some guy um the guy who was involved in some trial basically got Fred to testify for him that the gas chambers in Germany like couldn't have been gas chambers and like that was used like to I don't know that ended up being like this weird side road that the whole documentary took at the very end that you weren't expecting and it seems like your dad had to do a lot of damage control with that when they were promoting the documentary. No, no, no, no. I don't think I don't think that's a correct interpretation. I mean, that was the subject of the documentary was the association between Lucher's pseudoscientific beliefs and how this fed into his delusions and his selfdeception. And I think it was a kind of um it wasn't as if like there was some kind of gotcha moment like he was only interviewing him. I mean the subject of the documentary is his involvement with Zundle and there's you know an extensive interview with an analytical chemist in the documentary dissecting why his testing of the Avitz gas chambers was methodologically flawed. Um right they were just like putting like like dust in bags in like ziplockc bags and flying it across across the world to a chemistry lab. Right. Right. And this is, you know, I think it actually is a very important lesson. And I I say this just because this wasn't this was the subject of the documentary. This wasn't some kind of like he was just talking to a guy who was doing electric chair repair and then he he may have initially been interested in him for that reason. Although I actually think he probably did know about the association with Zundle originally. Oh, he knew about that in the in the beginning. I got the impression that he didn't find that out until like after they were in production. It could be that that was a while ago when I watched it. I would expect not, but I don't remember because all this was made when I was a child, right? Um, but yeah, the the story for those that aren't aware is that there was this untrained, uncredentialed electric chair repairman who had seemingly done a decent job uh designing electric chairs. There wasn't, as far as I know, any major instances of his designs uh failing in a way that caused some kind of uh terrible suffering or something like that to the best of my knowledge. I'm not I don't have like an encyclopedic knowledge of the results of Lucher's execution device designs, but um he had gotten embroiled in this quest to demonstrate that the Holocaust didn't really happen, right? and he was contracted as a sort of scientist despite having no training in chemistry to collect samples from the interior of the gas chamber in Achvitz and have them chemically analyzed. The issue is that in addition to these samples being um at that point probably at least a half century old um one wouldn't expect any of the for like hydrogen cyanide is very volatile. So that's the first issue is that this is not something that you would expect to uh remain on the surface um for even I would imagine months let alone decades. Well, it's a it's pretty much a gas. Yeah, that was that was how it was used in the gas chambers. Um that's why there were gas chambers. Yeah. So, because it is a volatile substance, it doesn't have a tendency to uh deposit on surfaces. I think the idea there was that there was like a a a Prussian a Prussian blue type cyanide complex that would have been detected but again the samples were diluted because you wouldn't expect this to penetrate more than like a fraction of a millimeter into the chamber wall and he was chiseling off huge pieces of Yeah. Yeah. So that's it was very crude the way he was taking the samples. Right. Right. So it's sort of a a portrait of selfdeception. Yes. and yeah, the danger of pseudocientific inquiry, right? It was uh you know, one of the most profound things about that documentary that I noticed was he was like he was explaining after the Bureau of Prisons got him to repair the electric chair, then said, "Hey, maybe you can come up with these other operations or these other ways of executing people with the um like lethal injections." And they even did gas chambers I think in the US for the Bureau of Prisons and all kinds of other ways of doing it. He was explaining like it is really difficult to kill people. He's like it's not that easy. It's not as easy as you would imagine cuz there was a lot of people that weren't that weren't dying that were just getting tortured or like getting, you know, put in a vegetative state or, you know, and and that was one of his hardest things is like actually trying to like push somebody over the edge of death is a lot harder than you would imagine. Yeah. Yeah. That is a surprising aspect of all of this. Yeah. Anyways, incredible stuff. I like your your your dad's new documentary uh that chaos documentary was also really good cuz he's also done um the Wormwood stuff about like CIA's MK Ultra and all this stuff. Did you did you like help him at all with any of this stuff? I'm sure like your guys' interests are very much intertwined. Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I did. I was involved with the chaos production in various ways from the beginning and it's an interesting story. It's, you know, I I think that the book is very good. Um, I even read a manuscript of it long before it was published. I'm not sure that I am persuaded by the book's thesis, but I still think it's very interesting and provocative. Yeah. Yeah. He Well, he didn't have like a um Well, yeah, there was a thesis, but there wasn't like any conclusion, right? He had like I think he ended it with like three or four different conclusions of like why they were murdered. Right. Right. I should maybe be a little bit I do agree with aspects of I mean there's maybe two two thesis in this. One is that the story of the Manson killings as they are typically portrayed is flawed and incomplete and has inconsistencies that I would agree with. Um, but the bigger thing that I think most people are actually interested in is the possibility that Charles Manson was some kind of manurian candidate who was programmed by the CIA. And that he's not claiming that that is definitively the case, but right that is sort of the subject of the book is attempting to uh identify the gap possibility. Yeah. Sure. And he but he did like he did point out and he found like solid evidence that that that clinic in Hate Ashberry did have CIA funding and they were doing like crazy testing with I think it was LSD mixed with amphetamines and seeing how that affected people and then that guy Jolly West was visiting there all the time and then the connection with Manson and his followers going there every single week is just you know the you can't make any draw any like solid conclusions out of that but the The connections are bizarre that the fact that they were doing that stuff and he was there every week. They're medium bizarre. I would say medium bizarre. Yeah. Because I mean on and I say this is someone that you know I've interviewed David E. Smith who was the founder of the Hey Dashberry. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. He was in the PCP episode of my show. Okay. So I've known him and followed his work for most of my adult life. He's very influential psychedelic researcher. created what was once called the Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, which was the premier peer-reviewed scholarly journal dedicated to research on psychedelics. It was later renamed the Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, but it's a big journal. And so, it's not surprising to me that one of the preeminent researchers on psychedelics was doing psychedelic research. It's there's nothing. and that he's in Hate Ashberry, which is the center of this entire hippie movement. Sure. Um, and that he's providing free medical care to impoverished people in that community. Again, not really surprising to me. He was treating enormous numbers of people. So, I do think that it's very easy, and I fall into these sorts of patterns of thinking myself. I say this, I'm not saying this like you're stupid if you think this way. It's but it's very easy when you're scrutinizing historical documents to look selectively at what suits the narrative that you're trying to present to the public and to not critically assess alternate possibilities. And you know I I know this very well. I've spent a lot of time looking at World War II psychedelic research and wouldn't it be interesting if the Nazis knew about LSD like for example so I'm already operating from a perspective of wouldn't it be interesting if the Nazis knew about LSD so anything I look at I'm hoping that it will support that meanwhile it's very easy to ignore large amounts of evidence that don't support that and it's just a a critical thinking exercise in general. I know it's less fun to talk the way that I'm talking. Like I'm sympathetic to the the funness of exploring these ideas, but more and more as I see our culture fractured by delusions of one kind or another and a lack of critical thinking skills, I feel less sympathetic to the the playful non-critical reinterpretation of the world, like using the world as this kind of fanfic canvas to paint whatever narrative narrative that you want. I mean, that's one of the nice things about fiction is you can explore these ideas and you don't need to pretend that they are true. Whereas, I feel like there's a tendency where people use these same sorts of um idea like what a fiction writer might do, but they project it onto reality, right? And this is like the new way that people tell stories. Yes. Yes. It makes it more fun, I think. And then when you combine I mean when you combine it with social media it's kind of like throwing gasoline on fire. And then people and then when you also combine that with like you know these sensational headlines or narratives that you can come up with and post on social media they organically get more eyeballs and more attention because you're attracting more people right more people that are less they don't think as critically. And on top of that, then you have people making careers out of this stuff, out of like taking these things and just running with them. Oh, yeah. So, it's like a compounding thing that is like it seems like it's completely gotten out of control. And I don't I don't know how it ever you can I don't think you put the toothpaste back in the tube. And this is this kind of goes you you talked about this a little bit with uh with Rick Strawman on your podcast when you you guys were talking about um telepathy and like brain chips. like what if people could communicate just telepathically and there was no filter. You you el you eloquently stated um how like that would be terrible because people would not be able to edit what they're think like typically when you write you have to like go through what you're writing and refine it so you can have the most coherent message and communicate authentically what your intentions are. But if you're just having this chaos of thought confusion in your head being transferred into somebody else, then there's going to be like an insane level of miscommunication happening. And that's like what's going on with social media, I feel like. Yeah. And it requires so much work to undo some kind of falsity that's been propagated that you can just totally lose track of reality. And you know, I think that it is, you said you can't put the toothpaste back in the tube. I think that culturally we can develop an appreciation for carefully constructed ideas that are responsibly uh bounded by the limits of evidence and and when you have something like that then it's all the more interesting because you it's because it's real. You're not playing games with imaginary ideas. Like, and again, I say this as someone who is extremely sympathetic to the excitement. Like, I can't tell you how many of these things I've had myself. One that I've been looking at for years. It's very fringe is this idea that astrology has been weaponized by the government, right? Hey guys, if you're not already subscribed, please hammer the subscribe button below and hit the like button on the video. Back to the show. And there is some evidence for this, right? And you can even make a case that is evidence-based but somewhat tenuous that the entire Reagan administration war on drugs was astrologically mediated. How? Yeah, it's uh it's pretty wild where you have uh Nancy Reagan was an actress, was a kind of lowlevel actress and a sort of like a a character who is sort of analogous to Melania Trump in a lot of ways where she isn't wasn't taken seriously. Everybody's making fun of her. She's not like a Michelle Obama type person who has political ambitions, who, you know, is using her role to disseminate ideas that are constructive. She spends something like $40,000 getting a new set of China for the White House and everybody makes fun of her ruthlessly and this is where our taxpayer money is going and how frivolous and how stupid. And so she's having this PR crisis and she's also really into astrology. both her and Ronald Reagan are really into astrology and they have an astrologer named Joan Quigley and she and this is a fact this is like a 100% established fact um in the midst of this PR crisis she's consulting with JoanWigley about what to do and Joan Quigley tells her which is probably pretty good PR advice you need a mission you need something that you can bring to the American people that will show that you are concerned and your mission And because Neptune is in the 12th house will be America's struggle with drugs, right? So this is like unfathomable human suffering may have come from this borderline random astrological whim. And when you add to that, there's some other kind of interesting little bits and pieces of evidence. There's a CIA whistleblower named Miles Copeland who wrote in a book called The Game Player about the CIA using astrology computers that have been compromised by the government to deliver disinformation to foreign heads of state. So you give this uh astrology computer to the president of Ghana and you say enjoy and the output of the computer is aligned with US interests if they want to for example organize a coup or something like that. So there are all these like and this is again this is written about by a person who did work in the CIA. It's very difficult to corroborate all of this. Maybe he's making it up but what a weird thing to make up. on top of that astrology computer. I've never even heard of that. Yeah. Yeah. And and there was a bizarly large amount of resources that were actually invested into astrology computers during that period in the 1970s, including military funding again. So, okay. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty wild. So, um I actually have the astrology computer, the uh DigiCom DR70 astrology mini computer that arguably is responsible for the war on drugs. Um, there it is right there. It's It's a be. Wow. The one on the left. Yeah, the one on the left. Yeah. Blow that thing up. That's crazy. Where did you get that? I got it from Nancy Reagan's astrologers. Astrologer. That's the best That's the best story I've ever heard. It's got an ignition like a car. You put a key in the computer to turn it on to rev that bad boy. Damn. Yeah. How many gears does that thing? That's so crazy, dude. But anyway, so so this is an example. Like I'm very very interested in this idea. I've probably collected every little bit of evidence and and and and is it possible? Yeah, it's definitely possible. It's possible it played a role. It's possible there's more to it. You could make an argument that the Reagan administration war on drugs was astrologically mediated, but at what point is this factual? At what point is this ignoring real factors that were going into this? At what point am I doing it because it's funny and interesting? And so you have to be self-aware and you have to be responsible about these things because it's so so so easy to manipulate people. Yes. And it's something that I've become I've always been acutely aware of it in the realm of psychedelic journalism. I mean this is like one of the areas where journalistic failure is the norm, right? It's it is the exception if a journalist isn't failing miserably in their coverage of drugs. That's we're just used to that of anything. Well, maybe maybe of any Well, I mean, yeah, you could that would be maybe a slightly more cynical interpretation, but yeah, journalists often don't do that well. They do. It's a It's a hard job uh to be sympathetic to a very unsympathetic uh occupation. It's a hard job, but um but they've done a really really bad job with drugs and they continue to do an unbelievably terrible job. But what's interesting is we tend not to notice the way these manipulations play out until a decade or so has passed. Like you look back at the scare stories of the past and it's laugh it's literally laughable. It's a joke. Haha. The their brain on drugs. How stupid was this? Oh, ecstasy makes holes in your brains. How stupid is this? All these things. You know, I I was uh had this huge archive of news reports on MDMA and you have like, you know, cops like lecturing other cops about like, oh, this is a pacifier. like the MDMA user puts the pacifier in their mouth to enhance the the the drug pleasures that they experience. It's all just like nuts. Um but uh but the same thing's happening now. We just are worse at noticing it until a little time has passed. So whatever the dominant narrative is and I guess crucially before I even get into the examples because the issue is that these narratives are so dominant that people don't even haven't even started to question them yet. Um and often there is some truth to it, right? Like this whole drugs cause brain damage narrative that was the sort of scientistic um orientation of the '9s. It's potentially true, right? Like under some Yeah. like drugs can damage your brain under some circumstances. For a typical person, holes in their brain is not really the major concern. It's more like disruption of their social and professional and educational existence through dependence on a substance um that probably isn't in most instances causing irreversible neurological damage, but it can still have very negative manifestations of one kind or another. So uh now we went through this era of like a hyper reductionist conceptualization of addiction problems in the United States. So the entire opioid problem in the United States can be exclusively tracked to Richard Sackler, right? It's just that's it. That's the whole thing. It's like right it's very convenient. Wouldn't it be nice? It sure would be nice if it were that simple. If you could blame everything on Richard Sackler one billionaire. Yeah. Yeah. That's it. That's the whole thing. That's why that's why all those people died. one guy, but it's like, give me a break. He definitely played a role. I'm not saying it's completely false, but it's such a laughably reductionist understanding of human motivations for drug use that I struggle to understand how any adult who has lived in the real world could think it is truly that simple. Right? It's like the the basic idea that I think people struggle with is that they think drugs are responsible for drug problems, which is a very superficial read. Of course, they are strictly speaking, but the reality is that to even get to a point where you want to hurt yourself with a drug or you want to you're willing to develop a problematic relationship with a drug, there's usually some kind of social psychological problem that is putting you in that position to begin with. Yeah. So just merely having like you offered meatom at the beginning of this podcast and I declined theratom, right? Why did I decline theratom? Cuz you know a lot more about cratom than I do. Well, I'm not even saying that is bad. That's not the point. But the point is that the point is that I'm aware of it. I'm aware addictive. Yeah. People become dependent on it. Definitely. Yeah. Yeah. Which in and of itself is not necessarily a bad thing. I'm very dependent on caffeine. So Right. Right. So dependence in and of itself is not necessarily bad. Although I would argue it's not. I can't remember a day in the last 10 years that I have I mean there's been in the last 10 years I could probably count on two hands how many days I've gone without a cup of coffee. Not many days. Like I drink coffee every single day. Is that necessarily a bad thing? Mayberatom's not as bad as c as coffee. Right. You know I don't know. Right. So I know I know this shit's amazing. Like I it is so much better than caffeine. Right. And um yeah, I mean what as far as what you know aboutratom I know you've done a lot of research on it and you know far more than I do. I watched part of your documentary um when you went to I think Thailand and you met with some guys who were basically they had cratrum trees. Yeah. Um how does it work? And other than the amazing euphoric stimulating uh feeling I get when I drink it, what what is like is there any downside or any long-term negative effects of it? Uh the long-term effects are not all that well studied. It seems reasonably safe with occasional use. I mean it is a an opioid. It's a low potency opioid. So dependence is not uncommon with people that use it regularly and then you have the sort of withdrawal syndrome that comes with that. Um unlike more common opioids that are related to morphine, it doesn't really tend to cause respiratory depression, which is a big thing because the main reason that people don't like opioids or there's this extreme fear of opioids in the United States is because they kill people, right? That's like the caffeine example shows that people are somewhat comfortable with dependence. Dependence in and of itself is not usually conceptualized as a big problem. I don't like living in a world where the NSA is constantly snooping and spying on our web searches. We've seen it on this show time and again how your data can be stolen and used against you. And that's the reason why I mask all my information with today's sponsor, NordVPN. With a VPN, your emails, online purchases, and web activity can't be spied on and used against you. NordVPN creates a secure encrypted tunnel for your internet traffic, shielding your activities from your internet provider and online snoopers. Not even the NSA can break through that encryption. But NordVPN doesn't stop there. Their dark web monitor keeps an eye out for your credentials on shady corners of the internet. So, if your information pops up where it shouldn't, you'll get an immediate alert, allowing you to take action before things get out of hand. And what's better, even one NordVPN account can be used on up to 10 devices. Easy to protect your entire family for the price of a cup of coffee per month. In a world where skimmers and mass surveillance is an unfortunate reality, taking control of your online privacy is essential. With NordVPN, you can browse with confidence knowing that your personal information stays personal. To get the best discount off your NordVPN plan, go to nordvpn.com/dannyjones or just click the link below. This will give you an extra 4 months on the 2-year plan. There's no risk with Nord's 30-day money back guarantee. Again, nordvpn.com/dny jes for 4 months extra on the 2-year plan. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. But as soon as people start dying from using a drug, then that dramatically changes the way it's perceived by the public for obvious reasons. And becauseratom tends not to kill people relatively speaking. It's extremely safe compared to um morphine type or fentinyl type compounds. Then it doesn't carry those same problems. That's not to say that it's without problems. And you know there's a lot of people that are able to transition off of other opioids ontoratom and that's probably a better move. It's it's very complicated. There's not a simple answer to these questions. It's like whenever this drink and you're able to transition on like one can of this per. Um but if you're just not doing anything and then you become dependent on this, I would assume that that's a step in the wrong direction probably. So yeah. So it's it's it's a good exercise to abstain from things for a period of time if you if you tend to enjoy it. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. So, I notice myself on the weekends, I don't drink any of it, but I catch myself thinking about it. I be like, "Oh, it's it's noon. I could go for a a cratom." And I'm like, "Okay, I know I'm thinking about it, so that means I I shouldn't have one. I should, you know, go a couple more days without having one." And then there's also the obvious issue that if you're taking a drug to address a problem that you are likely to encounter continuously for the rest of your life, then you're setting yourself up to use that drug continuously for the rest of your life. So if the issue like I do use occasionally as an alternative to ibuprofen if I've been like exercising a lot and I'm in pain. Um but then you have to ask yourself like do I plan to be sore after exercising? a lot in the future because if you will, then the answer is you may be using this all the time or I mean another example would obviously be using some kind of hypnotic to go to sleep, right? It's like chances are you're going to be going to sleep uh quite a few times across your life. So if you don't develop healthy once or twice Yeah. you don't develop a healthy technique for falling asleep, then you're setting yourself up for a lifetime of dependence. So why did you decline theratom? Uh I recently especially I've seen a lot of people becoming dependent on it. Again, not really necessarily a big problem, but it's just made me a little bit wary. And I, you know, I'm not somebody that is like immune to addiction by any means. Like like I'm looking at your zen. Uh you want one? No. No, I don't want one. Uh but but my podcast is sponsored by um Lucy. Lucy. Yeah. Yeah, I have those, too. I like the Lucy's better. Yeah. And so I'm friends with the guy that owns it. He'll send me a crate of these things and I know how it goes. It's like I'll consume the entirety of it and then it's not until it's all gone that I have a moment to reflect and think, is it really good that I just consumed like Everybody is is obsessed with the nicotine pouches. Everybody's on them now. It's crazy how they've just stormed society over the last two years. It's crazy. I mean, nicotine is so unbelievably addictive. It is something else. It's also relatively I don't want to say totally innocuous, but it's not You can be crazily addicted to it and it's not necessarily a big deal, which is one of the reasons that it's so easy to get miserably addicted to it. It's like if I take that Zen, if I were to if I were to consume that Zen, not that I want to, I uh I would uh it wouldn't be a big deal. It wouldn't necessarily be a big deal. It would really just be setting myself up to continue using it. And I'm really good at convincing. If I can convince myself that something is beneficial for me, then I can almost always use it. So like I've never been drawn to any kind of self-destructive pattern. But if it's but if it's like, oh, you're on this podcast and it would really kind of uh sharpen your thinking a little bit and you know it would be a little bit better probably if you were to consume that and then I can justify. Same thing with things like ambient for sleep where it's like oh well I'm doing a thing tomorrow so everything okay? Yeah. He's his his uh his headphone cables. Oh. Oh. Oh. Oh. Feel like it's it's uh it's overworked. A little overstretched. Um ambient. Ambient. Yeah. Yeah. Very easy to very because you always have to do something the next day. And so it's very easy to convince yourself, oh, I should really do mental some mental gymnastics to prove to yourself that it would be beneficial. It would be very beneficial. It would be productive. It would be damaging not to take damn. Yes, absolutely. One of the things I hate about the Zins though is uh it's like it's very vasor restrictive. So like if you're doing any sort of like activity or exercise, it's counterproductive for that, right? So like for some for some reason it's supposed to be a stimulating mentally stimulating but how how is that how is it mentally stimulating if it's like cutting if it's vasorestrictive? Right? Don't you want more blood flow to your brain? There's a few stimulating things that seem to reduce blood flow to the brain paradoxically. I mean, it's it's not the pharmacology isn't mediated purely by the vascular effects. It's mostly through the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, right? But um it's hard it's hard to know how much of this stuff is self-deception. Are you really what is the difference between thinking that you're working better and working better? And how would you know? And could something make you feel like you're working worse, but you're actually working better? This is the whole paradox of neutropic drugs when people say, "Oh, how do you know if a neutropic works?" And people say, "Oh, I think I I think my memory is really improved." Conceivably, something could be damaging your memory. And you would think that your memory is improved by virtue of being unaware of what you've forgotten. It's like a Dunning Krueger type scenario, right? Right. Yeah. I love these ones. I think these are better than the Zens. These are just neutropic pouches with caffeine and neutropic stuff in them. Yeah. They don't have the uh if I take too many Zins during the day, I start to feel sick. Yeah. Like nauseous kind of. Oh, yeah. Like if I take three of them, I'm I can't do three of them in a day. I can do like maybe max two of them. But the the other ones I don't feel that effect at all. Interesting. Yeah. It's weird. I'm a super lightweight, which is why I was super impre I'm very impressed with you and I'm I'm kind of envious of you because you are the complete antithesis of a you're the opposite of a um hypochondriact. You're not afraid of anything. You literally will go into the depths of the Peruvian Amazon and lick a [ __ ] venomous toad and be like, "Well, I hope I don't die." No, no, no, no. That's not That's not I' I've never licked a toad. Well, they didn't lick it, but they burned you and they they rubbed it on you. And like you had the guy in Haiti put the powder on you. He's holding this powder. He's like, he's like, "This will kill 20 people." You're like, "Okay, put it on me." Yeah. I mean, I would like to think that I'm not reckless. I'm just I think I'm reasonably You just know. So, you you you're very you're very educated in this stuff and you understand the pharmarmacology. So, maybe that's the reason that you aren't terrified of it. Yeah, I would. I mean, some degree of fear is warranted. It's just about finding the appropriate balance where you're not so afraid that you're paralyzed and you don't do anything and prevent yourself from having worthwhile experiences, but also having enough fear that you're not taking unnecessary risks and potentially harming yourself. And yeah, I think to some extent there will always be uncertainty, but you can learn. I I was just working on a um a piece about the chemistry of LSD type compounds and made a a new analog of LSD. and me and the chemist that I was working with all tested it on ourselves and I didn't know with certainty that it would be safe but we were very cautious and we increased the dose somewhat slowly and we were able to or I was able to look at the metabolism of related compounds and make an educated guess about how it may be transformed in the body and how it may or may not be risky and which is not to say that it couldn't have some sort of unanticipated toxicity it absolutely Absolutely could. But you can make a foundation of knowledge based on everything that has been published on a compound or related compounds and you can make an educated guess and then you can proceed cautiously and and everything was fine. Really? I was fine. Yeah, I enjoyed the compound. Really? How different was it from traditional LSD? It was a bit less potent. Maybe about a quarter to a fifth the potency and much less visual. It was a less dazzling but still very pleasant and shorter acting. Okay. Effect. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Um, so what was it like? I've always been curious. What was it like in like the very early days of Vice and producing those shows for Vice? Um, and that goes back like 15 20 years ago, right? Yeah. So, did you like like first of all, how did you start and how did you get in with Vice in the very beginning and like what was the like what were the meetings like? Like how how did you guys decide what you were going to go film and all of that? Yeah. Uh, I mean, I find it interesting that people always seem sort of amazed by the work that I've done or they they treat it as if it's like very unusual when Vice is producing tons of drug related documentaries and continues to. So, that in and of itself was never a hard cell. Pretty much every mainstream media outlet is continuously producing stuff about drugs. The only difference is I was doing it in a relatively informed way that uh was pretty wellreceived by people. So the the selling aspect was never difficult with Vice and it all did very well and was insanely low budget at the beginning. So you know it's it was all gradual. I wrote for the magazine, did a column, then there was this producer named Santiago Steelli who was really responsible for most of the early Vice video work. Pretty much the entire vice pivot to video was a product of this one guy, Santiago Stelli. And he was brilliant. He's still he's around. I mean, he left the United States and is long since gone from Vice, but he I think had was responsible for a lot of that early internationally oriented character and he would work on crazy low budgets. So, you know, we were going in those early shoots, the total budget of those things would have been effectively nothing. Um, you know, we shoot on a what was it like a 5D or something like that? Canon 5D. Um, or even before that, mini TV tapes. I mean, these were these were really um Yeah, I remember. I remember those days. Yeah. I remember my my friend who I used to film surfing with, Jerry. I remember when he I I know I knew him way before he worked for Vice and then all of a sudden I saw him traveling all over the [ __ ] world going to Antarctica and all these crazy places. I think he went to North Korea. But he was one of the big ones. He would he filmed with Shane. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think Jerry Richotti. Yeah. Ricky. Yeah. Richiotti think is how you say it. Yeah. And that's when I first discovered all that stuff when he started traveling to all these [ __ ] places. I'm like, Jerry, how the [ __ ] did How how did all this happen? It's crazy, man. It was crazy, but the formula was very smart, which is spend no money whatsoever. Just crank stuff out. And this is at the beginning of YouTube. And those things, I mean, they they were making money off of them. I think it was actually taken off YouTube, I think, because of a some kind of copyright issue with one of the pieces of music in it. The crystal coal LSD underground LSD silo piece that I did had something like 40 million views on YouTube. This was probably made for like $1,100 or something like that. You know, this is just and then they were making so much of that type of stuff and doing all these brand deals. They they had a good model for a while. I mean, one issue is that you have to pay people at some point. People are willing to work that way when they're 21, but eventually you want a situation where you're actually being compensated for the work. So, that that was one of the big selling points, right? Was like, we're so cool, everyone wants to work for us for free. Right. Right. Right. Right. Yeah. Which is a dangerous road to go down. Um because even if people do want to do that, you can fall into a pattern of exploiting people and creating a lot of bad blood, which absolutely did happen with Vice. Yeah, there was a lot. I mean, it's unusual to find somebody who isn't a Vice hater. Yeah. Especially somebody who worked with them for a long time, right? Yeah. Yeah. I would say it's like pretty much 100% of people. I Thomas is one of them. Well, yeah. Well, Tom, but Thomas is Thomas is my very close friend. Thomas Morton. Yeah, we live together for years. Oh, really? I didn't know that. I talked to him all the time, dude. He's so funny. You should have him on. I would love to. I talked to him on the phone once about doing this and then uh I think he go he ghosted me after that. He's like, I'm not [ __ ] going to hang out with this loser. I'll text him. He's he's um No, he's great. I mean, he's like I'm a huge fan of his, man. He's brilliant. Yeah. Um, but he was someone who I think worked really well in that environment. There was a certain type of person that maybe had a more impulsive style of creating things that responded very well to the lack of bureaucracy in that environment, which was unusual. Like the the typical pattern that you have with journalism is you have tons of middlemen, tons of people micromanaging everything that you do. I mean, I worked for National Geographic for a period and I was shocked. This actually may be the norm. They expected me when working on a documentary to write an entire screenplay for the documentary that would then be approved by executives and then my task as an interviewer wasn't to talk to people, but it was essentially to reverse engineer the scripted statements in question form. Oh wow. So like Jesus dude. so that you could come as close to a entirely manufactured piece as possible while still calling it some kind of documentary work. And that's just stupid. That's the opposite of what the original idea of Vice was, right? It was just like going out into crazy places and turning the camera on and seeing what happens. Yeah. Seeing, you know, seeing the insane [ __ ] that's happening in the world. Yeah. That's so [ __ ] crazy, man. Expensive. It produced bad results as well. So, so there were a lot of things about that model that I think were brilliant and ahead of their time and were copied by lots and lots of people. I mean, they were they were kind of some of the early people to sort of professionalize YouTube documentary work. This is also before YouTube, but this kind of nobudget, fully independent style, even though it was coming from a media outlet, that was the idea. It's like you don't need this typical professional production apparatus. You can just throw people out and make something, right? And at what point what was like the straw that broke the camel's back with Vice? Was it when they like sold out Murdoch or like what was the was there like a specific point where you realized and like Thomas realized like like it's time to jump ship or was it I know there was a lot of layoffs and stuff like that but that but like in your perspective like what was happening internally that caused that? There were a few things. I mean, one was you had overvaluation of Vice in general. So, it was kind of um coasting on this massive what was it like a $6 billion valuation, something nuts that was definitely inflated, not to say that it wasn't worth something. Um, you had an increasingly resentful and tired workforce and a increasingly large number of enemies that had been cultivated by executives at the company. You also had increasing desire from rival media outlets to discredit them, which gives an incentive to write articles about how they're bad or irresponsible. Yes. You also had a very ill-advised transition from streaming online video, which they had built their brand on, to cable TV, which was a dying art in like 2016, right? Yeah. At a time when this made really no sense. It's like I think it kind of speaks to how ill- advised that decision was that I couldn't watch my own show cuz I don't have a TV. So, I remember listening to videos, interviews of Shane explaining how great of an idea it was and like, "Okay, I think I'm convinced. I'm sold." It was one of these things where I sort of thought, "Okay, well, if this is what if this is what is going to bring resources in and allow me to make documentaries, whatever." But in the back of my head, I was always thinking, "This seems like a bad idea." And then on top of that, you had this sort of gradual erosion of their identity which had begun probably because there were different eras, right? You have the kind of Gavin McInness era which is oriented entirely around ultra edgy humor. Vice is basically a humor magazine, a humor art fashion magazine. Um, totally totally different. And then it goes from that to a a sort of transitional literary era that doesn't get talked about very much where there was this brilliant guy named Jesse Pearson who is the editor of the magazine and he's a sort of intellectual who wanted to use it to publish fiction and art photography and things like that. And that was around the time that I started working there. And it was actually like a really cool era to be there. Then it goes from goes from comedy vice to literary vice to news vice. That's around the time that the HBO thing. Is that when Spike Jones came along? He came along Well, he was always in the background. Oh, was he? Um, but he came along more during the Viceland pivot as someone that was like in the office every day. I don't really think that he had all that much of a Okay. I mean, I think he probably got paid well, but I don't know that that he uh played all that much of a role other than um yeah. So, um so the then there's news and that's around the time where they start to have mainstream appeal and everyone's saying like, "Oh, this is real news. This is the real news network." And then they get hit hard by culture war um propriety concerns because the edgginess that they' built their brand on suddenly became deeply unfashionable and dangerous reputationally. So they have to pivot to some kind of like social concern. There was actually like a I don't know if you there's a journalist Michael Moyahan who um wrote a great piece and did an interview with Barry Weiss about this about this kind of pivotal moment where uh young employees advice decided that the old covers of the magazine were too offensive to be displayed and so they all had to be moved out of the lobby into the private office of Souche who was one of the founders of the company and and I was there while this was happening and I remember it I remember seeing it and thinking that it was unsettling but also just ignoring it but he was I think correct to point out that this was uh indicative of rot within the company where you have you have the employees saying um your entire this entire company is so offensive that we can't look at what it has created um and you know they start making increasingly bad stuff after I left It became um kind of like one of the premier sources of anti-csychedelic journalism. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Wow. Again, anti-csychedelic shrouded in sort of social justice type concerns because this is we were talking about like the scientistic orientation of drug scares in the '90s that shifted in the 21st century to a moralistic orientation. And so now if you want to scare people away from using MDMA, you don't say, "Hey, it's going to make holes in your brain." You say, "Hey, this is a tool of capitalist oligarchs who are trying to commodify your spirit and make you a more efficient worker while funding the genocide in Gaza." Right. Right. And creating super soldiers. And this is a tool of the imperialist American war machine. Right. And so this is the new and people say, "Oh, okay. Oh, that you're right then. MDMA is bad. Thank you so much for telling me this important information." So, so it's important to recognize that the anti-drug messaging evolves with the culture and what the culture wants. In the '9s, they wanted medical scientistic explanations for why not to use drugs. Now, it's about moralistic explanations for why drugs are bad. So, why don't you use cocaine? It's not because there was a rat with a lever and he pushed that darn lever until he died and you don't want to end up like that rat. That's what you'd say in the 80s or 90s. Now, it's like, so you want to you want to participate in the exploitation of Latin American workers who could be enslaved by the cartel and you're going to get high off of this this blood money, this product when of course all this is a product of prohibition and and this whole idea this this is one of the issues with moralism and with scientism is that they can both obscure the real issues, right? That's not to say that there aren't actual moral concerns with certain types of drug consumption, but moralism has been weaponized very effectively by commercial interests and by government interests. Right? You even see this now with like the White House Twitter page, right? And they do that like weird cartoon of the crying woman and it's like very You see this? I haven't seen this. It's like kind of it's like this there's like an ICE um an ICE on their Twitter, the White House Twitter page. the White House Twitter page has an image of like an ICE person arresting a crying Mexican woman and it's like it's like a very um superficially inhumane creepy image and you look at it and you think ooh that's kind of an odd look like arresting a crying woman like what is what is going on here? But then it's like, well, this is a fentinel dealer. And then you say, oh, oh, okay. Oh, oh, wow. A fentinel dealer. It's a fentinel. Okay. There's a fentinel dealer. Okay. Yes. Yes. Yes. And and again, the point here, I'm not saying, is that fentinel is always good. But by using that, by using the word fentinel, suddenly you can completely change the interpretation of an image that would immediately be recognized as um sort of unsettling and inhumane, right? And these these things are weaponized very very effectively and it's important to recognize them and see how they have become tools. Right? I I did this thing for my podcast where I covered a trial in the DEA headquarters which was oriented around prohibiting two obscure psychedelics. So obscure that they for one of them were not able to provide any peer-reviewed scientific evidence that a human being had ever consumed it. Right? So, we're talking insanely [ __ ] obscure. When was this? This was recently. This was like maybe four or five months ago. Okay. I covered the entire trial. So, it was it was a twoe trial and it was like a a a group of scientists who were petitioning the DEA not to prohibit this extremely obscure scientific research chemical called DOI. Okay. And what I saw going to DEA headquarters every day for this hearing was up close and personal the entire propaganda mechanism at play, right? You walk through this lobby and it's like faces of fentinel. Faces of And yeah. Yeah. And it's all these little these photos and and I was looking through them and thinking, "Huh, this is interesting. Faces of fentinel." And then I'm looking and and it's like really really old people. So it will be like Janice taken by fentinel age 87 or something. I'm thinking like what's the story with Janice? There's no how did Janice die of a fentinel overdose but there's no context. Then I looked at the website and realized that this is like you can just submit random [ __ ] There's no verification of anything. These are just things that have been submitted and that there was even someone uh a mother whose son was used in this campaign without her understanding. So it's like right off the bat you're being hit with a literal wall of propaganda that is all oriented. They have they have a a golden fentinel chandelier in the office. Is this it? Is this the hallway? Yeah. Yeah, that's it. That's it. Jesus, dude. Whoa. Look at that. Look at the one with the on the very left. Very bottom left, Steve. Yeah. Yeah, that's that's bizarre. That's exactly what I'm referring to. Forever. So then there's like forever 2 forever 88. Um anyway, as you can see, this is just very I'm not saying people don't die from fentinil. Obviously they do, but this is also without question propaganda that is neglecting to recognize the real reason that people are dying of fentinil overdoses, which is prohibition and a lack of regulation of the drug market where people are driven to use completely unregulated, uncontrolled black market substances that might be contaminated with fentinil. And with fentinil, it's actually like amazing that this is their chosen propaganda tool because it's the worst possible example. This is a drug that most people don't even want to do, right? They've surveyed people and said, "Do you want to use fentinil?" The majority of people don't want to use fentinil. So, how lucky for the government, you have a substance that people don't even want to do, and yet this is a problem. Well, then you have to ask yourself, how did we develop a problem with people using a drug that they don't want to use, right? My fellow men, if you've lost your hair, that doesn't mean you can't find it again. Try Hims hair loss solutions and you'll be joining hundreds of thousands of subscribers who found their hair again without ever leaving their couch. Here's the deal. Hims offers doctor approved clinically backed treatments like finasteride and minoxidil. The good stuff that's proven to actually regrow your hair in 3 to 6 months. Whether you're into chewables, pills, sprays, or serums, they've got a solution that fits your vibe. No awkward doctor visits, no waiting rooms. Just answer a few quick questions online and a medical provider will see if the treatment is right for you. And if it is, they'll ship it straight to your door for free. No insurance, no problem. One low price covers everything from treatments to ongoing care. And with hundreds of thousands of happy customers, HIMS is pretty much the go-to for getting thicker, fuller hair, and your confidence. Why wait? Hims has you covered, literally. Start your free online visit today at hims.com/danny. That's hs.com/dny for your personalized hair loss treatment options. hymns.com/danny. Results vary based on studies of topical and oral minoxidil and finasteride. Prescription products require an online consultation with a healthcare provider who will determine if a prescription is appropriate. Restrictions apply. See website for full details and important safety information. Make your hair great again with him. And the answer is prohibition created this. It's their fault that this has happened. like if people had access to I mean I thinkratom actually represents one example of like you know it's kind of gray market right you can't buy it on Amazon or anything like that yeah I mean conceivably you could but maybe Bezos doesn't want to dip into it but yeah it's it's you can buy at any gas station yeah and I and I think that while there are problems associated with it I do think that having a semi-regulated supply of an opioid relative to just totally untested ed totally unregulated powders represents a step in the right direction where people will still get into trouble but you'll have a much smaller number of overdose deaths. I mean, the the bigger issue, of course, is that I I alluded to this earlier, and it's maybe a controversial statement to say that drugs aren't the cause of drug problems, but when you look at 2021, a record number of drug overdose deaths in the United States. You have more people dying of drug overdose deaths than ever before in history. That was the like the height of the pandemic, right? Yeah. And that's I I would say that that's probably not a coincidence where we're going to blame the Sackler family for that. I think that there's I think you had a very clear indication. Everyone knew that opioids were addictive. There were endless news stories about it. And so if you're going to say, "Oh, the the Sacklers pulled pulled the wool over everybody's eyes and nobody knew that opioids were addictive by 2021. That's not a valid argument anymore. Everybody [ __ ] knew." And yet you have record you have record awareness and record overdoses. So what's different? The difference is there's a [ __ ] pandemic and everyone is miserable and unemployed and isolated and atomized and sitting in front of their computer feeling lonely and sad and they are psychologically ultra susceptible to developing drug problems. Wow. Yeah, that's that's wild, man. That's an interesting interesting way of putting it. I I mean, just one quick story and it actually involves Thomas. I don't think you'd mind me telling the story. I think it's it's like so Thomas and I live together and Thomas Thomas Thomas's father uh died from cancer and he was in a very typical scenario that people are in when they have a loved one die of cancer. His his father had been prescribed morphine for the cancer pain and I remember him coming back to the apartment that we were living in. He had this big bottle full of these blue 5 mgram morphine sulfate tablets. It was just like completely full. And he put it on the counter and he said, "Uh, help yourself. You know, you can have as many as you want." And I took one. I thought it was okay. It made me really constipated. I wasn't really into it. And that was it. That was the end of my experimentation with morphine sulfate. Thomas, on the other hand, became addicted to morphine. Oh, wow. So we have two people living in the exact same apartment with the exact same access to the exact same drug. Yet one of them becomes dependent and the other one doesn't. Wow. Why is that? If it were just the drug, wouldn't we both have become equally dependent on the morphine? We both had access to the same bottle. But it wasn't just the drug. Thomas was going through a lot of emotional pain as a result of losing his father. I was in a relatively emotionally stable situation and was less susceptible to addiction for that reason. So if you deny all these psychological, environmental, social aspects of addiction, you're fundamentally misrepresenting the problem and you'll never help anyone. And everyone is different in um regards to like their chemical makeup too, right? like depending on like emotions or what their lifestyle is, like we're like these bags of hormones and different chemicals that is constantly fluctuating. Like we're never in a solid state. Oh, absolutely. Right. Right. So like drugs are going to interact with everybody differently. Right. Right. So like I experience extremely severe hangovers. Like I could have three drinks. Same here. And I would the next day I would be just off. I would the next day would be useless. I wouldn't be like vomiting and you know have like a splitting headache. I would just feel like [ __ ] kind of. Yeah. Other people can have five drinks with lunch and it's nothing. So, they're fundamentally responding to this in a different way as a result of likely genetic metabolic differences between us. So, the punishing effect of the alcohol hangover just doesn't apply to them as much. And those same people are going to be more susceptible to alcoholism. Yeah. So, there's a lot of factors. Mhm. Um, I've always found it so interesting how people people I know I have friends that are can function and live their lives and are ultra successful in their lives that can go dayto-day doing like hard drugs. Like I'm talking about like ambient cocaine. Ambient? Yeah. You call ambient a hard drug for me? Yeah, I would call a hard drug. I'm I'm super like lightweight. I'm a I'm a [ __ ] when it comes to drugs. But like I have friends like that that can just function off this stuff and do it every single day. And I'm not talking just ambient. I'm talking like I'm talking going from ambient to aderall to cocaine to vicodins and and muscle relaxers like all in the course of a day and they're like like arguably they're more with it than I am. Oh yeah. Yeah. Well, you become tolerant as well. That's the other thing. But yeah, I mean the way you describe it you make it sound crazy but to me it's crazy. Yeah. But, you know, people drink coca tea in a lot of South America. They're consuming cocaine every day. It's not a big deal. It kind of depends on the culture, how you're doing it, what the dose is. I mean, people take 80 milligrams of aderall a day. It's [ __ ] crazy to me, dude. But, but for those people, it's just normal in the same way that nicotine very rapidly becomes just normal. Right now, if I were to take that that zen that's uh staring at you that's staring at me intently from over there, I um it would be wild. It would be it would be really Oh, yeah. Yeah. It would be wild. Wow. It would be a wild ride that I will not take. And uh because I have no tolerance. I stopped using nicotine um for now. I may I may be back, but it's been a little while and I'm going to see how far I can go with this. And um and how's it been so far? It's been fine. You can live without it. Um have you did you notice any any sort of crash or any sort of like withdrawal? A little a little bit. Yeah. But that's useful as well, I think, is to to actually analyze what it is that you feel that you're missing, what it is that it was doing for you. because it's not always entirely intuitive. I mean, I felt that way with cannabis. I don't think I would have really known, but for me, and I think for a lot of people, I would use it just to like reduce my annoyance or anger. That became the kind of thing is like you're annoyed, you're angry, smoke some weed, chill out. But then again, it's sort of like taking ambient to go to sleep. A typical life involves numerous occasions where you feel annoyance. And if you don't develop a healthy way of contending with annoying situations, you're just going to be all bent out of shape. Sure. Yeah. But what I was like, like when I was explaining my buddies that I know that use ambient to go to sleep and aderall to wake up every day. I was like, it feels like to me you're just burning the candle at both ends and it can't be it can't be a healthy way to exist. But somehow these people manage to not only exist but thrive. Yeah. Which is I don't know. That's just to me it's just it's kind of unfathomable. You can do it. I don't it's whether or not it's good just depends on so many factors. I would say all else equal. It's probably better not to. But again, you do have people that struggle horribly with insomnia. Maybe if they just take 5 milligs of Zulpadm before bed. Mhm. It's better for them. It just kind of depends. For me is I travel a lot and when I'm traveling I'm always working and so it never feels like oh I'm just going to tough it out and not sleep before a strictly scheduled chemistry project where every day matters. Like it just feels too again but this is my rationalization. There's too much at stake. I can't like I'm about to go on a big chemistry voyage and it's like you better believe you got to put some high octane gas in your body before you do that. Yeah, it makes sense. Yeah. My my one of my buddies in particular that uh uses ambient a lot. He he'll explain to me sometimes how he has like he's he has security cameras all over his house. So he'll like fight the urge to go to sleep after he takes the ambient and he'll go into uh one of the rooms in his house where he has a monitor that shows all of his cameras. And he said he'll be staring at like his driveway camera and he'll see like a a unicorn walk across the driveway and he like hallucinates on it. Yeah, that can happen often. It doesn't tend to I had a little bit of that when I first used it once you become a little bit tolerant to it. The dominant effect is a sort of ultra disinhibited delirium. So that's like the kind of Roseanne Bar type situation where you're you're like tweeting some crazy [ __ ] that you don't remember. Like that's the real So it's not so much for most people that they start seeing unicorns. It's more like your entire sense of social professional caution goes out the window because you're just totally disinhibited. M you know you have these examples of people like masturbating on planes or things like that and it's like they're often on [ __ ] like ambient. Yeah. And it and I could imagine it I could imagine how like on one hand you could see someone being a sex criminal and using that as an excuse. On the other hand I could see it's crazily disinhibiting. It really it really does whack you out. What was the story with Tiger Woods taking ambient? It was like a he used it as like a sexual enhancement or something, right? Yeah. I think one of his mistresses said that he had quote crazy ambient sex. That's a direct verbatim quote. Oh my god. H how do you chemically and pharmacologically explain that? It's basically it's binding to the same site on the GABA A receptor as a bzzoazipene with maybe a little bit more selectivity. So it's not so different from Xanax or colonopen. The main difference with ambient is that it is metabolized very very very quickly. So if you take something like Valium before you go to sleep, you'll still be under the influence of it when you wake up in the morning. Whereas ambient and related Z drugs have been chemically engineered in such a way that they're very rapidly metabolized with the intentionally with the idea being that you won't have any morning groggginess because 2 hours after taking it it's already largely then excreted or metabolized bot transformed. Okay. Hopefully not excreted if you're sleeping. Right. Yeah. Um going back to the fentanyl thing. Yeah. There was tons of stories a couple years ago of like I forget where I saw this piece, but I I read this this really long essay on this fentanyl epidemic that we're seeing people dying from doing coke that's accidentally laced with fentanyl. And there was this um theory that people had that somehow China was shipping fentanyl and teaching these chemists in Mexico and South American countries to use fentanyl to make their co or mix it in with their cocaine to somehow kill Americans. And then this person did this really long piece that laid out the case where he he said that he went and tried cocaine in various cities throughout the United States, right? Like he went to he got went to some highlevel dealers that sold cocaine to like rich people and welloff, you know, white collar folks. And then he went to like some inner cities and bought cocaine from, you know, like street dealers. And he also, I think, tested it. And what he found was that the cocaine that was laced with fentanyl was sold by people who were also selling heroin because I guess you mix fentanyl with or you mix heroin with fentanyl. So his his theory on this was that like okay these very low-level dealers are selling heroin, fentanyl, all this other stuff, but the like the people that are selling coke to like rich people, they're not selling heroin. So the low-level people are like mixing the coke and the heroin on the same table and there's accidentally getting a little bit of fentanyl into that cocaine by accident. And that would potentially describe those fentanyl overdoses with people doing coke. Yeah, that would seem like the simplest explanation to me that there's just some crosscontamination occurring. Yeah. Um it's possible that there's some intentional adulteration. The idea of doing something like that has existed for a long time. There's even a a cigarette brand that had opium in it at one point. But after that, then there was a a tobacco industry internal letter that was released to the public that was kind of interesting where they it was I can't remember what tobacco company it was, but they were talking about the concern that competitors would put this drug in to cigarettes. So, they weren't suggesting doing it themselves. They were saying, what was the drug called? It yeah which is like a so-called Bentley compound. These are ultra potent opioids that are sort of chemically related to morphine. Um at that time it was a very a fentinyl not chemically related to fentinyl but similar in terms of its potency. Um but so the idea was the same. What if somebody put a essentially micro dose of a high potency opioid into cigarettes in order to make them even more addictive? So people have tossed around that idea with fentinel. I don't actually know that this is really so common. It's talked about all the time, but you have to be very careful with and it does occur. I'm not saying it never occurs, but um I I'd want to really have a better sense of how prevalent this is because it's the sort of thing that people will talk about and report on because it's sort of sensational and frightening. But is this really uh a widespread issue? Right. I'm not entirely convinced. Yeah. I heard also, what is this, Steve? 1977 scientist at BAT Industries PLC explored adding a highly Oh, this is what Hamilton's talking about. Wow. Um and I've read the primary document that's referred to. Yeah. Yeah. I I saw a story I forget where I saw it. It might have been from um Luis Chaparo was telling me that there was a story basically of a cartel like the head of the car one of the cartels in Mexico like hung somebody from a street sign and put a message on there like warning people of mixing their coke with fentanyl saying this is what happens if you guys will mix fentanyl with the cocaine like you're going to hang because it's not good for business. It probably isn't good for business, right? That's what I would imagine. Like if you're selling Coke to people, you don't want them to be dying. They're not going to be buying any more of your coke, right? But the other thing is you get into this weird cycle where a drug like fentinil is associated with fatal overdoses. That's pretty much the only thing people ever say about fentinil is that it's killing people. And so when somebody dies of a drug overdose, everybody thinks that's fentinil because fentinil is the drug that kills people. So you get this selfreinforcing cycle and I've seen this happen personally on a number of occasions where somebody dies of a drug overdose, everyone says that it's fentinil and then the toxicology comes back and it was heroin, something like that. So people still die of drug overdoses and it's important again I think people will often misinterpret what I'm saying and they'll say, "Oh, he's like a fentinil apologist who's saying nobody dies of fentinel." They absolutely do. But the point is if you decide that every drug problem is a product of fentinil then you will misconstrue the problem and may fail to recognize that while the problems with fentinil are real it has also become a major propaganda tool. M I was reading this crazy story in uh I forget what magazine it was, but it was a story basically about how um one of the head guys of the Rolling Stones was talking about how back in the day they used to get this uh pharmaceutical grade cocaine from Merc. Mhm. And uh he said they would just use it all the time and like they would have like lines of it chocked up behind the speakers and the amplifiers during live shows and it was incredible because there was no withdrawal afterwards. There was no like you never came down. It was just like you could do this coke all day long all the time, you know, feel yourself through these eight hour shows and and uh no downside. Absolutely zero downside. And they somehow got like loads of it from Merc, this like pharmaceutical grade cocaine that apparently came from the Nazis, right? I think this also speaks to the the way that people project associations onto a drug and that can change the nature of the drug experience. So maybe that's the case that this is but also you could imagine having a bottle of pharmaceutical cocaine and being impressed by it and thinking oh this is the real stuff this is very very good and then because of this association with purity and goodness then you don't have a come down and people do this all the time don't feel dirty right it's pharmaceutical grade right right so people do this all the time with alcohol where they'll they'll say oh that's you know the like of course you get a hangover with the terrible alcohol but this is some like really nice this is some nice stuff. What gives you a hangover from alcohol is alcohol. So, so, so you know, and I'm not saying that there couldn't be some, you know, minor contribution from sugar or whatever, but if it were the sugar, then anyone that ate a piece of candy would have a hangover the next day, which is not typically the case. So, um, yeah, it's the alcohol that is responsible, but people will buy into these ideas about how like a really high purity alcohol is not going to produce a hangover or whatever. So, it's the same people do this all the time. You're talking about basically placebo, right? Like, yeah. Well, the interesting thing about placebo or expectation is that these factors exist even in the presence of an active substance. So people always talk about placebo as if those factors only exist when you give somebody a sugar pill or something that's pharmacologically inactive. But those same expectation effects apply even in the presence of a pharmacologically active substance which can make it very difficult to interpret clinical trial results. I mean this is why anytime you're working with the human mind in that way there's so many complicating factors that have to be taken into consideration. Um, so is it possible that their pharmaceutical cocaine um was vastly superior to whatever street cocaine they were getting at that time, which maybe was methamphetamine or it's possible or it's possible that the the idea of a hyper pure pharmaceutical product allowed them to experience it differently? Yeah. How much how much of an effect do you think that has on psychedelics? A huge. Really? Huge. Yeah. Yeah. because I noticed that I think one of the most illuminating things about your um your trip to Haiti when you when you documented that tribe and the voodoo I think it was like a voodoo ritual society in Haiti that they were obsessed with this and this goes back to like that rainbow serpent thing where they they had this puffer fish venom that is like 160,000 times more potent in a certain alkaloid that is in cocaine or something like that and it paralyzes you, paralyzes your whole body and sometimes is f or a lot of the times it's fatal. But like these people they have this spiritual religious belief right in voodoo and that these things happen and that they create zombies or whatever. So, so that has a huge like that dictates how they react to these drugs because they're so their culture goes back, you know, who who knows how far it goes back, but um they really believe in this stuff and they believe they and they they have extreme expectations to how or what's going to happen once they take these drugs or engage in these rituals, right? And so the hypothesis that this ethnobbotnist Wayde Davis had was just for those that aren't familiar that using a combination of this puffer fish toxin TTX and scapoleamine you could effectively convince somebody that they had died and been revived as a zombie. And people outside of Haiti were very skeptical of this claim because it wouldn't work on you. It wouldn't work on me. Why are we supposed to expect that it's going to work on them? And Wayde Davis's counterargument was that the effect of a drug is not just pure pharmarmacology, but it's dependent on the cultural matrix in which the drug is consumed. And if you administer this drug in a culture where people believe in zombies and believe in resuscitation and believe in all of these things that you can induce this effect and I think it's inadequately studied. There really isn't a lot of corroborating evidence. It hasn't been tested by How do you study that? you know, you'd have to go back and spend more time with voodoo practitioners and and take more samples and really critically evaluate it. But I I think that it's inadequately documented to say with certainty that this was a a widespread phenomenon. I think that fundamentally WDE Davis's hypothesis is plausible. Mhm. Um I wouldn't go as far as to say what was his hypothesis that zombification is a ritual in Haiti that involves the administration of puffer fish that contains a toxin TTX that causes a death-like paralysis. The victim is buried alive and thinks that they have died. They are then exumed and given scapoleamine where they are kept in a sort of pharmacologically zombified state and enslaved by the voodoo sorcerer the boor. So this is like this was the idea. Um and it's pretty outlandish but it's plausible. I mean, so the book has control of them after they become a zombie, right? It's like it's like a a way of convincing somebody that they are your slave. And again, people say, "Oh, that's crazy." I mean, there's cults and religions all around the world that do things that are not that different. So if you create a system of belief that allows somebody to think that it is real and this is what needs to be done, people do all kinds of weird stuff. Um so I I do think that what he was proposing is a possibility, how widespread it is, that's another question. Maybe it was a one-off thing, maybe it never happened, but I think that fundamentally what he was describing was possible. Yes, it seems like um there wasn't there a study that was done um I think it was with John Hopkins where they were trying to give psychedelics to different religious groups or people like leaders of different religions and seeing how the psychedelic affected them or like what their experiences was what their experience was based on their religious worldview. Yeah. Yeah, there was. Yeah. This was this the famous study that was never released that Travis Kitchens wrote about, I think. Yeah. Yeah. Have you had him on? Yeah, I have. Oh, cool. Oh, yeah. He blew my [ __ ] mind, dude. He's got I mean he's got Well, he did you talk about Was this recently? Yes, this was like maybe a month ago. Oh, okay. Did you talk about the the symposia stuff at all? What's that the symposia stuff? Cuz he was one of the He talked about it. I mean, we talked about everything. There was nothing that I don't think he held back on anything. Oh man. What's the Well, if he didn't talk about it, I don't know that I want to I'm sure he did. Like, I just don't know. Well, there was an activist group. This comes back to what I was saying at the beginning about people being very careful about how they're being manipulated by journalists and these drug issues. So, there was this activist group that Travis Kitchens was actually a part of, an anti-drug activist group. Um, and they had people who were, I think, like entirely cynical in their orientation. And then they had people like Travis Kitchens who were not cynical in their orientation but were looking for a place an outlet for a critique of maybe capitalism or forprofit motivations in psychedelic research something like that like you know there I'm not suggesting that there's no valid criticisms of psychedelic research or anything like that there absolutely are. The issue is that a lot of the people who are engaged with critical psychedelic thought are [ __ ] nuts and are like ultimately anti-drug in their orientation and so they kind of contaminate the entire movement, right? It's like in the same way that there's like valid objections to almost everything, but it's like there's valid objections to smoking weed, but if somebody's like life is oriented around being anti-weed, chances are there's something kind of weird about their reasoning there. This I think this similar thing happened with psychedelics. So, there was this group and they um sort of terrorized the psychedelic community um stalking people essentially. anytime I gave a talk, one of them would either be there online or in person to harass me. This went on for years and I was um always thinking like damn, you know, these psychedelic conferences are very expensive. The tickets cost like hundreds of dollars often and I'd think who the how the [ __ ] are they? I can't even afford to go to these things and I'm being paid to go to them. So So how are these people going to these conferences just to harass me? like what is what is going on? Like wouldn't it be interesting if they were being paid by someone? And this was something that I was an idea that I had been toying with for a while, but it's a very paranoid idea that I felt uncomfortable talking about publicly because it's just a bad road to go down the the like your your ops are paid. Yeah. You just don't want to be that guy. So, but I'd had a number of these things happen that were very actually a lot of things happen like I another example would be I um was giving a talk at this New York City psychedelic conference um had nothing to do I because I was working at this lab in Philadelphia that was receiving funding research funding from a pharmaceutical company um to develop new psychedelic drugs. So the talk had nothing to do with that. It was actually just about how different psychedelic drugs are made. Then afterwards, this woman uh speaks during the Q&A. She has a prepared statement and um then she's like, "I want you to answer before this audience whether you think your pharmaceutical company's polymorph B is truly a novel invention, and if not, what are you giving back to the indigenous people of the world?" Oh my god. And and like the audience erupts into applause. And I was thinking like, oh wow, whoa. I mean, this is just nonsense. the work that I was doing had nothing to do with indigenous people or indigenous knowledge and this uh patent that she was referring to had nothing to do with any of the work that I was doing. So, I was thinking and the stage lights were in my eyes and I couldn't I couldn't see who the person was, but I was thinking like, wouldn't it be [ __ ] crazy if she were an employee of a competing pharmaceutical company and they were just weaponizing their employees using moralism to try to interfere with the competitor's drug development. Wow. But it's like this is the sort of thing you don't even want to say this out loud, right? Like, so, so I kind of made peace with this. I was like, it would be crazy, but you will never know, right? You will never know. And it's better to just assume that that isn't the case because you'll go crazy if you even think that thought. M but then I found the dissertation the PhD thesis that was written by the woman who asked this question which has a transcription of her asking the question and acknowledging that she was the one that did this and she was an employee of the uh opposing pharmaceutical company Eona. Yes. Yes. actually. Yes. And thanks the CEO, the billionaire CEO of the company in the beginning of her PhD dissertation. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. So, it's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. This was really crazy. This was one of these like, oh [ __ ] it's real. Like, it's real. It's actually real. And this is the sort of thing that's going on. So this company Eona was very very good about employing people who would harass business opposition using moralism as their technique. they uh branched their pharmaceutical company into there's a for-profit, one of the owners has a for-profit called Seruvia and then they have all these nonprofit arms that are oriented toward um supposedly preventing the approval of bad patents that just happen to be patents of all of their pharmaceutical competitors, right? It's it's really actually kind of amazing. And so they they promote the work of any journalist who is writing anything negative about their competitors. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. And it turned out that one of the executives at Eona was paying um or had paid one of the members of this group that Travis Kitchens was a member of to again also harass their opposition. It's pretty wild. Oh my god. And and the same person, I don't know if you follow Michael Pollen, but the same person is Michael Pollen's major informant in all of his psychedelic reporting. And that bias is very much evident in all of Michael Pollen stuff as well. So there's some wild Yeah, there's some really wild stuff going on. And this is this is like a real example of this sort of thing happening. That's an example of the YouTube comments becoming true. Because if you read YouTube comments of a lot of podcasts, you'll people always speculate that this person's an op working for this person. Like that's like the number one foundational conspiracy, right? I feel like that exists in comments of people that say anything intelligent or anything interesting. Like you always they always say, "Okay, this person's a, you know, working for this person. They're a paid informant for this company or this country or whatever." Yeah. Yeah. Which is funny. And people do that to me. It's funny because as an impulse it's not necessarily a bad thing to do. The issue is that they often get it wrong. So this Eona thing um is a very extreme example and it's now 100% confirmed that this occurred and not a single journalist has ever publicly discussed this. The only narrative that has ever been publicly promoted has been Eona's narrative, which they promote through association with the grants that are given to journalists to report on psychedelics. Right. There there's actually like a and and again the way that I'm describing this, I want to be very cautious and not suggest that it's like purely calculated. I do think that there's a a complexity in all of this. It's a little bit hard where there's a bit of selfdeception at play. Maybe they really believe what they're saying. Whatever, whatever, whatever. But this is one of the reasons that MDMA was not approved was this group that was in part funded by an executive at Eona, but also um funded actually two executives at Eona, but also funded by a major anti-csychedelic organization called the Sarlo Family Foundation that Sarlo Yeah, I've heard of them. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So they they fund like most of the anti-csychedelic um people at the moment. Yeah, Travis was telling me about that family. Yeah, it's a very interesting story actually behind all it's this [ __ ] is fascinating and it's kind of sad to me that no journalists have covered it. A lot of people that even dip a toe in the water get sued. I might I hope you know it's it's like you have to be the people that How could they sue you if you dip your to like just to talk just people talking about it or like they're they're saying they're being defamed or something? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you can just legally harass people very easily. Harass people with lawsuits. Yeah. Yeah. And and they know this. So, um Yeah. And this is all to say, I saw all this play out and it was one of the most shocking things I've ever seen. It was mindblowing. Um and you can see the some of the stuff on YouTube, right? So, if you go to the YouTube um MDMA advisory committee hearing, you can see some of these people who were being paid by the SARL family foundation to run an anti-MDMA campaign lying to the FDA and getting away with it. um including the the main person was this this woman Nishay Devono um who had was sort of the head of the anti-MDMA campaign. Um and she just was firing off [ __ ] at a rate so fast that no one could even contend. She's saying that the MAPS, the company that was developing MDMA as a treatment for PTSD, was a therapy cult. She was saying that one of the therapists had pinned down a patient. Well, the patient screamed, "Get your [ __ ] hands off of me." But this was like a completely decontextualized snippet of a account of a ketamine therapy session that had nothing to do with MAPS. That was not at all what she described. It was like the patient was reliving the trauma of having been abused by their father and was speaking to the memory of their father saying, "Get your [ __ ] hands off of me." Wow. So, it's that kind of Anyway, this stuff is messy. It's a messy big story. But the reason that I even bring it up and why are they so anti anti- psychedelics and anti-MDMA and all this stuff? Like, why? Like, is it is it some sort of like personal moral thing that they truly believe or is it something is it having to do with money? Oh, money is a big a big I think it it transcends money, but money is a big part of it. Money, I think because they can't sell it. They can't they they they wouldn't be able to make it their own product and and commercialize it themselves. No. Okay. There's there's different This is kind of a a bag of a can of worms. Um and and I could like try to breeze through it. It's a lot of names that people won't know, but the basic is that there's there's two different groups that were primarily responsible. One is the SARL family, and the story there is really convoluted and bizarre, but it was that this millionaire Holocaust survivor had been given MDMA by a MAPS employee and had this cathartic emotional release of the trauma that he experienced during the Holocaust and decided that he wanted to leave a portion of his fortune to MAPS. And this enraged his estranged daughter who stood to inherit that money and also felt um hurt that her father had had this um sort of emotional connection with this other woman. I don't think there's any evidence that it was sexual. And so she then can and then her father also is very old and in the midst of this controversy develops Alzheimer's disease. So he's effectively taken out of the conversation. So now it's an issue of was this elder abuse and a sort of Anna Nicole Smith type exploitation scenario or was this somebody who truly had this healing experience and due to weird internal conflict within his family, um, this turned into a problem, right? Anyway, the whatever the case may be, and I of course lean toward the more likely scenario being that he actually had a cathartic emotional release from using MDMA and that he genuinely considered this experience valuable and that he was not being manipulated, although I wasn't there. Don't know. um whatever the case may be. His foundation then began to fund anti- psychedelic reporting and and so that was uh very odd. Yeah, very very odd. The other one is a bit more familiar and it's which is that Eona is developing um psilocybin and so if they can position themselves as morally superior to their competitors by funding opposition or sicking their employees or the people that they're paying onto anybody that is potentially critical of them, then it's good for their business. That's simple. That's, you know, right? An old story. Yeah. It's just like this crazy sort of political corporation shadow war that's going on where they're manipulating the media and doing whatever they can to prop themselves up. Yeah. And I I really feel bad for well-intentioned people that are stuck in the middle of this because it's really hard because I know that many well-intentioned people have gotten caught up in it. Like there's um an interesting story in the New York Times where they're kind of covering some of these things and you can tell that the the journalist who I've spoken with a tiny bit just bought the the story, right? There's like this, you know, they they're photographing one of the representatives of the pharmaceutical company, but they never mention that he's even an employee or an executive at the pharmaceutical company. It's pretty weird. How did that happen? I guess they didn't ask or whatever. And then they and they're very good at creating these fake things that they've done to help people that sound good until you really think about it. Like they'll say, "Oh, you know, well, we've done this amazing work. We actually were able to shoot down a patent for Viagra and MDMA as a combination therapy." And you think and you think like, "Oh, thank you so much for for your What's wrong with Viagra mixed with MDMA? It sounds like an amazing drug." Okay, so you get it. Yeah. So I mean they're saying oh it's not a sufficiently novel invention therefore it shouldn't be patentable but it's like what have you even achieved here this is not a thing that exists you just prevented someone from developing this as a medicine nobody has been helped by this in any way but you if you frame it the right way credulous journalists will say like oh good work sir for your uh for your advocacy anyway this is a is a whole crazy thing but this has been a big big story and it's been disheartening to me to see how hard it has been for the journalists that have even tried to draw attention to any of this. um really like there's two journalists Rachel Newer and John Semley who've really worked very hard to do this but the majority of journalists have just uncritically repeated the narrative um as it has been presented to the public by many of the people who are responsible for creating this mess to begin with. M um yeah. Yeah. One of the other one of the ma main things that Travis was explaining to me when he was on here was um the he was explaining how there are all these different groups that are trying to use psychedelics to their advantage. And the one that he was pointing out was the Catholic Church and um how there's certain people that want to sort of use psychedelics to revive Christianity or revive the the church and to give these church fathers the power to give the churchgoers psychedelics to because they would it would be able to make people more enthusiastic about God or about religion which in their estimation would make be good for the country would make people more in line with one's spiritual belief but like what Travis was pointing out is how [ __ ] dangerous that is when you give these people who are believed to be the connection to God the power of giving these people psychedelics where they're probably already these people are probably, you know, already vulnerable and now you're giving them psychedelics and you have the and you have a direct connection to God and you can tell them whatever you want. Like that seems like a very dangerous slippery idea. And um I think one of the people one of the people that he talks about is Brian Marescu in the immortality key book. And uh um Travis interviewed um Aman Hillman and Carl Ruck who are both sources for that immortality key book that Brian Morescu did. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And uh he I allegedly Brian didn't tell either of them his ultimate aim of that book, which according to Travis was that it would be a great idea to infuse psychedelics into the church. Yeah. And then Carl was very upset about this um from what I hear. like I don't I haven't talked to him or Brian about this. This is just what I'm learning from Travis and from Ammon is that um you know he wasn't happy about that. And there's also pictures of uh Brian that was in Travis's article giving the pope a copy of his book. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I read and I really enjoyed Travis's article and I hung out with Brian and like him as well. So yeah, he seems like a very nice guy. Yeah. So, I I'm sort of um sympathetic to both sides of that. I would say maybe there's a less nefarious implementation of psychedelics in the church. Maybe it could revitalize Christianity in a way that wouldn't necessarily be bad. It's obviously not my thing, right? Um, I have complicated feelings about religion because, you know, I'm a pretty I I think socially a lot of harms have come from religious thought and generally it's not really my vibe. But at the same time, I do think that our culture is atomized and lacking any kind of um any kind of unified goals and having a sort of uh culture system that and a value system that people can connect with one another through can be beneficial. You know, I think about like my my grandmothers or things like that and and how uh socially beneficial religion was for them in their old age and it provides a community that's really missing from a lot of people's lives. So, there's there's there's good things. Um there's also countless examples of exactly this sort of problem that Travis is describing existing where psychedelics are used as tools of manipulation. Um, I'm actually pretty close friends with the guy that was in a psychedelic cult and it really [ __ ] him up. Um, and it [ __ ] him up in complicated ways. Like it's it's not really the story that you typically hear about things like this where and and some of it I think is so sensitive to him that he's never even fully told me. So I have to sort of fill in the blanks a little bit. But I think part of it was that he got involved in this group when he was very young. I think he was maybe like 13, something like that. And he loved psychedelics and they love psychedelics. So right off the bat, you have this thing. Everyone is enjoying this thing that is transformative and transcendent and amazing and interesting. So that part is good. That part is connection. But then the leader of the group is also espousing other values that at least superficially seem good because the psychedelic stuff is good. So he's he's saying, "Oh, you know, it's bad to eat meat or whatever." Okay, fair enough. Bad to eat meat. Okay, psychedelics are good. Eating meat is bad. It's bad to be violent. Okay, also fair enough. Nothing wrong with not being violent. That's good. And on top of that, you have to believe in God and and the Christian Bible. All right. Okay. maybe and uh and also being gay is bad because it's uh not it's not what the Lord wants. So then then you know you start to see how this kind of like and I I suspect that this person was gay and I think that the the homophobic orientation of this particular group um may have broken him out may have really had a detrimental effect on on him. Oh wow. um psychologically because I mean and the same thing can happen without psychedelics, right? That can happen to people just with normal Christianity. But I think that this exacerbated it and there there was even more to it. I don't know that I how much detail I should go into, but there there was more to it that um that taught me a lot of the complexities associated with these things. And this is just part of the difficulty of religion. Like I I don't know that it's necessarily a bad thing. In fact, I think it could be good. But these things are complicated. Yeah. Ammon Hillman, how did you discover him? I'd been familiar with him for a while because you wrote this book, The Chemical Muse. It's quite a while ago, actually. So, I'd read The Chemical Muse, and I felt that most of the ideas that were being articulated in that book were totally believable, not particularly controversial. Um, this idea that there was ancient Greek use of psychoactive substances of one kind or another seemed totally plausible to me. Why wouldn't there be, right? Um, I loved the way he articulated how the the ancient medicine and the ancient drugs, uh, which is like the the the work of Galen, the Galen literature is like 10% of all literature from antiquity, which is crazy that it's medical like literature. He he explained that stuff as um a guide rope that leads you through the dark cave of fairy tales because he he uses the drug the the ancient Greek drug stuff that Galen wrote as context to everything else all the religious stuff that was written about through antiquity which I thought was super interesting. It's very interesting. Yeah. And Hillman is in an interesting position that's sort of analogous to someone like John Allegro where or Brian Morascu um where you have texts that the majority of readers cannot access or translate and so you are essentially blindly basing your interpretation on the authority of someone who you don't know and don't know what their intentions are. And this is the case for a lot of things. Um, you know, it's probably the case for science for most people. I'm lucky in that there is a domain where I'm able to critically assess things and look at the primary evidence and make some kind of a balanced assessment of how likely something is to be true or false. But when it comes to reading Algro or something like that, I don't know. I just don't know. And um when you think about how complicated drugs are in our current society as we've discussed and how you could even look at our entire published record about drugs and so much of it would have additional complexity that wouldn't even be evident to some 1 a thousand years from now maybe right would they would they know that there are additional layers to fentinil as a tool of propaganda or would they just look at the superficial take on this that fentinyl was a problem. Would they understand all of the legal pharmacological complexity involved in all of this? Maybe not. And so it's I always have avoided these debates about ancient practices because I feel that it is so hard to understand what is going on right now. Yeah. that what hope could I possibly have of understanding what was happening thousands of years ago? I don't think you could possibly ever know what was happening thousands of years ago. It's just that he has the most entertaining speculations and translations of what was going on thousands. It's the most fun. And I have to give him credit because I mean first of all I got to give you credit because I didn't know about him until I listened to your podcast with him and I had him on after that and it was like wildly popular episode and um and that like got me really interested in the ancient Greek stuff and I led me on to read a lot more books and stuff on that on that topic. So like at the very least whether like people want to argue whether he's mistransating things or he has his own agenda. I mean, he very obviously self-admittedly has a bias because his dissertation, they told him he had to take all references to recreational drugs out of his PhD dissertation. Right. Right. So, he went on and did that. And then after he got his PhD, he was like, "Fuck this. I'm going to turn that whole part into a book about all the recreational drugs that were happening or that was going on." And then he wrote that um that other book about uh ritual child, which got him in big trouble. And then he got kicked out of the university. So he was like he's like the anti I think he and he was at a religious university. I think it was Wisconsin University of Wisconsin. So like he became like an like an anti-Christian classicist. So he want like he has a built-in bias in his brain that wants to just utterly appall any Christian person, which is arguably exactly what happened to Algro as well. Right. Right. But like a potentially a lot of the stuff he's saying is is pretty spot-on. like a lot of the stuff that he talks about with um with Galen using these um this theak concoction of like seven different viper venoms combined with flesh of vipers and opium in there like and you know like first of all how did they how did he come up with the idea to combine all these venoms and and who did they test them on like he's like like are you like who's going to be the first test subject to try this theak concoction and where did you even come up with the idea in the first place? So it's like I haven't heard I haven't like again I have no way of telling it like knowing if he just pulled that out of his ass or if he really translated it but it's definitely super interesting. It's extremely interesting and it also speaks to a sort of tension that's become prevalent in our culture which is I like to talk to people even if they have really weird beliefs that I don't agree with or whatever. I just think it's interesting to talk to somebody and hear their perspective and it can be an exercise in critical thinking. It can be an encouragement to evaluate the evidence on your own and try to understand why he believes this and why it may be true or may not be true. And I think that's all good, but we in general have this like there's this idea of platforming. Like you by even speaking to somebody, this is a tacid endorsement of their character and all of their beliefs. And so you should only speak to good people who you agree with and any deviation from that represents some kind of uh danger to a free society. That's a bad road to go down. Um, and I think, yeah, I think in general, even if somebody has beliefs that are wrong, there's a lot that can be learned from it that's interesting. I don't know. Again, with Hillman, I think he's so fascinating. I just don't have the time to even attempt to fact check most of the claims that he's making. I did a little bit and it seemed like what what is this word? Lay stace. Lay stace was a trafficker or a pirate I think. Yeah. So there was and then Jesus was in the public park and he's like I'm not a Lace. Right. So it seems that that translation of the word is child trafficker is uh at the very least non-standard. Right. Um right. But then you have to think like is it non-standard? It's non-standard depending on who you talk to as well. like a lot of people have a lot of um this this here's the and here's the thing about Bible scholars too is the majority of Bible scholars sub ascribe to the ascribe to Christianity or whatever religion that is. So, like you're you're dedicating your life to the science of the history of the Bible and you also believe in the Bible as your faith, which is weird. And these people don't want to hear anything that goes against what the conventional explanation of Jesus was, especially if you're labeling him as like a Jeffrey Epstein type character. Right. Right. Right. And then of course the opposite is also true where you have one group of scholars that believe in Christianity and will have a bias in that direction and then you have Hillilman and who's the opposite who I believe satanic. Yeah. Right. Well, he doesn't he doesn't believe Satan was a He thinks Satan's a fairy tale. Okay. He says hail Satan. Yeah. He says that's what I was saying. He says hail Satan. He says hail Satan, but he calls that he got that from Socrates. He calls it the gadfly. He thinks he says hail Satan because it's like a a throat punch to people cuz people people hear and they're like whoa. It like blows them like off of their mind, you know, it gets them like out of their normal frame of thinking like what the [ __ ] And it gets them to pay attention, right? So he thinks it's like provocative and it's uh Yeah. You know, it's interesting. It's fun for him. It's not like he literally is a Satanist. Wouldn't mind if he was, right? No, neither would I. But it's but it's super interesting that he, you know, he thinks it's all a fairy tale. He thinks it all, you know, and and you know, he and he credits a lot of authors. Like I've I've talked to him. I talk to him all the time. I call him up and talk to ask him questions all the [ __ ] time. I love him. He's a super nice guy. Yeah. And um you know and he teaches me a lot of stuff and like I've I ask other people that I know who are like super um like knowledgeable and study the stuff for their like their entire lives like the Bible and Greek myths and Greek literature and stuff like that. And I often get a lot of corroboration on the things that he says. For example, like this ancient writer Nonus who wrote in like the second or third century talks about um how the sponge that was offered to Jesus was an antidote to the snake venom. And there was like a a literal Greek passage that was translated and he used the words antidote that was on the sponge that was given to him. And he was um according to multiple authors he was on the cross and he was in ex like dying of thirst like he was extremely thirsty which was apparently that's a side effect of um a certain viper venom. Um I think even you said in the puffer fish documentary that that was one of the side effects of the puffer fish venom. But um again, who knows what the [ __ ] was going on 2000 years ago, but it's like there's a lot of corroboration here and it's a it's a decent hypothesis at the very least. It's interesting. Yeah. I don't know enough about this to say, but I could see I mean, are are you familiar with the origin of consciousness and the breakdown of the bicamal mind? Do you know about this? Um not not deeply. No, I've heard of it. I'm I'm not like super into it. I mean it's an interesting idea exclusively from this perspective of thinking about it's interesting in general but this perspective of thinking that even the way that we conceptualize something like our own consciousness or sense of self or internal monologue could be totally different that every aspect of our consciousness could have been so different from the way it currently exists on the basis of different religious beliefs. And I think that this kind of um bicamalism or whatever it's called, what does that mean bicamal? It's been so long. I think the idea is that you see your consciousness as like a projection of God into your mind as opposed to a sense of uh individuality and personal agency. Okay. And so, you know, you think about something like this or, you know, there's another kind of vaguely analogous idea, the sapier warf hypothesis. I don't know if you know about. No. Where it's like also called linguist linguistic determinism, but the idea is that just the language that a person speaks can change their interpretation of reality. And this is by contemporary linguists considered not evidence-based, but it's an interesting idea. Like if you didn't have a word for orange, might orange cease to exist or would orange be lumped in with red if you only had red, right? Um or oh interesting. like to what extent is our reality defined by the language that we use to conceptualize and categorize things. That's so interesting too because ancient Greek had like over a million unique words and like so many different variations of words and and I think even I don't think there's even close to that. I think what is how many words does um modern English have? I'd be curious if you could find that, Steve. But like the fact that and and you know go even going back to his like his book how he explains which is I mean the book is not sensational at all. I mean it's it makes sense that in the time of the Romans like there was plague and famine and handtohand combat all the time. It would make sense that people were using drugs to get through the day and that, you know, with infant mortality being like 50%, you know, people would be taking drugs all the time. So 200,000 is this what it the Yeah, that's what it seems to say. It seems kind of low to me, but I I mean I guess I mean I don't know 200,000 words. So like 200,000 words in our language. They had over a million words in it 2,00 2500 years ago, you know, and just like the thing the the concepts they were able to come up with and like the philosophy that, you know, they were coming up with democracy and the scientific method and all that all that crazy stuff that they were doing. Like it's like you it's just super interesting. I wish I could take a time machine back to that point in history and see what the [ __ ] was going on. But we'll never know. It's also funny how people like to bicker about it online. What difference does it [ __ ] make? You know, you see the people like debating it, you know? I even asked a couple people to debate Almond. Um like some serious academic people and they uh they had they they said that I don't want to give him the uh the credibility of being on like the same platform as me, right? But I want to give him that that stage, right? Or like give him that credibility was the general responses that I got from people. Yeah. Which is on one hand disappointing. You think, well, why wouldn't you do it? But, you know, he's hard to swallow. He's a he's a jagged pill to swallow. And I think that he's actually operating in what I imagine is good faith. But there's a lot of like there's a YouTube channel, Professor Dave Explains. It's pretty great, I think. And it's he's constantly debating um flatearthers and things like that. And it's exhausting. Like you kind of I know this is like a big thing with Graham Hancock, for example, where he's he's like getting angry at Egyptologists that don't want to debate him, but it's exhausting. I don't I'm not talking about Graham Hancock specifically, but I understand generally why experts in a certain field may be reluctant to debate people that they conceptualized as having fringe beliefs because in some instances it's like extremely difficult and does cause problems. And you can see the Professor Dave stuff. I mean, he he's like it's called Professor Dave on YouTube. Yeah. Yeah. He's pretty great. But he's, you know, he's like a real um warrior when it comes to this sort of stuff. Like, but he he goes after people in these debates about aiogenesis, flat earth, um lots of different scientific topics. Yeah. And it's it's hard. It's like it's not it's a skill in and of itself that I don't think you would necessarily expect a typical expert to have because it involves this sort of uh flare as a debater and performance that are not typically part of their profession. What do you make of the idea of using human like using the b like his idea of using I don't even know if that's his idea. I think it comes from somewhere else, but he basically talks about it a lot. But the idea of using the human body as like a drug factory or like as a um I think the way he describes it is like using venoms like a a small amount of like snake venom on a young person to where they don't die from it but they build up the antibodies to the snake venom and how they could use this young person's bodily fluids as an antidote to snake bites. That seems like an ancient vaccine or something like an Yeah, it seems very very very roughly speaking plausible maybe like do we have any evidence that other that they outside of [ __ ] like Galen that they were doing that stuff back then? Do you know that you know that they were creating vaccines in humans? I don't using using human human humans as like antibbody factories or anything like this. I don't believe so. No. And and but but the idea of harnessing human metabolism as a mode of affecting chemical transformations I think is broadly represented. I mean the alchemists were very very interested in urine without question. The element phosphorus was discovered in urine from urine analysis. I think the ancient Romans were drinking piss in some of their initiations. I don't know about that but it seems possible. I mean but the idea there is that yeah there's clearly some kind of transformation of foods that's occurring. Uh one issue is that many not all but many metabolic changes are oxidative in their character and increase the polarity of a drug in order to facilitate its excretion in urine. This is kind of like if you were to there's a lot of things that can happen in the body, but if you were to broadly talk about what uh like phase one metabolism is, it often involves oxidation that increases polarity of a drug. And one problem with that in terms of harnessing it for drug manufacturing is that the reason the body does this is specifically because it facilitates excretion and typically, but not always, deactivates a drug. So this is this is like our evolved process for reducing the activity of drugs. There are active metabolites. There are instances of drugs that become more active through biotansformation, but they're often intentionally engineered that way. Not always. Mhm. And what do you think would be or do you think there would be any effect of combining venoms and and consuming them? Oh, I have no idea. There certainly could be. I mean, yeah, without question like a like like a like a compound like an ancient compounding pharmacy of venoms, like where they're just creating their own new compound. I mean, look at the ingredients in most products today. They have an insane number of different things are each intended to alter the activity in its own little way, changing the taste, changing the color, modifying the pharmacology in various ways. We do that all the time. So I see no reason that people wouldn't be aware of the at the very least additive if not synergistic effects that come from the concoction with you know many different ingredients. Yeah. And I'm sure it also had a lot to do with like the beliefs and the the culture that was around back then too. I'm sure that had a lot to do with this stuff. If people believed that this theak combo was making them younger, maybe that was that was what he reported to his physician and he wrote about it that way. Right. Right. But but I'm not the person for the especially when it comes to these very broad discussions like I could investigate the influence of a specific plant or a specific thing but most of the practices that he was describing were so complicated. Yeah. that they don't really lend themselves to any kind of casual critical analysis. It's not the kind of thing like I could, you know, you could design experiments. You could dedicate yourself to it, but it's not something that you could just, you know, on a podcast say like, "Yeah, yep, it works." It would be amazing to see somebody try to engineer uh the all the ingredients of that and and analyze it and see what the [ __ ] it was, what the [ __ ] it actually did. Yeah. Um I'm going to take a pee break real quick. Okay. We'll jump back in. Okay. We're talking about David Nichols. He got Travis told me about this. He was saying that um David got some crazy DARPA grant to work on psychedelics uh the use of um what was the psychedelic? Some sort of psychedelic for soldiers. And uh I actually we actually looked it up and it wasn't David Nichols. It was somebody. It was I think the head of his department. It was Brian Roth. Brian. Okay. Yes, that's right. Yeah. Yeah. And um allegedly I I mean who knows what the [ __ ] DARPA is doing spending all I mean allegedly oh according to the grant like uh according to all the published research on it is that they're trying to take the psychedelic trip out of these drugs so that they can um get the benefit of the therapy for use as a PTSD or battle fatigue things like this. Mhm. Um, but according to Travis, there's this dude named Dana Beal who is trafficking Ibagane to the front lines of the Ukraine to give the Ukrainian soldiers so that they can uh enhance their edge detection and their aim on the battlefield and uh also to combat battle fatigue so they can get right back out there and continue fighting. Oh yeah. I mean, I'm friends with Dana Deal. Are you really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, he's um he's a character. Wild dude. Yeah, he's he's one of the original New York City psychedelic weirdos and everybody knows Dana Beal. I don't doubt that he's doing that. I would say that's a very separate thing from Brian Roth's work, which is funded by DARPA and is published and publicly available and brilliant and beneficial to all of humanity. M um it's not it's actually not clinical work. It's basic scientific research that has been the most important work ever published on the structure of the serotonin 2A and 2B receptor. And he very recently published a new paper that goes even further in elucidating how different psychedelics interact with the protein and how these different types of interactions produce either psychedelic or non-csychedelic effects. So there's nothing even remotely nefarious about any of the work that Brian Roth is doing. It's some of the most important cutting edge pharmarmacology on serotonin 2A agonists that exists and the idea if I'm correct is there is taking the trip out of the psychedelics so that people can get it without the sort of uh hallucin hallucination or uh that's part of it. Yeah, it's part of it definitely. Like the question is like do you get that same benefit from these drugs without the psychedelic effect? It depends on what benefit you're describing and what you're looking for and who the patient is and what the disorder is and exactly because you conceivably have a full spectrum of psychedelic to not psychedelic. And maybe at one point on the spectrum for a certain type of person you're getting the benefit and maybe not. And what about the duration? and what about the environment and what about a million and the frequency of dosing and a million things. It's very hard to say what is optimal. I try to keep an open mind because I think people can be very moralistic about things like this or they'll say like, "Oh, you're just commodifying this and destroying the spirituality and destroying the the whole thing that makes this valuable and making it into the next Prozac." Yeah. Okay. I I understand the argument, but we should explore everything and see what's out there. Because Brian Roth's work, you you could you could look at this two ways. You could say, "Oh, he's studying non-sychedelic psychedelics." But part of studying non-sychedelic psychedelics is also recognizing what creates a psychedelic. You can kind of move in both directions. So, one of the big subjects of this work has been biased signaling at the serotonin 2A receptor and whether whether a receptor interaction that is associated with something called beta arrestin or GQ is responsible for the psychedelic effect and this work has allowed us to better understand what makes psychedelics psychedelic in terms of their molecular neuropharmacology. It's been very important. So I don't see these things as like two things that exist in opposition to one another. You could argue in the same direction and say that studying psychedelics shows you what you need for maybe like a in this instance GQ biased path that would be more likely to be psychedelic. But I think the the basic thing is like the psychedelic experience is incredibly powerful and is maybe unsuitable for certain types of people and maybe not beneficial. And if you had a way of dialing it down a little bit that could allow certain benefits of psychedelics which may have little to do with what we typically associate with the psychedelic experience. Right? There's a the there's a neuroscientist pharmacologist named Chuck Nichols and he did a lot of work on the anti-inflammatory effects of different psychedelic compounds. So he's showing that there could be a therapeutic effect from psychedelics that's completely separate from what we typically conceptualize as the therapeutic effect of psychedelics. Right? Same thing goes for treatment of addiction, treatment of cluster headaches, right? thinking that the point of a psychedelic experience is have this religious transcendent hypervisual uh experience I think is somewhat reductive because who's to say what they can or can't do or should or shouldn't do. So I'm I'm in support of people that are exploring every avenue of what can happen at serotonin receptors. Yes. And the so the serotonin 2A receptor is what's primarily responsible for the the psychedelic experience that you receive with the classical psychedelics and we and and humans have had this receptor forever like as far as we know seems like it. Yeah. So So I mean even nonhumans have it. Even nonhumans have it. Even nonhumans have it like rodents have it. Rodents have a 2A receptor. So, do we know or do we have there's no way to know if they can experience anything similar to what we experience when you give them these drugs? There's no way to know whether another human being is experiencing anything similar to what you're experiencing. That's a really good point. There's a lot of unknown when it comes to the internal experience of another organism. But what we do know, and it it sounds incredibly abstract, but it's actually a robust predictor, is that when you give a rodent a 5HG2A agonist that has GQ biased signaling and even balanced, it seems to cause their heads to twitch. And that head twitch is strongly associated with psychedelic effects in humans. are exceptions, but it's a for something as abstract as this sort of wet dog shake, head twitch thing, yeah, it's pretty good. It's better than you would think. It's the sort of thing where if you're looking at a scientific paper, you could laugh at it and say, "Oh, they're they're saying this mouse switching its head predicts psychedelic activity in humans. These silly scientists, they're they're so they don't get it at all." Turns out it's actually pretty damn predictive. Wow. Yeah. What are the per performance-enhancing effects of psychedelics and like is there like an optimal dose for like like um cognitive enhancement? Because I know there's like a correlation with psychedelics and like growth of of new neurons in the brain. Is this right? Under some experimental conditions. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yes. It's so hard to say because what constitutes performance enhancement could be radically different between people. The goal performance enhancement for a guitarist might be totally different for an air traffic controller. Sure. Yeah. I don't know. I just always thought that this stuff made people smarter because the smartest people I know are like take a lot of psychedelics. Yeah. I mean, it's definitely a psychologically interesting experience that maybe certain types of people are drawn to or interested in consciousness. And yeah, I would I would hesitate to say that it can make you smarter, but I think it can make you more aware of certain things and it can be very inspiring for some people. And for someone like me that's not religiously inclined, it can give you a taste of what I imagine religious experience is like for people that are. Have you ever seen that uh DMT experiment where they shine the laser on the wall? Yeah. What did you make of that? Uh I think it's interesting. I think it is I I'm not persuaded that the code of the simulation is being revealed through this process. I mean I'm I appreciate the attempt to assess something like that. I think it's as an idea. I think it's very cool. I've gone to the website of the guy uh who's at the forefront of this laser DMT laser examination technique has some weird stuff like eating chocolate and viewing it through a glass of water. I mean Oh, really? I haven't seen that one. The the obvious issue is that if you're taking a drug that causes visual hallucinations in order to see this otherwise invisible phenomenon that it could very well be a product of hallucinations, right? Yeah. Right. But the fact is like like the interesting thing is you're giving so he he says that I think hundreds of people have done it and reported to him seeing the same exact code that he describes which is this like Sanskrit looking [ __ ] Japanese katakana style matrix dripping code that exists behind this laser beam when it's projected on a wall and like I don't know if there's I know like I haven't done a lot of DMT, but I know people explained that DMT is uh a lot of people see very similar things when they're on DMT, like different like similar patterns. Some people see these elve things, but there's nothing else that I've ever heard of that is consistent across a lot of experiences similar to this code that people are explaining they're seeing. And I mean, one of my questions when I asked him, I was like I was like, is it an issue that they're watching your documentary and seeing this code on the wall and then they're trying to do it themselves and they're kind of confirming what they already were expecting to see. Is that a problem? I don't know. I would say it is a problem. Yeah, it's but it's a common problem. I mean, same thing with the machine elves, as you said, and this has been studied from pretty much the beginning of psychedelic research. Heinrich Clover coined this term form constants and he was very interested in this idea that people's visual distortions or hallucinations under the influence of masculine appear to have certain themes like a honeycomb pattern or a spiderweb type pattern or uh like a sort of tube type pattern or whatever. And now you hear people describing often seeing Alex Gay type imagery. Is that because many people who are interested in psychedelics have been exposed to Alex Gray imagery? Is it because Alex Gray was able to capture some kind of some kind of characteristic that is maybe just present in the psychedelic experience because we have similar central nervous systems and and other visionary people. I mean, one thing about Alex Gray is that he's using a lot of motifs that have also been explored in religious artwork as well. So, it's not as if he's the the only person to um ever explore these types of images. They they do obviously have a a particular resonance with people that use psychedelics, but I think that there's this interplay between human biology and psychology and art where Yeah. it's all Yeah. It's all Yeah. It's all interwoven. Yeah. Yeah. Galammore was explaining how um throughout history there has been multiple documented uh documents of people taking different psychedelics and uh explaining how they saw code code on different psychedelics throughout history um in various studies. So, but I don't know if any of them were were as similar as this DMT thing. You know, it's interesting to me that like if the if this DMT is actually stripping away this sort of brain filter, this brain filter hypothesis, how you have like these filters that filter reality and the DMT kind of like breaks the filters away. So you're sort of seeing the brain is exposed to more sensory input and uh if if that's really if something like that is actually happening and then you're bringing like a laser into it like that's that's a super interesting experiment. And then if it's like if the laser is acting like a microscope in the visual field or in the brain, it would be it would just be, you know, what what does that even mean? You know, if people are all seeing this, is this some sort of like epigenetic thing in the human brain that is happening because we're combining these chemical we're taking in these chemicals and and exposing ourselves to a certain light frequency or like Are we seeing the actual matrix? Are we living in the [ __ ] matrix? I would definitely bet against that. That would be, you know, that would be the last explanation that I would go for, which is not to say that it's impossible, right? But when you're kind of creating the flowchart of possibility, it's usually good to start at the most likely scenario and then if you can't explain something with the most likely scenario, you then go to the next most likely scenario. So the most likely scenario in this situation is that a combination of suggestion expectation and the visual hallucinations that are produced by DMT are causing people to see characters that they are interpreting as being similar. But they can't really say that with certainty because nobody's able to take a snapshot of whatever it is that they're seeing. And it's obviously a better story and it would feel better if you saw the same thing as someone else than something that was subtly different or totally different. And what even are these characters if you draw them? Are we really totally sure? The very fact that they're unrecognizable and not in a language that we speak gives them a lot of latitude to be different. Um, and then there's also just the kind of uh language that we use to describe things that are unfamiliar. Um, you know, if you see something that is weird, what do you say about it? If you see lights in the sky, do you say that's a UFO? Do you say that it's gods? Do you say that try to fit it into a box? That it's witches? Yeah. It's dependent on your culture and what language you use to describe the unfamiliar and the inexplicable. Yeah. So when you look at earlier psychedelic experiences, I don't think I'm aware of the word alien being used very frequently. Um people saying this seems alien. Often I do see descriptions of things being like Egyptian or associated with other cultures. Um but I don't think alien in in the like 19 early 1960s type stuff. Now you'd see that more frequently because aliens have become a much bigger part of our culture subsequently. Um, and the same thing goes for the way different indigenous groups conceptualize these things which are very much based on their like I I would imagine that if you were to go to Peru and do this experiment, the matrix line thing might be less less frequently encountered as an explanation because the matrix I mean it kind of depends on who you talk to. I'm sure there's people, indigenous uh cactus users who have also seen The Matrix. It's a pretty popular movie, pretty good movie. Yeah. But but assuming that they haven't seen The Matrix, I have a feeling that that and the the current popularity of simulation hypothesis thinking wouldn't be um wouldn't be the first explanation that they go to. Hold on, let me crack open this fresh can of uh but I I don't mean to be a hater on this kind of thing. Like I do find all that stuff very interesting and [Music] um so good and careful observation of the world is how you discover things. So, it's like I understand how you could look at, you know, someone, you know, looking at a laser through a water glass or whatever and say like this is [ __ ] this is like like this is ridiculous. But it's like you probably could have I'm sure there were people that would have said the same thing about early microscopists like looking into a droplet of water and saying like what are they doing? Like oh they think they see little like organisms in this droplet of pond water. Like it's crazy. Well, I did it. I tried the experiment and it was also the first time I ever tried DMT and um I didn't see the code. Oh, I saw I saw millions and millions of of little gears rotating and connected just all spinning like behind the wall. No code at all. Oh, interesting. And I was expect I watched the documentary like like the day before or not the doc the the teaser for the documentary the day before I did that. And so I was like looking for the code but I couldn't find it. All I could see was these gear spinning. But maybe um maybe I didn't get high enough. Maybe I needed to do more DMT to see it. I don't know. It was my first time ever doing it. Brilliant. Have you ever heard of people that take a lot of DMT all of a sudden not being able to get high on it anymore or experience the uh the psychedelic effect anymore? I have heard of that. Yeah. What What do you think is going on there when that happens? Again, it's so hard with these sorts of things where what there's a term for it like being locked out or something, right? Something like that. Something like that. Um, it's so hard with these things where once you create the idea, it becomes a sort of meme that is spread. And I've had the same experience before I thought. Oh. Where I I remember um smoking not DMT but DPT many years ago and I was using a candle to smoke it and just wasn't getting DPT. DPT. Yeah. And just wasn't getting an effect from it and had that thought of like, oh, interesting. maybe um maybe I'm tolerant, maybe I can no longer experience the effect of DPT. And then I moved the bowl a little bit deeper into the flame so that it was really touching the wick and the change in temperature was sufficient to vaporize the DPT. And then I got an insane insane experience. But if I just stopped there, I might have said, "Oh, maybe something is preventing me." when the real issue is just was insufficiently heated. So, you know, it's actually people love to talk about DMT because it's so visual and fascinating, but there's all these aspects of it that don't get talked about as much, like how hard it is to smoke and how harsh the smoke is. Yeah. And these vapes that are now much more common make it easier. But if you're smoking DMT crystal from like a meth pipe Yeah. it can be pretty hard. It's much hard. It's It's like not the story that people like, "Oh, but my friend, he tried to smoke DMT and the smoke was really harsh." Yeah. Like that's not the story that gets shared. I could barely handle the vape. Yeah. I could barely I was coughing like a maniac trying to inhale that. Right. So, I think that would be my first guess would be, you know, is this really somebody that's locked out or maybe they are just not really smoking it and getting the hits or for whatever reason. And, you know, to even begin to assess that, I would you'd want to do something like give them a, you know, IV bolus dose of DMT to see if see if they're truly unresponsive. I sort of suspect because even in these DMTX experiments where they give people DMT repeatedly over long periods of time, the accumulation of tolerance is very minimal. It does occur but it's very minor. Right? So the idea that somebody would have some kind of total tolerance outside of an extreme situation like they were smoking it all day every day for like 3 months or something. It just seems unlikely. Yeah. You think it would be gradually onset, not just out out of nowhere, just not work. It seems like the more likely explanation is that they're just not smoking it right. But again, this speaks to the mythology and the mysticism surrounding a lot of these substances. Like, I'm sympathetic to that. There's something kind of strange about them, and it's they don't always lend themselves to the most analytical interpretations. M wasn't DMT um first discovered in a lab before it was ever found in nature. Yes. It was like first discovered synthetically. Yeah. Yeah. It was Mansky did the first synthesis in Canada as a potential reference for a like strawberry plant alkaloid before it had been found in nature. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. That's interesting. It is. I think the way that you describe uh you know, you explained that there's kind of like this uh this polarization between people who like plant-based drugs that come from nature versus synthetically in a lab. And I think you described it very well like it's the same thing like we are we are nature. We are part of this earth and we are creating things the same way things are created you know chemically in the soil or out in the rainforest. Like we are just a product of this earth and we are using chemicals that are made on this earth to compound new chemical structures. Like it's all it's all natural, right? I thought I thought that was a uh an interesting way of putting it and and I do believe that. But the paradox is that it's simultaneously all natural and all synthetic, depending on how you want to think about it. Everything is simultaneously but they're both the same. They're both the same. Um and somebody will say, "Oh, but there's a difference between, for example, Toadderived 5 Modmt and synthetic 5 MODMT." And I've often said, well, okay, if there's no chemical difference, then there can't be a difference. But this does neglect the psychological contribution of the user. This is again comes back to the the expectation, beliefs, what you project onto the experience. So then if the case is that there is a difference and that difference is not derived from the chemistry of the substance but from the psychological expectation of the user then why can't you reformulate your expectation accordingly so that you have these same associations with a synthetic substance you could change that. So if the idea is and it typically is that the natural is better, natural is good, synthetic is worse, you can totally change that bias if you want to. If you want to, you can make a very persuasive case that the synthetic is better because it's better for the environment. And so you are not harming toads in the process of acquiring the substance and you're not contributing to the potential exploitation of an endangered organism that only exists in a small part of the world or something like that. And so this is like a better experience because you're doing it more conscientiously. Like you could formulate that exact same expectation and projection onto the experience if you wanted to. I have. Right. Yeah. I think the way you did it was great. Also, like so that that toad that you guys captured in the Amazon rainforest and that and that you strung strung up and got it to secrete its venom. Yeah. Was that when you took that, was it the were you expecting the effect that you got from it when they burned your skin and rubbed it on your skin or was that like it seemed like you were just nauseated from it? Yeah. Yeah, I was um I was aware of the pharmacology of the peptides that were present in the venom of the phomodusa by color and so I wasn't expecting to have you know an LSD type psychedelic experience or anything like that. At the same time when I made that many many many years ago there was relatively little information. Um there was like a a Peter Gorman article that had been written about it. He was, I think, the first outsider to document that process for high times. And there was maybe a couple scholarly publications, but there really wasn't all that much out there on it. Um, a little bit was there definitely. And so, I kind of knew what I was getting into. I knew that it wasn't exactly the sort of altered state that I'm typically drawn to, which is a more classically psychedelic state. this was maybe something closer to um I I mean because in a lot of cultures you have also these um orals of one kind or another that are also done to produce an altered state. It could be fasting, it could be rights of endurance where you go on a very long hike, something like that with the intention is to create an altered state through suffering. Um and so it was a bit more in that direction I would say. Oh, okay. Yeah, that makes sense. Um, another thing I wanted to ask you was about nitrous. What what uh what are the um like effects of nitrous on the human body and like what is the how would you describe have you done it? Oh yeah. Yeah. What is like the therapeutic benefit of it? I mean, the therapeutic benefit is typically if you're talking about like a sort of FDA approved conventional therapeutic benefit, it's preventing pain during surgical procedures typically in the context of dentistry. Um or it's sometimes used by EMTs or things like that in emergency medicine because it's rapid acting. Yeah. Um so that's the benefit is that it kills pain. It may also have some confined psychotherrapeutic benefit maybe in treatment of PTSD or things like that that's been investigated. Um, but for the most part the benefit and this is actually one interesting historical quirk of nitrous oxide is that it was originally a recreational drug and then became a medicine. Often it goes the other way around where you have something like ketamine that's a medicine and then people realize that it has a really interesting effect outside of a medical context. With nitrous oxide, it was used for fun exclusively at first. There were nitrous parties and Yeah. Yeah, I remember. Yeah. Like from a silk from a silk bag they would inhale with Oh, a silk bag. This is like I guess pre pre balloon era. you maybe have like a waxed song. I knew this guy when I uh when I was younger. I used to work at a pizza place and there was this old guy who had a band called the Speed Wobbles and he would always go to his van on his uh on his brakes and he would go into his van and do whippets and he had these little canisters of nitrous oxide that he would do. I never tried it but um he would always came in super happy after he did it. Yeah. It's it's not again I would say it's not the most psychologically interesting effect. It's more like pure hyper intense euphoria which is one reason that people become addicted to it like miserably especially during the pandemic actually it seemed like a lot of people started ordering it and and also there was the all these you know giant cans of nitrous you can order a lot of people developed issues with it now they're trying to prohibit it I don't think that's the path obviously but isn't uh wasn't Kanye West addicted to it horrendously probably still is from Everything I can tell horrendously addicted. Yeah, I think it may. Do you think that has anything to do with his psychological? I do. How what do you think happened there? How if you were I know this is like super speculative, but like do you think that like like how would nitrous or any other sort of drugs that he could be on? Because you know I know he went to like a mental hospital and they probably gave him a a lot of different drugs. I don't know if they were SSRIs or what they were, but like how would that explain his current state? And I I wouldn't go so far as to say that it completely explains it. I think it may be a contributor. I mean, I know people that know him. I know a little bit of the backstory. A lot of it's publicly known. But when somebody is a celebrity and they're a billionaire and they're very very powerful, they end up in an interesting power dynamic with medical doctors, which is that if a they can find a doctor to give them whatever the [ __ ] they want. And the doctor is in a weird position where they want to please their billionaire client. And they also don't want to kill them or hurt them because it could result in the revocation of their license and the loss of the billionaire client. That's a a line you got to dance. So, how do you please this person? Give them what they want and not hurt them. And then if you decide, okay, this is getting a little nuts. we gotta pump the brakes on this. You know, and the billionaire knows that they can just find someone to replace you instantaneously. So, you can engage in a cycle of selfdeception where you say, "Well, it's better me than somebody else because I really care about Yay, and I'm going to be the one that's going to give him this and I'll be a little bit more cautious or whatever." This is what happened with Michael Jackson as well. So I I try to be a little bit sympathetic to the doctors who will face criminal charges for doing this because they are like no one wants to be sympathetic to those doctors. They're in a difficult position. Like imagine you're Michael Jackson's doctor and he's asking you for propall and you think no I shouldn't do that. But you also know that if you say no, they're just going to find someone else to give them the propall. So what do you do? you give them a little bit and you try to monitor and you hope for the best and they end up in a really complicated situation. There's also, of course, that's a sympathetic analysis of what's going on. There's also, of course, the very real possibility of exploitation and predation from people that are just using them for money. And there's probably plenty of that as well. So there's a dentist that I think he like lives in the same building as Kanye and is enabling him with huge amounts of nitrous oxide. That's like it I think. Um and you know this isn't I'm sure that dentist is in a complicated position because Kanye is definitely capable of getting nitrous elsewhere. So what does he do? I don't know. But but when you use nitrous continuously, it can result in all kinds of negative effects. Like when I was in high school, the thing that people would always say, say, "Oh, you do a whip it, don't you, you know, you lose 10,000 brain cells or something like that." That was kind of the the little like um prohibitionist narrative. That is not the case, assuming that you're co-administering oxygen. But it does result in the destruction of B12. So it can cause a B12 deficiency which then results in demination of neurons and creates a multiple sclerosis type syndrome where people start to lose sensation in their extremities and eventually lose the ability to walk. That's a pretty extreme which is reversible in most instances with B12 administration, but you don't want to get to the position of being in a wheelchair even if it's potentially reversible. this is like representative of a really severe degree of neurological damage. So that's one of the things that can happen with continuous use and there's different people that have again this comes back to individual genetics as well because the way that you metabolize the the way that your body metabolizes homocyine and some other things related to B12 metabolism also play a role in all this. It's a little bit complicated. So, some people are more susceptible. Also, even your diet and your age, like vegans would be more susceptible because they have a reduced B12 intake, which is primarily from animal products anyway. Like, there's a lot of things that that go into this. Um, but then you also have the reality that you're just continuously entering this dissociated state and it's going to make you all whacked out and could he could be doing that instead of taking treatments for bipolar disorder and becoming manic and deranged and maybe he's surrounded by people that don't have the desire or power to try to rein him in. It seems like it's probably very difficult based on everything that I've seen and somebody can I mean it is amazing. I don't know if you know people with bipolar, but I feel I feel like it's it's something that is often talked about as if it's not really that big of a deal. It's kind of like like schizophrenia is really really bad, but like bipolar, you just take like a pill and whatever. But it is amazing how much damage somebody can do to their life when they're manic in like two days. Like I have a close friend of mine like if you are fully manic you can just destroy everything in a couple days. So you are dependent on people reigning you in which is also complicated because when somebody is in that state they don't want help. They will perceive any intervention as somebody attempting to silence them or oppress them in a paranoid delusion. So it's it's not easy. Right. Yeah. I just wonder like what else what other kind of drugs he's been given that are being combined with that that's just like sending him into just a [ __ ] neverending spiral you know that there's so many like weird weird like he would never think I never would have suspected nitrous of all the things but then you you know maybe he's just getting a lot of uh you know new grills being made or something like that and that has something to do with it like when you're getting that work done and getting gold Keith, maybe that just comes with the territory. I don't know. And the insane stress of being publicly scrutinized the way that he is. And it's all it's all like very unrelatable, I would say, to the typical person. Like this is just like a life that is so abstract, so different from anything that a typical person would ever encounter. And it although you could say that it it touches on issues that are relatable, which is like what to do with people who need help but don't want to accept it. Um, and is it, you know, humane to allow somebody to behave in a self-destructive manner? And what is the line between personal autonomy and the need for a society to step in and prevent somebody from harming themselves, right? Where do you find that? These are complicated. And when you're people like when you're a person like like Kanye, like a like a public figure who has like an exorbitant amount of money and like you described having just like unlimited access to doctors who could get you anything you want. Like yeah, nobody knows what the [ __ ] that's like. or like you know even like Jordan Peterson who's another great example who you know went through he I think he was uh he had to go somewhere like out of the country to do some sort of uh therapy I forget what kind of therapy he was doing but he was getting xenon among other things what was it xenon xenon and you know that's he's another person who was like super polarizing and went from being like a a professor at a university to being arg arguably like one of the most popular people on the face of the earth who h you know half the people loved him and then half the people absolutely despised him for the stuff that he was saying. Um and how you know how that plays a role in in someone's psychology and the way and the way that people like normal people will perceive them. Um what what is xenon there? In the third season of my show, there's a whole episode dedicated to it. It's worth checking out. It's a good It's worth Is this Is this um post Vice? No. Oh, okay. This is a This is in the final season. Okay. Um and it is an element. It's a It's a noble Yes, I remember this. Yes. It has a nitrous oxide like effect. So this is one of and it's always being explored as a healthier alternative to nitrous oxide because it doesn't induce this damaging effect on B12 and myelin biosynthesis. So it's a little bit safer arguably but it has all the same psychological risks associated. Do we use that in the US? Only experimentally. It hasn't been approved by the FDA for anything. Okay. Do you know anything about methylene blue? Oh yeah. that's becoming very popular right now. Yeah. And it's like a a a fish tank cleaner and like a a fabric dye that people are using that a lot of people I I had a guy on here who was explaining to me all this that he was a brain surgeon who was explaining to me how he gives his patients when he's performing uh cranottoies on folks. He gives them an IV of methylene blue while he's performing brain surgery as a neuroprotective agent or what was something like that. I don't know all the scientific uh reasons he does it but yeah it's mainly because uh it helps them heal a lot f a lot faster and it's a neuroprotective agent and uh another thing he he does is when his patients are recovering from like super invasive brain or spinal surgery. He wheels them outside into the courtyard and lets them recover outside in the natural sunlight. M and he claims that they recover a lot faster because uh allegedly this or I don't know if it's allegedly I think it's might be proven that this methylene blue is like super beneficial for the mitochondria or something like this. Yeah, that's the idea. I've taken it a bunch. It was pretty much the original synthetic drug. I mean it was, you know, it was used as a treatment for malaria for a long time. It's still used in medicine for malaria. For malaria. Yeah. There was like a Can you get prescribed it? You can. Yeah. Oh, wow. You can I mean it's mostly used in hospitals for treatment of I believe it's used for cyanide poisoning under some sort of methoglobanmia I think is one of the reasons that they use it. Uh but I think I've heard that it's been effective for um for illnesses similar to COVID like respiratory illnesses. This is the thing where you you have a pharmacologically active substance that does have very real effects like the antimmalarial effect is established. It was also it is an MAOI there are like real effects of this drug but then the overlay comes where it's like also the mitochondrial rejuvenator maybe for some people it might be or treatment for COVID I'd like to see some some strong evidence for that maybe it doesn't hurt I don't know or depression or whatever and you know it becomes this kind of um place potential placebo panacea that um worries me a little bit. It also seems pretty innocuous at the doses that most people use it of like two or three milligrams. So um if people were routinely taking hundreds of milligrams, I might be more concerned, but I' I've taken it many many times. I'm not certain that it has an effect. I at times be a little bit of a stimulant. That's what I thought at first, but then it didn't seem dose dependent to me, which made me feel like it wasn't. Like this is, you know, this is one of the kind of best ways to assess whether something is a placebo effect is if the effect isn't dose dependent. It still could be pharmacologically active, but that's definitely like a a tick of the potentially placebo box. Like if if 10 milligrams doesn't do twice as much as 5 millig there's a that I think is moving in the this might be placebo direction. Interesting because it's like with most things you have a dose dependent effect. You can create a dose response curve. There are things that might be exceptions like certain enzyme inhibitors where if at one dose you have total inhibition of the enzyme going beyond that assuming there is an offtarget activity may not confer additional pharmacological activity right um so yeah methylene blue I'm it's definitely active for some things it's definitely a actual drug it is useful for some applications I've used it myself many many times I'm not totally sure I understand what its benefits for a healthy person are Right, dude. Thank you for doing this. This has been uh incredible. Yeah. Yeah. No, thank you. It's fun. Yeah, I learned a lot. Um, so are you mainly now focusing on uh your podcast or are you working on any other kind of documentary projects? Yeah. So, I make a podcast on Patreon, and I did this for a long time while I was focusing on chemistry, partially because it allowed me to continue making stuff, but also because it has historically been very hard for me to get funding to do any kind of research. And so I recently have started just filming completely independent documentaries, trying that out to see if I can do that because it has been so hard for me to get any sort of like media outlet to simultaneously allow me to do this work and not interfere with it in a way that makes it purposeless for me. So I've filmed a bunch of these weird chemistry documentaries that I'm currently editing and I'll post them on the Patreon. one about u this exploration of toarium chemistry, one about this creation of a new LSD analog, um another about Schulgan's research on Parkinson's treatments, all these kinds of weird little science mini documentaries. So, I've been making those independently and it's been okay. A lot of fun. This is Hamilton's Patreon. What is that uh iguana on the top photo? It's just a It's a chameleon. Oh, it's a chameleon. It's a panther chameleon. A panther chameleon. Yeah, I love chameleons. Wow. Do they secrete any sort of uh drug-like fluids or are they just cool looking? I actually think there might be something that is active in their saliva, but I'm not sure about that. It may just be a glue, but I thought that there might be some kind of like um something in their saliva. Oh, really? Where is that one from? Madagascar. Madagascar. Yeah. Wow. Yeah, that's amazing. Yeah. Well, cool. I'll link uh your Patreon and then you also have a YouTube channel, right? Yes. You post stuff on on YouTube as well. Yep. Cool, man. Um thanks again. I really enjoyed this podcast, dude. Yeah. Yeah. Cool. It's fun. All right. Uh it's all linked below. Good night everybody.