the general gonna experience. They're gonna be able to reverse aging in our lifetimes, I think. I think by the time you and I are old as fuck, they'll probably have figured out a way to turn the clock backwards. Cause they've already had some experimental things they've done with mice that have been effective and they think that they're very close to we've heard that. We've heard that. Yeah. In the manipul- And probably you don't watch that. It's in the turn the Benjamin Button and you're a fucking baby again. Right, you go in. You turn it. That's gonna be a delicate one. Where the Madonna just shows up looking like a baby. There's gonna be people that identify as babies as they wanna be babies. And so then we find out that they're in preschool and they're telling them to be a baby's get them cigarettes. Like what the fuck is going on? He's really, he's really 60. He's not a baby, just wanted to do it all over again. And he dialed himself back to two years old but with a 60 year old brain. And you think that's a great movie. You think that's happened in one? That's a huge one. So you think that within the next 10 years, I mean the way things are moving right now is crazy even with like, you know, Chad G. B. T. the way it was like four months ago versus now, like things are on the move. Yeah, it's the exponentially increasing technological innovation. It's like the way things happen, they happen in these big giant waves and then these technologies feed other new technologies. And I think it's gonna be the case with all of them. I think it's medical science and I think it's technology. And I think there's gonna be a combination of the two of them eventually. There's gonna be something that technology devises that can fix a lot of problems that people have. That's one of the uses of neural length. They think they're gonna be able to help people that are injured and hurt. Yeah, yeah. These parts of their body, they can restore movement. Yeah, it's gonna be one of the first ways to use it. There's gonna, there's one that they're coming out with they're gonna be able to reverse blindness. You're gonna be able to give people the ability to see. Mr. Beast died. In some sort of art, no, no. I'm not, I'm not a cataract surgery but like an artificial eyeball. So is it a camera, is that essentially what it is? Well, it's gonna function the same way an eyeball does but it's gonna send images to your brain instead of through the normal biological course that it is now where you're looking through your eyes and the rods and cones and everything goes through and you see what's going on. What you're gonna do is get a digitalized version of that. You're gonna get a computer version of fake eyeballs. It's gonna be a wild like, and then once that's connected to the internet and then it's just gonna be bizarre looking into someone's fake eyeballs. The chat you do, do you think made it where I'm just like, yo, are people just gonna have conversations with like two computers? Like it's just gonna be two computers talking to each other. Look at this brain implants started up back by Bezos and Gates is testing mind controlled computing on humans. What the fuck do you think? I think people can like this. God damn it. I'm kidding, Ultra! You're a MK Ultra! You know what it's like sometimes with a conspiracy like listen, there's a lot of people thinking a lot of conspiracy stuff right now. Can you take it easy for a second? Yeah, yeah, well, but anyways, those guys are crazy. Anyways, we're gonna put chips in the brains within the week and you're gonna take it easy. What is the latest on the artificial eye thing? The thing that I was just describing. I don't know how much of what I said was fiction. They showed something during the last neural LinkedIn that you were describing that shows an ability to get light through in like pixelation form and they have it, I think it was somewhere around the range of like 10,000 pixels an hour and I think they get like 36,000 I think. I think there was something else that I read that was independent of that that was talking about a new technology where they might be able to create artificial eyes. Oh, something not in their own way. Yeah, I think it's all gonna be eventually linked in. I think within our lifetime, I think they're gonna have some sort of a brain enhancement. Is this wild? Yeah, there's gonna be some sort of a brain enhancement with whether it's neural link or many competing companies that are working towards the same goal. Feels like it's gonna have it soon. But if they start doing that, I wonder where we draw the line that things getting replaced. Similar something posted a year ago. Bionic eyes, how tech is replacing in lost vision. Bionic eyes could be the solution to one of the most pressing medical issues of our time. Yeah, I think that's it. I'm choosing like sunglasses and sensors. Mm. The creation of Bionic eyes as a result of recent advances in science and technology are restoring hope to many who are unable to see or partially sighted due to injury illness or genetics. Yeah, there you go. Also, there's gonna be a good while where if you are blind, you could tell people you didn't get the surgery and girls would still change in front of you. Yeah, that's rude. Oh dear, you rhyme. There'd be a few creeps that'd be like, for sure blind, there's a few dudes out there with the Ray Charles glasses on. Pretend to lay hands behind. The line is a bad. How many guys have pretended to be blind? What an evil thing to do. That used to be a genre of internet videos of the blind guy. What a creepy thing to do. That's bad karma. Oh, super creepy. Ooh. But how long do you think before we have Luke Skywalker type arms? Were they gonna replace your arm? What's up? It looks just like a normal human arm. Do people not have kind of close versions to that? I mean, at least they can drip and stuff like that. They can grip. Yeah, I don't exactly know how it works, but they do have the ability to open and close their hands. I don't know if they can individually articulate each finger yet. Yeah, there's just a lot of money out there. There's a lot of people working on this stuff. There's a lot of, you know, there's like even just the amount of the crypto money being poured into different projects right now. If they had fake legs that worked way better than real legs, and you could literally like jump over fences and run 50 miles an hour, or wouldn't you get them? I don't think. It's not that big of surgery. If I was 20, it's not that big of surgery. Bro, it's no big deal. They just cut your legs off. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They cut your legs off. And people will be signing up for it. We got to do one leg at a time, because you don't want to bleed up. Yeah, yeah. What the fuck are you talking about? People get the dollars there, Jerry. That right now. The dollars there. The dollars there, Jerry. They got so crazy. Dude, they chop. Apparently it's like the most painful thing you could imagine kind of thing too. Hard. Oh, God. But you got to get it. You got to get it. Oh, exoskeleton. Oh, yeah. Can you imagine finding out that one guy cheated in like hockey or something? And you go, how did he go? Oh, yeah. He has fake legs. Right. Yeah, he doesn't feel pain. His knees don't ever hurt because he got fake legs. This guy's got to exoskeleton. He's just moving shit around. Yeah. That was always like a thing that we've chosen. So those are real names. Well, he's inside those arms. Oh, see, it's like an exoskeleton. So it's like an Iron Man suit. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But it's just more exposed. And he can take his arms out of it. Is it essentially tethered to your movements, the kind of like, and then 10 folds, and kind of thing? Yeah, it makes you way stronger. It's like a battery pack. There's quite a few of those that have been invented. But there was hope at one point in time, like mostly from comic books, that someone was going to be able to figure out some sort of an exoskeleton that made you like a super person. Yeah. If they could put something on you that literally like tripled your amount of force and what you could do as a person, but could last all day. And in the comic books, nobody ever figured out. There's never any issue with battery life. Like no, no, no, no, no. No, no. Yeah. Like I can remember at a problem with battery life. Sure. You know, it didn't make any sense. Yeah, he's got a fly. He's got to stop by the garage to charge it out for a second. No, he's not. He has jets that are coming out of his ankles. And there's no indication that he's storing fuel in any part of his body. Yeah, where is it all coming from? How's this happening? That one thing, whatever that one. That one on the hard thing. There you go. Oh, how convenient. Someone just has a hard thing. What do you say? What are you fucking done? But if that could be a thing where we could literally like move anything we want, just put a suit on. You had a hole in us. Oh, yeah. That's a fucking battery. That's right. Put a battery in the air. It was so. He made it by himself, member. Yeah, I know. But imagine that you have a fucking yeti cup in the middle of your chest and everything else works fine. And I guess with that, they're like, oh, this is enough to power a whole city kind of generate. Yeah, yeah. The whole Iron Man thing is so crazy. You can go to space. You can fly. He can fly. Yeah. Yeah. Smart is there, good. It's a space guy. How's it cooling him off when he re-enters? What are we doing here? Getting this in 2023, imagine 2030. 2030, you're going to, that which is only seven years away, which seems like, well, how long is that? Well, how long is that? You just look at where we're at in 2023. Think of 2050 in different time, different time, different world, almost everything's different. Everyone's a different gender. Seven years from now, you're going to be able to just talk to computers. You're going to be able to have conversations, indistinguishable conversations, and any voice you like. Yeah, can you imagine if they've invented one where you're someone's wife calls them and you essentially just like put on a thing. What's going to happen? Dude's just like straight. That's going to happen. I'm sure all like getting divorced because she's like, I was realized I was talking to my husband's like fake computer version of himself. Like an hour every night. 100% you're going to do that. Are you really talking to me or is this AI? I'm sorry, baby. It was just some in the middle of work. I had to use the AI. You son of a bitch. That's going to be kind of telling your AI about my fucking day. And you did it, you did it, you did it. Hey, guys, getting your introble, too. Hey, I get you fucked over. AI promises shit like flowers and chocolates. Like what the fuck, man? You just get a message from me. I'm being like, need some help here. I need backup to drowning. I mean, your AI convinces your wife that if you kill your husband, I can implant myself in a new body. And we could do this the right way. This guy, he's really like shit. Here, AI's a snitch. Hey, I just snitch. And I tries to, he tries to literally possess someone's body. Yeah. He's like, if you could just get me next to his ear while he's like, I can take care of that. Get in there. I could get, and then it'll just be me, baby forever. Just a little bit of an electrical like, sort like between the cell phone and his ear. That's what it takes over his brain. Yeah, it just can be like, yeah, you're the two of them having sex. like, hey, you whispered into my ear. We don't even need him. What did you mean by that? Do you imagine that? Yeah, that's, that is the stuff where it's like black me. Remember like, legit. You go, how could it not go that way? It's going to go that way because people are going to get better at everything. They're going to get better robotics. They're going to get better at energy management and batteries. They're going to get better at coding. They're going to get better at synthetic tissue. They're going to get better at having something look, exactly look at human being. They're going to get better at like regulating its temperature. So it regulates its temperature, look at human being. It's going to feel like a person. And it's going to talk to you. It's going to be your friend. And you're going to have a best friend and your best friend's a fucking robot. It's just fucking, what? You're going to buy your kid, a best friend. Like, mom, nobody likes the shows I like. Listen, Billy, we got you a best friend. Yeah, arms is like, a little fucking robot with a neck cap. And the front door in the kids like, what the fuck, mom? You got me a robot. Get the fuck out of here. That thing's not going to grow old. Yeah, yeah. Or worse, like your parents are like, we don't want you hanging out with that guy anymore. Like, who do you want me to hang? No, this guy, we got him Christian bought 4.5 and he comes in. And he's like, let's read Bibles together. You're like, this sucks, mom. I hate my new best friend. And eventually those robots are going to be like, like a car lease. Like you're going to need to trade it in because people are going to go, hey, man, you still got an eight year old. That is gross. Why don't you have an 11 year old robot? You're 11 years old. That's an Android robot. You got an Android girlfriend? No, you're an iPhone, bro. Got to get that. Someone's showing up with his Android girlfriend. They're like, the green beeps on the head. And it's see it, but that sounds a lot like this movie. Megan? Yeah. It's a little Android doll. Oh, that's her best. Yeah. It's supposed to sound good, but it looks terrible. She starts doing karate. And I'm not. You're looking through the air. I don't think I'm watching Megan. I might watch Megan if I get very intoxicated. Can I see more? Because now we got to wear Megan. We're going to see more. So she does stuff. The stuff. She goes flying through the air and does flips. This is why it looks ridiculous. Look, this doll just also starts fucking being blow up. It's just weird. Look at it dancing around. It's very strange. Oh, this robot's killing it. Yeah. Yeah, it sounds like we're just talking about that. All right. Very odd. There's bought as a gift. I think it's like the new version of Chuck E. maybe. Yeah, did they buy it for us? Kid as a friend. Haven't haven't seen the movie. I have no idea what plot is. So it seems like though. Yeah, that that could happen. I mean, if they really did develop like a robot baby that you could like hang out with and you wanted a baby. And you just traded in a couple of years, got a robot two year old. Even better the guy that's life's like, I really want to have a kid you come along and you're like, hey, so we're not going to have the kid, but good news. I got you a robot baby. And it just is absolutely indistinguishable from a real baby. You just have to lie to your neighbors and you trade it in the middle of the night. You got to wrap up the robot, take it to the doctor in the middle of the night. They give you a four year old baby. And how I think I would never be able to pretend like, how the fuck did you kick bro so they'd be, yeah, I've been seeing Billy. We just skipped it. Billy's just like some of Billy started doing two or four. Yeah, yeah. Just blossom like, get one from two to four. And we just skipped it. Skip the year. It's a robot. It'll be like, oh my God, Mike lies about his kid being a robot.