So you ran OMB before and you don't have to come in on this. It sounds like you are very likely to run OMB again. Tell us what OMB is for those who aren't from Washington, what it does and what you would do with it. So OMB is the nerve center of the federal government, particularly executive branch. So it has the ability to turn on and off any spending within the office of management budget. It has the ability to turn off the spending that's going on at the agencies. It has all the regulations coming through it to assess whether it's good or bad or too expensive or it could be done a different way or what does the president think. And then all of government execution. So anytime you have cabinet executive branches conflicting with each other or working together or on something, for instance, you know, the wall. President wanted to fund the wall. We at OMB gave him a plan to be able to go and fund the wall through money. That was at the Department of Defense and to use that because Congress wouldn't give him the ordinary money at the Department of Homeland Security. So it really is presidents use OMB to tame the bureaucracy, the administrative state. It was really pioneer, honestly, by FDR. And then President Nixon also was really learning from FDR and how to use it to tame the bureaucracy. And we would have seen that he create the office Roosevelt. The office was formerly the Bureau of the Budget for the last 100 years, right? And then Nixon renamed it Office of Management and Budget and it becomes kind of more of a statutory thing reporting directly to the president no longer within treasury. And so since then you've had it still there, still really important viewed by the country largely as a budget cutting, exercise, but it is the president's most important tool to dealing with the bureaucracy and administrative state. And the nice thing about President Trump is he knows that and he knows how to use it effectively. You can't get any of your domestic policy done with OMB and sounds like no. You will be in a situation where you will have at best really awesome cabinet secretaries who are dealing on sitting on top of massive bureaucracies that largely don't do what they tell them to do. And you have to have statutory tools at your disposal that force that bureaucracy from the White House to get in line. And that is really the main thing that OMB can accomplish in addition to what everyone would think of from a budget office, which is, yeah, you cut spending, you figure out how to deal with your fiscal finances and all of that. You're making me anxious. I mean, I can't handle a disobedient dog. I can't imagine what a disobedient federal agency looks like. How resistant are they to democracy? They're incredibly resistant. I mean, think about Ukraine and the president in that first term wanted to cut off funding for Ukraine why? Because it's a corrupt country. And we didn't know how it was going to be spent just totally normal policy process to go through the people lost their minds about. But the bureaucracy was literally just ignoring it. And quite frankly, his political appointees like John Bolton were ignoring him as well. And what we then did at OMB was I had been personally told, look, you know, I want the money cut off until we can figure out where it's going and we cut the money off. And it was like all hell broke loose within the bureaucracy. We got impeached. Yeah. And so, yeah. And so you have the ability at that point to bring them to come to heal and to do what the president has been telling them to do. And we can do that in foreign aid. We can do that all sorts of ways. It's kind of crazy. I mean, everything you're saying, I'm familiar with. But if you think about it, that's the end of democracy because the only authority in the executive branch comes from the president and the vice president also elected. But it comes from voters as expressed through elections. So bureaucrats and federal agency appointees in the federal agency have no authority to act independently that I'm under our constitution. Do they? No. The left has innovated over a hundred years to create this fourth branch of an administrative state. I might call out the regime. This administrative state that is totally unaccountable to a president that lets it move in the direction that it has been going. But the president is accountable to voters, so remembers of Congress. And the system is designed that way. That's why we say it's a democracy or constitutional public because the voters convey bestow the authority on their leaders. And so this seems not only illegal their behavior, but unconstitutional. I mean, at the most basic level unconstitutional now, totally unconstitutional. And if you would have seen Woodrow Wilson, Bimonar's constitutional system, he would have wanted constitutional amendments. The left stopped talking about constitutional amendments because they innovated to this new fourth branch, which is totally different than anything the founders would have ever understood. The notion of independent agencies that think of and Congress has designed them to be divorced from the president. But even the notion of like, this is, this is, we're supposed to be technocrats and experts and we don't have to listen to what you say. We work for, and I caught this tucker, people would say, well, we work for the office of the president. Huh? What? What is that? It's a way. They get their authority. They have essentially taken authority. They have no legitimate authority. They have no legitimate authority in the Constitution. But they are part of this fourth branch that I still believe reports in large measure to congressional leadership and in the case street interest, right? You have very powerful interests that direct them to keep going in the direction that they want them to go. That's why these bills are written in such a way that they are anything, you could read anything into them, right? When Nancy Pelosi says, we're going to find out what the bill says, she wasn't actually being inaccurate. That's their strategy. They pass bills and then they let the experts fill them in. But over the phone, they put massive pressure on them to go along with their directions and their ends. And lo and behold, you get conservatives or publicans that take office and then you find that it's incredibly difficult to wield power to get them, to deal with all that muscle memory, to get them to do what you want. And so you got to have statutory authority that a president kind of steps in and says, I am fully aware of where I sit in the Constitution. I am fully aware of the tools at my disposal and I'm going to use them on behalf of the American people because I just want a massive agenda setting election and I'm going to go do what I said I would do. That's democracy, correct? That is democracy. That is not oligarchy. And when they say we're going to preserve democracy, we know that they have been meaning all they want to do is preserve their kind of a Morifice oligarchy administrative deep state. I don't think that's an overstatement at all. I mean, I just think I don't even see the kind of argument against what you just said. So let's just, if you don't mind walking us through what happened in the example that you gave you, Crane. So you just said the president comes into office in 2017 and says, why are we saying all this money into Ukraine? Where's it going? There's no audit. We don't know. It's the most corrupt country in Europe, one of the most corrupt in the world. Maybe we should find out we don't know. Okay, we're cutting it off till we know. I think that's what you said. And then the agencies like now we're going to continue to fund you Crane. How do they do that? They ignore the president. And there and officials ignore the president. And I think one of the things you'll see in this next Trump term is policy officials, his political appointees that are not looking to get out of what he has clearly told them to do. So let's assume that issue is solved. But at the bureaucratic level. The issue, I think what you're saying is let's assume that he appoints people who agree with him and we'll do what he asks. Correct. Okay. It was part of what we call the policy process, right? Where you would go and you defend and you articulate what you're trying to accomplish. And we had put the hold on the Ukraine funding. And my guy goes to all of these meetings and he's like literally the only one in the room that wants to do what the president has asked him to do. Everyone's kind of just gang enough on him. And that is the think of that often for all of our political appointees. They are surrounded by people that have no idea about what the reasons and the agenda that the president has been put in office. And they're just bombarded with reasons of how can you do this? What are you thinking? Did you know that this is you can't do this most of the time that's not true. And so you have to cut through all of that and to have the courage of your convictions and quite frankly Tucker, the know how to know to have read the law to get in the granular or details yourselves to not be staffed by your people working for you. This notion that you can just come in and preside is not true. You have to be in the weeds and to drive these agencies to be able to fix where we have the undergrowth and the muscle memory that we've had for decades. So why can't you just show if the president says again to refer to your example, I don't think we should be funding Ukraine. I'm elected. We're going to cut this off. If Congress wants to fund Ukraine, they can go ahead and do that. But the agency's not going to fund Ukraine. So why wouldn't you just fire the people who disobey who tried a silver democracy? You've got to know how to fire them and there are tools to do that. And the president was was innovating in that space himself with what's called schedule F of essentially saying if you work for me in your policy, a career official, think your attorneys who are writing regulations, then we're going to create a new classification for you and you are going to be what most of the country is, which is at will employee. That's where we were headed. But there was also ways that why I don't understand a system where a president, any president, Obama Biden Donald Trump comes in and doesn't have control of the executive branch because constitutionally he does have to do so. How come you can't fire the why is it just not as simple as saying you're fired? It should be. And this is one of the mountains of the administrative state. This is how they have built their institution by essentially having it being incredibly difficult to hire and fire employees. And so another example, when the president decided to take money from defense to build the wall, we had clear legal grounds to do it. That Congress had given us, it's called transfer authority. And I told this to the Hill. And obviously this was controversial. It should have been controversial. Congress had given us very clear transfer authority. I must have had at least three times someone re-litigate that decision from the career staff who work at OMB. Are you sure? Are you sure? I think we should oppose. I think this guys, the decision has been made, execute the decision. And you see that everywhere. Right? And if you don't drive it, you're going to get better. You're not going to be able to accomplish what the president needs you to come. How about if you were to just start demitting with any, okay, this is how democracy works. The people elect a leader. He carries out their will. Anyone standing in the way of that is subverting democracy. We will not allow that. Anyone who does that is fired instantly. Could you do that and just say you're fired for unconstitutional behavior? You can do that increasingly when you move towards a schedule F system and there are other tools in the toolbox to under the current system. What would happen if you tried that? If you lost it. Lost it. Yeah. But if you fire them all. Look, you've got a lot of tools on the table. It's just so infuriating. It is the one of the most infuriating things that you could possibly imagine. But I think that the good news, and this is I think the good news, not just in hiring the good news at large is that most of the time they have been able to get as far as they can because of just it is the way it is. It's precedent and laws that are not drafted precisely, but purposely vague. And as a result, we can then do it in reverse. You can have a president who can steps in and says, you know what, there's no constitutional amendment for me to take control of the administrative state. I'm going to do in reverse everything that you have done. And I think that is the great hope. What you need is people who are able to absorb political heat. They don't have a fear of conflict. They can execute under withering enemy fire. They are up to speed and they are no nonsense in their own ability to know what must be done. And they are unbelievably committed to the president and his agenda and believe and truly believe in their bones that they're not there for their own agenda. They're there for what president Trump was elected to do. And so his commanders intent matters a great deal. And that's the view that I always had to others. How do I get in the mind of the president to think through what is he trying to accomplish? And then I'm going to go figure out how to do it. Yeah, because once again, he is the authority and no one else does because only he was elected. Fixated on this question of like, where do career bureaucrats think they drive the authority to make these decisions? Like who made them God? I think it's very known ever asked that question in DC or considered a freak if you do, but I think it's a key question. So one of the problems that you had last time was the media explained how that works, how the media works in conjunction with the permanent state and the Congress to thwart the president. Well, I think number one, they are always framing narratives and messages that both are lies and are also designed to destabilize the Republicans in control who want to be for however that narrative is being framed. You used one already with democracy, right? If you're not aware that when they say democracy, they mean oligarchier, like I don't want to be anti-democratic. That's the whole point is preserving democracy. It's what we just did. And if you have a plan to deal with the administrative state and then they frame it as authoritarian, you don't want to cast off your own ally saying, I don't want to be anti-authoritarian. We saw this in COVID, right? We, if they define something as anti-science or anti-public health, it causes our political pointies to just completely wilt. And so that's I think the beauty of President Trump is kind of immune to these media-generated narratives that conflict with common sense reality. That I think is the main one because that is there, that is controlling the skies from a military standpoint, right? Like that is their ability to shape the conversation in such a way that it makes it very hard. too, they're obviously working in conjunction with with leakers and in individuals with know-how to know, you know, when a hold has been put on Ukraine to be able to send that and have it explode in the public arena. And so you have to be, you have to be prevent leaks, you have to govern well from the get-go to be able to manage all of that as best you possibly can. But I also think there's an opportunity there because they will report on conflict. They will report on confrontation. And when they do that, you can get the word out as to what you're doing. At least you can get the word out on shows like this and the new and developing ecosystem. Well, that's kind of it right there. I mean, that was the basis of my question. I do think things have changed, right? I mean, if you still care what the New York Times are Washington Post say or tendilinated and NBC News, like I hope you're not working there, right? Right. Anybody still cares what they think? No. The whole ball game has shifted, right? Like I don't even know why you would do many of these interviews at all because if you can't get, you know, you've got to be able to get your words out without just complete combativeness. And I think the best examples, remember the Caitlin Collins interview with President Trump. I mean, it's just constant interrupting and misuse of lies, actually. And so like that's the kind of thing that you're up against. But you can shape them. You can, particularly the print media. And I think it's important to at least attempt to do that. But you have to make the measure of the person that you're dealing with. Sometimes they're just, you know, they're, they're complete activists themselves. Do you remember when Democrats used to refer to abortion as something that should be safe, legal and rare? Well, they've changed their view on that. It went from a right to a sacrament. This isn't the pro choice movement you may remember from 30 years ago. This is something much darker. And that's why we have joined forces with Criborne, their sponsor of the show and of our speaking tour, to do something about us. The largest pro life organization in the United States. And they are doing what they should do, which is speaking up against this atrocity, killing babies after birth. No one seems to have the bravery to call that wrong, which it is. But Priborne is calling it out. Their networks of clinics are positioned in the highest abortion areas in the country. And they've rescued 300,000 babies when a woman considering an abortion searches to end her baby's life. Priborne is there. A single ultrasound costs 28 bucks. Five ultrasounds are 140 bucks. Giving women the information they need to make the decision that many of them actually want to make to have a baby. Any gift will help and all gifts are tax deductible. To donate securely, go to preborn.com or call pound 250 on your phone. And when asked, use the word baby. It does seem, I want to ask you with the intel agencies, it does seem like one of the main vectors of control is briefings. And the number of people I've spoken to, Congress executive branch like, oh no, no, if you only got the briefing, I think I live there too long. I just don't leave the briefing. You know, maybe sometimes they're accurate. Sometimes they're not, but they're almost always designed to control the person being briefed. Did you see that? I did. And I'm very rarely ever learned anything particularly interesting in the briefing. Is that true? Yeah. You killed Kennedy. Yes. They did not. Right. And so, you know, I think I came away with the similar skepticism of these briefings and the information and the over classification in the system. Yes. They classify everything. And you're really reading this thing. You're like, you realize that's all just normal stuff that's out in a congressional research service that's on Twitter. Right. And so like, so I think that's a huge thing that we've got to fix, you know, over classification and system. But I think they both create this environment where it's very exclusive. They are trying to bring you into their kind of priestly role so that no, I saw the briefing. If you had seen the briefing, you would be okay with us not having a FISA warrant requirement. Exactly. You would be okay with us just another hundred billion dollars for Ukraine just which we can't have Ukraine fall. None of it is rigorous analysis. And honestly, I think that's the biggest thing that I was promoting is the extent to which rigorous analysis that I thought would be there wasn't there. What do you mean by rigorous analysis? I don't expect people to agree with me constantly. I want to, I want well prepared memos that have a conviction to them. Yes. It's not, these are not like, I'm going to plant the flag. And then we can divide, we can see okay, who's right, who's that, who has better support? No, no, it's like, I'm going to give a blob an exercise to report on something. And the blob is going to kind of like all, it's not a Google spreadsheet, but it's going to all be a, you know, an interactive Google spreadsheet to just spit out something that is a consensus document. And you're reading this thing, you're like, this makes no real claims other than to affirm the narrative that we just have to write. So what's the point other than to preserve the status quo? At that point, the point is just to know what the intelligence community is writing on. Did you're not going to learn anything from it? I talked to someone recently in the last few days who works in the, in Tokyo, the IC, who is saying that you can see people who come to Washington for the first time in high positions in other branch before and after their briefings and they're like different people and they, they fall for it. Like all of them fall for it. No, no, we're going to tell you all the things you wondered about. We're going to tell you the truth about the presence, especially Trump seems, as you said, immune from this and he's done it before. But this person said, you should see how much they change like deep inside. Once we lay, you know, lay the bullshit on them. They just, they're not the same. Have you noticed that? I've seen it, you know, I think part of the problem and this is endemic of not just the IC, but our, we don't read enough in general. We don't have our own convictions. We don't search for understanding ourselves. And so you have people go in and they're like, I'm kind of need this career staff to tell me what to think. I don't want to look stupid, right? And so that has killed us on our side of the aisle, the conservative side to say, we don't have people that are driving policy and bringing their own opinions in the history. And so they, they are susceptible to feeling like they, and they still, they still believe that these people have an authoritative stance on things and they don't have enough skepticism that in fact, you know, there's no, the emperor has no clothes, right? And then that is the, and you've got to bring that perspective their weak inside is what you're saying a lot of these people. I do think that's, I do think that's the case, you know, and I, you know, for the standpoint of the, I see the other thing that they would do is they, they would keep you from being briefed, right? The brief and we've already discussed of what the brief is and sometimes like what President Trump is saying, I don't not necessarily get the brief, right? But I would find that I wasn't read into certain things until they needed my signature. So once they needed some reason to get my signature, then all of a sudden I get this brief, right? And it was, that's not the way it should be. If you're trying to provide oversight and accountability, you need, you don't know what you don't know. And so you have to be able to be have the, the whole entire landscape of things that you could, oh, that's, that's interesting. We should do something, the President Trump wouldn't like that. And I find that was very restrictive unless they needed me. And so I basically said, look, you're, I'm not going to, you are not getting my signature unless you get me briefed up. And I want, I want to access to all of these things that I need to be able to provide oversight for the federal government. And one of the things that we did Tucker is that since the rise of OMB, the inability to turn funding on and off had always been done by a career individual, not a political appointee. And so we changed that. And it was like the, it was like the, the world was going to end. They said, look, you're going to destroy the agency. You can't, you can't handle the bandwidth. You can't handle the bandwidth chaos will be, will be unmatched. And we changed it. And next thing you know, everything's flowing across our desk. Oh, that's interesting. You're not doing that. You know, it was just amazing. And if you don't know and have that thesis that says, this is what must be done, you could be the most incredible conservative in the world. You could be the most policy, consistent person with the president. But you don't know how to put your hand in the glove and, and use that agency for the president's behalf. The president's not going to be able to be well served at that agency. I saw David Ignatius who was a long time water carrier for the CIA. I don't know if they're paying him, but they should be because he does their bidding and has for decades at the Washington Post. And I heard him saying yesterday that we can't have Tulsi Gabbard at DNI, Director of National Intelligence, because it will cause quote chaos, because the intel community doesn't like her. And basically he's making the argument that we should not have silly and control these agencies because the agencies won't like it. Just say it. That's what you really mean. Well, I think that's basically what he's saying. And so that's, again, that's dictatorship is what he's describing. But he used chaos as kind of the threat. Okay. But you've been there. If you really did everything that was needed in order to root out the corruption that defines our government, you will cause some chaos. You would. Wouldn't you? It will certainly read on the papers like, hey, that's good fair. As to what's just this normal good government behind the scenes, managing, pushing through whatever. I think it can be done very wisely and done in a way that anyone who had a bird's eye view into that would be able to say that's exactly what we put this administration into office. But yeah, you're going to have to kick over people's paradigms. You're going to have to kick over people's turds. You're going to have to change people's understanding of things that they have invested their whole life into a view of the world. And none of this is their views of the world aren't incident rooted in the constitution. And in some cases, in some cases any version of the facts. But you're going to that's going to cause a lot of turmoil within these bureaucracies. And you got to fight through it. And then they're going to overlay the aspect of, oh my gosh, you guys are racists. And you know, you guys don't care about us as people. You know, you're going to have to deal with that too, right? They are, you know, one of the arguments that they're using in the press against me right now, as they say, he called for trauma within the bureaucracies. Yeah, I called for trauma within the bureaucracies. The bureaucracies hate the American people. They want to put a 70 centimeter year old and did a 70 centimeter old Navy veteran in jail for 18 months for building four ponds on his ranch to fight wildfires. That's not the Department of Justice. That's the EPA. We go every agency and it's not just big government. It's weaponized against the country. Of course. And so yeah, we, we, I would want to provide trauma against that bureaucracy in a way that frees the American people from the people that have assumed the type of power that the Constitution and no law, no public debate ever gave them. Does that mean we dislike everyone working at federal agencies and want them to have a bad life? No, of course. A lot of people there who have come to serve and do great public service and we want to affirm that and we want to turn over the bureaucracies that are traumatizing the American people. Yeah, and the outcomes are terrible and they're terrible because it's corrupt. That's why it doesn't change. And the DC metro area is the richest in the country and they don't make anything. So it's just like that's the most obvious marker for corruption that I can imagine. What's about what congressional confirmation hearings are going to look like for Trump's appointees? They're going to be exhilarating if you have the right approach. But they'll, you know, they're going to come at everything we've got, right? You know, or everything they've got with it with what they are able to put someone in the dock and that individual is going to have to face the balance of wanting to defend everything that they've done in life and belief. And at the same time, the thing that's a little hard about is you're no longer your defend everything that they've done in life and belief. And at the same time, the thing that's a little hard about is you're no longer yourself, right? You are yourself, but you are also going to do a job for a person. So what I think about a particular issue doesn't mean as much as what the president thinks. That's correct. Something right like that. And so it is a different thing than coming on and doing an interview about what your viewpoints on our particular. No, that's exactly what's not a cable news hit. Right? No. So, but I think, look, I have had experienced, you know, Bernie Sanders went after me very, very hard in my first confirmation hearing as deputy OMB for essentially believing in John 3-16. And it was, it was, he hit you, he attacked you on the basis of the word, he said I was a big it. And I should not serve in the federal government because of my Christian faith in believing something that essentially comes down to what's articulated at sports games with John 3-16. And that was, most close, who's the bigot who is the bigger, right? That's a perfect question. It goes back. That most nominees will not go through what I went through. But I will tell them, you will get through it. You will get to the other side and it will be the most freeing thing in the world. You will come at through the end of a process like that and you will, I find it to be at that point exhilarating because it prepares you to take on enemy fire. What are they going to, what are you afraid of been calling you big it racist, Christian nationalists, authoritarian, if you are, if you are not afraid of these attacks and you give them no credence, no credibility, then you will be able to get through these things. You will be able to convince enough Senator and you will be able to serve more effectively. But the bright lights will be on in these confirmation hearings. How much of it is theatrical and how much of it is real? So you go into a hearing like that, your confirmation hearing, do you know the outcome at the beginning? Or do you think that votes really change based on the testimony of nominees? I don't think most votes change at all. I think that you may have one or two anomaly senators that are trying to, have you answered something to their satisfaction or are they trying to get a feel for you that they haven't otherwise? But I think increasingly in the part of the world that we live in, the Democrats are voting no and it's a matter of making sure you've convinced and you've brought in the... Do you get... I mean, it's interesting. I've got no Democrat votes. But the Republicans are always voting for the... I mean, Lindsey Graham will vote for any Democrat. I'm not going to put you in an uncomfortable situation. But there are plenty of Republican senators who are liberal Democrats effectively and they vote for all kinds of nominees. But you don't see that on the other side. You never see that on the other side. And they have an appreciation that they have to attack our people at every level because they know that every level is a stepping stone for the next level. Exactly. Right? So they don't make as they all is just like the underserved thing. Yeah, exactly. No, we're opposed to that. That guy will be secretary some direct. Well, your part, guess a perfect example, aren't you? Well, certainly the first term, right? I've become deputy and next thing you know, Mick goes to the chief of staff and so I have an opportunity to serve as director. And so that is... They understand government and they understand the career path that is opening for people and they... When they sense, it's not always a case. But when they sense that this is a committed conservative, it's a partisan line down the road. For 35 years, Liberty Safe has been the number one manufacturer of safe made in this country. American made from start to finish. They make high quality gun safes. I've got one. Vault doors, home safes, handgun vaults, whatever you need to protect the things you value. And again, I can tell you from personal experience, these guys know what they're doing. I use Liberty Saves for the things that I don't want stolen, the things that really matter. My father's shotguns, the documents that I've got to have and a lot more. I'm not gonna tell you what else. But you need one. Primerates are way up. And if you have anything you would like to protect, that you need to protect Liberty Saves is the way to do it. Now Liberty Safe has over 350 dealers nationwide who specialize in delivery and installation and answering any questions you have. If you've got so many protect, they've got a way to protect it. Visit LibertySafe.com. Pick out what you need and be sure to use the code TUCKER at check out to let them know that we sent you. They'll take care of the rest. Liberty Safe is a product we fervently believe in. With Liberty Safe, you were always protected. Isn't it the role of Republican leaders, particularly now since Trump won the majority of the popular vote, overwhelming majority of control votes, House and Senate are Republican majority of state houses. The majority of governorships, that's a mandate. So that means that Republican leaders, the two head guys in the House and Senate should be helping. Are they going to? I have high hopes that people are seeing what Trump just accomplished and are going to be pulling the oars to get things done as soon as possible. And I think the jury is out. I think I want to see and I'm hoping to see people looking for ways to move these appointees through the process and sounds like they're trying to do that. We'll see. We have to do things not based on how it has been done recently. Like this whole notion of recess appointments. You have some people out there who are saying this is unconstitutional. is not the way it was meant to be. It's totally wrong. It is a specific provision in the constitution to be able to allow a president if he does if he got has to stand up in administration quickly and he's dealing with a Senate that won't move quickly enough to be able to install his people so that he can actually function as a government. That it specifically mapped out and yet you have so in the constitution. So it's by definition not a constitution. Don't fair. So you have Republicans, one of them in particular, like Ed Wheeling right now, who's attacking Trump for even mentioning who's Ed Wheeling? He writes one of the main kind of legal luminaries on the right and ethics and public policy are one of those think tanks. And he's out there opposing the whole notion of recess appointments for whatever reason I don't know other than he thinks it unseemly and not the way the the found. Okay. So you don't, I mean, this is a whole separate question and it's a broad brush. But in general, conservative think tanks with some exceptions are not conservative. They're tools of the left and sort of repositories have broke down people with no other job prospects. Why would anyone pay attention to them? I think they should increasingly not be right. Yeah. And by the way, there's some good ones that you know, I love Kevin Roberts and heritage and then there are good people in something. Thanks for sure. But in general, it's like the world of Jonah Goldberg. It's like, okay, what you think? It only matter to the extent that people in the arena listen to them. Right. And that is increasingly they are not being listened to. And I think that's part of one of the reasons why they're so arms about it. Right. I mean, that's national review itself is that's what is phenomenal national review that was a magazine in the 50s. Right. Right. And I think that's, but at my point is the extent to which people have opposed Trump and the American first agenda, I think ultimately is a loss of power because they didn't get to set the agenda. They don't get to be the traffic cop. They don't get to kind of say, Oh, this is this offense, my sensibility and more. And no, if you have a radical constitutionalism and that's really what I've been calling for, given this crazy unconstitutional situation that we're finding ourselves in, if you have a radical constitutionalism, it's going to be destabilizing. You may find that you can use the James Madison could have put a whole lot more recess appointments and then you would have ever imagined. But it's also exhilarating. And why if you're trying to preserve the country, would you make arguments against that? Why wouldn't you be making arguments for us? That's one of the reasons we just put out a five page paper. We'll put out a 40 page paper next as to this is the constitutional grounds for recess appointments. If we haven't just, President Trump hasn't decided to do it, but if he does, he will be in the same vein as our founders. It's a little weird. And again, you haven't, well, as of right now, let's November 18th, have not been nominated. No, yeah. I think it will be. Hope so. But you haven't been. So I don't want to put you in an awkward spot because if you were, you're going to have to deal with this. But why would Mitch McConnell still this Senate leader of Republicans? Why would he say we're not doing recess appointments? Again, I can't, I haven't spoken to Senator McConnell on it. My guess is that the Senate is going to want to know the argument. And they probably have been told and may have been told. And I'm going to just keep it as positive as possible that this is not inappropriate. You can't do it. And I want to show them. And no one fact you can. It is entirely appropriate. And to win the argument. And then if you win the argument and then people are saying, no, well, you don't want to do this, then it's a different matter. Right? It's like, it just kind of reveals that they're, they're not actually on board with those particular nominees going into office. And that's a different issue. So I think that we don't know yet to whether, well, the Senate have an issue. I mean, to some extent, the Senate knows it has an issue because they couldn't move these nominees fast enough in the first term because the Democrats were filibustering everyone. Right? And so and by the way, you know, a lot of these hearings and you read the history books and people got approved by the Senate in that day. You know, like the system wasn't meant to be the slow and it has been bogged down and slowed down. And we'll see, you know, Senator Thune, the majority leader of Thune will have a chance to put his own imprint on the Senate. And I want to see how he does. Yeah, I've got you know, high expectations, low hopes, hope I'm wrong. Um, it'd be one thing if the outcome was positive if the country was thriving. You know, you say, okay, the system's just functional, but you don't really need a lot of change right now. So that's fine. But the outcome is not positive at all. It's total destruction of the country we grew up in. So gotta fix it. Why would you want to enter back into this? Well, you know, I've always said last four years, I would never want to miss out on another chance to be at the president's side. I find in him to be someone who's so uniquely situated for the moment. And you go back and I've done some reading on this. You go back and read some of the Federalist papers and they actually designed the system for someone like him, whose his interests would align with the country's interests to such an extent to which it actually works. Like separation of powers is meant to have strong opinionated, convictional leadership that go as fast as they can and hard as they can in their direction. And for the system to then have crew separation of powers, right? An example of that is is what he's proposing on recess appointments. If the Constitution allows you to do it, why wouldn't you do it if it's in your interest? And then let's see what Congress does in response to but that's real separation of power. It's not like this kind of fake, you know, fourth branch administrative state where none of it works and it's all kind of cartel behind the scene, wherever all you get is kind of different parts of each of the branch coming together, almost as a blob. And I think he's so unique in terms of being a historical transformative person that we can actually save the country. And that's really what it comes down to. The hours late, it's 1159, it's not too late, but it's really late. And this isn't an election where you can just have sea saws. We'll be up and you'll be down. Now, we, if we don't win and we he's won an electoral mandate now it's time to actually execute. If we don't execute, we may never have this chance again. And so you have the president who's ready to go. Now you need know how people who can do that and do it with the attacks that are coming and they will come. Right. They will come hardest at the people that they believe are the greatest threats. And but but that's what the president needs. The president needs those types of people where he's not going to be successful and the country won't be saved. And I just, I think that it's incumbent on those of us who have that skill set who have had the experiences we've had, you know, we're put here for a reason. We're here because we got as given us a particular purpose for a particular time. And it's incumbent us to be responsible with those moments that we're given. So I don't know what the future holds. I don't know if I serve or if I continue at my center to to be championing the ideas that he's working on. I'm happy with both of those scenarios, but it's incumbent on us to to to to give everything we can to be successful in this moment because I don't think we will get it another moment like this. And if you doubt how serious the opposition is to the public not just a Trump, but to the majority of the country that voted for Trump, they're trying to leave him with World War three on the way out. Yeah. I can't imagine more desperate or evil thing for Tony Blinken who I think is desperate and evil my view. To do, leave him with the war, a lame duck president trying to start a war with the world's largest nuclear power Russia. What do you make of that? It's incredibly insidious and then add to the fact that he can't put two sentences together and he's largely not in control of his own government. And so you have almost an unelected president with individuals behind the scenes that are doing this. It doesn't surprise me though. I mean, these are the same people that have weaponized the Department of Justice, the lawfare. I have a colleague of mine, Jeff Clark, who's you know, has they're trying to disbar him because of the the care that he had on behalf of the president to deal with voter integrity and election fraud after 2020. And so the system has thrown everything at the warriors that are on the field. You're seeing that with Tulsi, you're seeing that with Matt Gates. I mean, why is all of this stuff being thrown at him slandlessly? Can I just say, I thought I'm sorry to the grasp of it since you mentioned Gates. We don't accuse, look, DOJ leaked that he was a child sex trafficker. Okay. So at that point, they have a moral, I would say legal obligation to charge him for child sex trafficking and proven in court. And if they can't shut the f up, but they didn't do that. They did not a leak that Matt Gates, a guy they didn't like whose views were threat to them is a child sex trafficker. Then they just let it hang in the air and all their repulsive little minions like Joe Scarborough, like he's a child sex trafficker. You want to live in a world with a secret police can just slander you through the media like I read in my Bible this morning that you don't believe something unless two or three people are witnesses and say, and there is none of that. In fact, let's say like, well, right. And in fact, the weaponized Department of Justice said we don't have the proof to pursue these allegations. I know. And so then you read in the story accused him of it. They accuse it. They make the case, the reporter said read it this morning. And then they say it should be known that Matt Gates denies that these allegations of course he denies it because they're not true. The Department of Justice, there's no accounting of the fact that these things have been proven not to be true. And yet people and there's a tendency on our side and this is very troubling. It's not just the left which is kind of state regime propaganda. There is a tendency on our side to believe that if there's smoke, there must be fire. Why do we do that? Why do we, why does our side, why does Republican congressman Republican senators believe that where there must be smoke, there must be fire only because this person has been a confrontational courageous, conviction leader in a true generational talent. I might add. So that's that what the last point is in just people. That's just a fact. I mean Gates is the most articulate member of Congress. It's a sign of clothes. Right. So they hate him for that. Because he's a danger. My explanation, of course, I've noticed that Republicans believe most of what they're told. Part of it is I think there's an IQ gap. But from just being honest, part of it is they believe in the system and Democrats just don't believe in the system at all. They don't believe in any system that that curtailed their power basically. But Republicans really believe in it to their great credit. And so they're like, well, it's the DOJ. I mean, it's kind of corrupt on the margins. There's some bad apples, but most of them are really great. Why would the great ones resign? Right. Right. I don't I don't think there's any evidence are mostly great at all. I think they're really dangerous heavily armed. Do you maybe that's the answer? I think that that is fundamental. It's too full. I think the left is made up of revolutionaries in the first year. Right. And their Marxist one, if you've read witness, everyone knows that, right? Like that it's not a new phenomena. It's become militarized over and over. Which is written in like 1955. Correct. Right. So now and now what that looks like is not someone who's behind the scenes spy. Now that looks like, you know, some of their members of Congress, right? Like an AOC that their Marxist revolutionaries are voting in Congress. So that's their side. And our side doesn't really grapple with that. We don't make every decision realizing like that's what they think. And that's what they're doing. So I'm not going to listen to what they just kind of chit chat conversation. I'm going to to govern and make decisions based on what I know they are pursuing. No, you're enemy. Secondly, we do have trust in kind of the media and the institutions like Tony Fauci can't be lying. Right. It can't really. He must not have been doing gain of function research. If he said he wasn't he's Tony Fauci. Right. Like that's what we were up against and totally true. And that is the wrong. You got to have a skepticism of all of these people and their institutions and their bureaucracies. Okay. What needs to be done? And just while shut up, I'll stop with my stupid editorial comments. You just go through the top three or four things that you think this incoming administration, which has a rare mandate should achieve in order. I believe that the there's a lot of policy issues downstream, the border inflation wars across the world. All of them are downstream of one reality. And that is we don't the American people currently are not in control of their government. And the president hasn't been either. And so man, we have to solve that. We have to solve the woken the weaponized bureaucracy and have the president take control of the executive branch. So my belief or anyone who wants to listen is that you you have to the president has to move exactly as fast and as aggressively as possible with a radical constitutional perspective to be able to dismantle that bureaucracy in their power centers. And I think there are a couple of of ways to do it. Number one is going after the whole notion of independence. There are no independent agencies. Congress may have viewed them as such, SEC or the FCC, CFPB, the whole alphabet suit. But that is not something that the Constitution understands. So there may be different strategies with each one of them about how you dismantle them. But as an administration, the whole notion of an independent agency should be thrown out, particularly with the Department of Justice, in which there's literally no law. All it is is precedent for the Watergate era that the Attorney General and those lawyers don't work for the president. And who do they work for? They think that they work for themselves. They think that they are. So they have the power to kill people just because they awarded themselves that power. They have the power to kill people. They believe that they have the power for all of the prosecutions and that the president doesn't get us saying any of that. And we have to go at that as hard as we possibly can, whether that's the military. We have a whole military industrial complex of generals. In Tommy Tuberville kind of exposed this this last year with a fight about life. But it really became a fight about whether we have essentially a military that is not subject to civilian leadership. So you can apply the concept of destroying independence at every agency. I even saw it in aspects of OMB with regard to who gets to make the decisions on statistics. There are little pockets of independence that have to be just you got to remove those right. It's they're unconstitutional. Number two, would you include the Fed in that? So I am not a huge fan of the Fed. I can't I can't look at the Constitution and the massive decades long decisions that they have made totally undemocratic and and see that that is a place where their deserves to be an exception for. I don't even understand who controls the Fed. I mean, and where does their authority come from God? Do they are they speaking directly to God? Like where does this know because they're wrong and they've been wrong? You know, that notice for decades, right? Right. Let's go zero interest rates for 11 years. See what happens and see what happens. So President Trump has it run on that. And so I'm not going to speak. But I'm just interested in this. You've looked into the question of what authority does the Constitution bestow into whom? No, and it give me an example. If you go on T if you were watching news, you're going to have seen in the last two years ads saying, oppose the feds regulations on capital bank capital, right? Well, who are they supposed to call? They're not calling it a congressman. Congressman has no power. The issue is like the call to action is against the Fed. Well, sorry, you're kind of out of luck. And what's what's the lever we would use to influence their level, right? And so they have existed with this notion that they have this priestly ability to make decisions. And in fact, I don't actually think they're that good at it. I think people like President Trump are in fact better at it. And there's no reason that they should be exempt from the normal democratic process. And if Congress wants to come along and pass rules, it says, you know, this is how we want the money supply to go. All of that is in their purview. But I think you know, this is not some exception to the rule. Doesn't mean in any way that, you know, President Trump has any interest in doing anything in this area. But I don't think it, I don't think it's the exception that proves the rule on independence being something that is important downstream to the CDC, the NIH. I think everything that people like Bobby Kennedy have been running on and others is about, no, you're not some priestly role. You are politicians yourself. You just don't have to face voters, right? So independence is, I think, first and foremost, number two, bring back the notion of empowerment. And this is something that of what of empowerment, the ability to not spend money for 200 years, presidents had the ability to not spend a congressional appropriation. That has always been the constitutional system. It had been brought, it had been a paradigm that had been brought from from the UK and how we understood the constitutional principle is certainly how are the purse means that Congress gets to set the ceiling. You can't spend without a congressional appropriation, but you weren't ever meant to be forced to spend it and it has become a floor. So 200 years, presidents are using empowerment. They get money for something. The president says, I don't think it's a good idea or I certainly can do it better or I have events that are happening overseas that cause me not to want to spend on the gun boat when I want to get some treaty done. All manner of executive decision making that would be a part of that. In the 1970s, at the lowest moment of the presidency, Congress steps in and to some extent the courts and they passed the empowerment control act, which was really the empowerment elimination act. And in that, from that moment, they had destroyed separation of powers on spending on fiscal issues, but it was beyond that. It wasn't just about dollars and cents. It was about control of the bureaucracy. So that law effectively meant the executive branch, the president's agencies have to spend every dollar their sent by the Congress. Correct. And I believe as a budget guy, that was the original sin on why we can't do anything fiscally from that moment on. It's also why we get omnibus bills because if I only need you to get my signature and I lose all of my ability to throughout the rest of the fiscal year to push and pull and not spend and have make different decisions, I just got to get your one signature. So I'm going to put everything in that one bill, thousands of pages and I'm going to push it through at the most the hardest time for you politically. You might have some diplomatic visit that you're talking on. Yeah, totally. And so empowerment is in vitally important, not just to save the country fiscally. It is vitally important to be able to rest control of the bureaucracy because when you combine Congress giving the agencies vast authority to interpret the laws that they passed overly broad make law essentially, make law essentially that has no repercussions on the people who voted it. They don't have to vote on what the right blended for ethanol. And then you say that your funding is going for Congress and the president has no ability. Sorry Mr. President, you don't have to, that's illegal. You can't, you can't turn off my funding. Now, imperial Congress still exists just a lot more subtle. So that's number two, bringing back empowerment. Number three is is dramatically going at restoring at will employment as far as you can. A lot of ideas on the agenda. But it's always companies are always telling you how much money they're giving to charity. Oh, we're so charitable. But what are the charities they're giving to? These brands that you buy that you have in your house. You don't even want to know very often their charities that don't have the same values that your family has. Sometimes their charities that don't like your family at all. But when you use pure talk, which is a cell phone company, a lot of us use, you can be certain that your money is going to charities that you yourself would give to veteran lead companies for example. To date, pure talk has gotten rid of 10 million dollars in debt held by veterans. They've spent tens of thousands more every month to help prevent veteran suicide. They just gave 50 grand to Mike Rowe works, which gives scholarships to veteran learning the trades after they leave military service, etc. etc. So you've seen companies once again, we're not going to name names Bud Light, but they do business with lunatics again, charities that run contrary to your world view that despise your world view, but with pure talk, you don't have to worry about that. This is a company that supports the causes that you can support. Pure talk gives you the same great cell service that America's most dependable 5G networks provide for half the cost. They'll support small businesses with excellent and affordable business plans. They are powering us here at TCN, so we can vouch for it and they can probably save you money too. Find out could a pure talk dot com slash Tucker today. Switch to a company that aligns with your values. Pure talk when you sign up at pure talk dot com slash Tucker, you get an additional 50% off your first month. We recommend it. Can we just go back to him? How many? Yeah, super quick. So what was the idea during Watergate of forcing the president to spend all the money, the Congress sends it like why would you want that? You only want it from the standpoint of control. If you want to be able to say you're going to spend what I tell you in the spend that it is nothing more than an institutional desire to force the president to spend an ex amount of money. But again, it's never just about that. It's always about where they have tried to innovate from really the press of era. Like they wanted congressional government. That was the title of Woodrow Wilson's he wanted a system where essentially the agencies un-it congressional government. That was the title of Woodrow Wilson's book. He wanted a system where essentially the agencies largely worked out of the Congress or associated with Congress, not unlike what you would see in the House of Commons, right, where their cabinet lives in their House of Parliament and it's largely the monarch, the executive over time becomes toothless. That's essentially what they have wanted and have pursued at every turn here. And you saw that on steroids with them using the events of Watergate to promulgate new paradigms and ways of binding the constitutional system from working. So everything post-watergate is largely, you can just make an assumption, it's not the way it was meant to work. And so you have our guys defending post-watergate paradigms instead of trying to think through, okay, let's go back, let's go back to what the founders would have actually envisioned. Amazing. Okay, so to your third point, thank you for this, by the way. So to your third point that the president has to be able to fire people who are supporting democracy. Why can't he? How did federal bureaucrats wind up with a kind of super tenure? No matter what they do, you can't get rid of them. Like, I don't understand, they work for the public. Right. Laws that have been passed, perhaps not challenged, that laws have been passed, that give them bargaining power, that give them certain processes that have to be followed before they can be dismissed. But I think in that, and it's certainly made it very, very hard to hire and fire. The current system needs to be changed, but it also can be used to deal with these same kind of actors if you're willing to do it. And I don't want to get into all of the tools that are available, but they exist. One of them is the reduction force. I mean, you can, and Vivek has talked about this. I mean, you can proceed on the basis of what is good for the efficiency and the effectiveness of the agency to be able to dramatically lower at a macro level the size of the workforce. And that will give you certain legal abilities to begin to move people off of the payroll. So there's a lot of things that are being creatively discussed in the space, but it has to be front and center. Schedule after the President Trump has already run on. That seems to be like a day one thing. He already instituted in his first term. We just didn't get to get across the finish line. Every agency has to go and categories how many of his employees are policy and therefore subject to at-will employment. I put 90% of OMB in that category because I wanted A, it was true. And B, I wanted to set a high bar for the rest of my colleagues at agency. That this should be viewed maximally. You're willing to your own staff, which is the only way of saying you're willing to relinquish some power because personnel manpower is power. And it's always not just about firing, although there's certainly going to be mass of food layoffs and firing, particularly across some of the agencies that we don't even think should exist. But what I found was that you get better staff work when people are now in their mind realizing, okay, I'm not immune from all accountability. And I would tell people, you'd have to have these conference calls where in middle COVID explain what we're trying to do. A lot of people were very upset. It's like, guys, we're Republicans. We don't believe in these these laws that give you these protections that we think make you less good at your job of serving a particular president. So it's just on its face outrageous. Like everyone else in the country faces to this, attitudes of the job market. I've been fired so many times with a lot of kids. And I'm not whining, but most people have been had moments like that. We're like, wow, I'm out of money. Why are the people that we pay with our tax dollars immune to the pressure that the rest of us feel? It's like so crazy. Now, it doesn't mean that you can't tell your boss what you think. Like that's the most crazy thing in the world. Oh, right. Like we what? Yeah. I mean, I worked for some private work for some pretty authoritarian people by the way over the years. And the last people I work for, very nice to me, I will say, but like they have really strong views on a couple topics. And I like kept my views on those to myself at dinner. Yeah. They're my bosses. I mean, I don't really understand like what how does an entirely separate set of rules apply to our employees? The public employees are housekeepers. This is how I think of them. They work for us. And when they when your housekeeper works for you, you get to fire steals from you. You get to fire her, correct? Yeah. And there's no other way to run any business, any government, but it's like I'm what what grounds do they get to be treated better than every other category of employee in the world? Yeah. And there are also some of the suckiest employees as the son of a federal employee I can tell you. Some of them are great. Most are not great. Subgrade, which is why we have so many contractors running federal agencies, correct? Totally. And that's like, why is it to wait, you know, at NSA? Right. Because most NSA employees like suck and they don't come in because a COVID they take three or lunch breaks are like not effective. Am I telling the truth here? You're telling the truth. I know. That's why you've got to have a massive effort to dramatically reduce this so that the good ones rise to the top and everyone else is is fine in other work. Okay. Sorry to get so well. No. So, you know, and then the last thing is is dismantling all of the specific things like over classification, the FBI background checks, all of the things that deny information to the political class that are the political appointees that prevent them from doing their job. Okay. But this is where people start getting murdered or getting cancer or whatever they're doing to maintain control because if you start threatening, I think this is whether terrified at Tulsi Gabbard, you start threatening to expose things to what the public know what its government is doing. You're going to be exposing crimes because they're committing crimes. I know that for a fact. I know that you know it too. So that's like the kind of a scary mission. Is it not? It is it is one that caused you to count the costs. But the notion is such a ditch. Yes, I love it. And Tucker, the reality and I think this is I would encourage everyone to think this way. There is no place in America where you're going to be protected from the walls closing in on you and your family. And the only extent to which that may not be true yet is the which, you know, Kevin Bacon's degrees of separation. You don't have someone that's immediately in proximity to the FBI rating their house or being the victim of law fair. I mean, I know two people very, very closely who have been in jail. I know me too. For people that have multi million dollar lawsuits. And so they're coming. And the only way to stop that from happening for people that are in this community trying to rebuild from a storm or run their coffee shop. The only way to keep it from happening is for those of us in the political arena to stand tall and and and unabashedly and to lean forward no matter the costs. And that's the moment that we live in. And so it's not meant to be provocative. It is it's just meant to know that if you are not loud and proud, that's the wrong way to think about it. But if it is aggressive and public and articulate in how you go about it, it will make it so that more and more people can come along beside you and make it so that the president has enough people that are willing to take on the system. And I believe that he has a growing number of people that are like that. And it will make it very difficult for them to move against individual actors. And I you know the nice thing about being out of office is you get to read and kind of wide and understand what happened, you know, and to have new perspective. And I'm just blown away by the number of people that they went after individually like like wounded individuals. And we never heard about I didn't hear about them until after the administration. Adam Lavinger, Mark Moyer, these are individuals that blew the whistle on corruption and their agencies conspired with their political appointees to make them go away. And I don't think they'll be able to get away with that this time around. And in some cases really hurt them. They wasted three or four years, you know, they're dealing stuff in their families. Life happens and you're dealing with the Intel agencies multiple working behind the scenes together, never giving you due process. And I think that is we know their playbook. And we know not only what to look for, but how to be prepared to ensure that that cannot happen again. I've noticed and I don't think I'm imagining it that a huge percentage of people who criticize the Intel agencies wind up with Kitty porn on their computers. One of the reasons I don't use a computer. I don't think that's because yeah, just proportion. I'm only perfect. I would use a computer. You know, first of all, you know, you can't respond to anything without it being foyer, right? Like so. We have to have a totally different view about going into government. But the Intel agencies are not allowed. Well, most of them are not allowed to operate domestically period. Well, they were never allowed. They do it. But they're definitely not allowed to play in American politics to influence election outcomes and they're absolutely doing that. How do you stop that? Well, I think you need to have people that are there who are fearless and obviously Tulsi and RFK and not Intel, but saying there are, you know, there are certainly health aspects of national security, Matt being at DOJ. Those are the types of people that you need to get under the hood and to push as much as you possible. You've got to shut their funding off until they can prove to your satisfaction that's things are. And then, but wait, we're not even allowed to know what their funding is. We don't know what the CA is, but it is. Well, we don't even know like when when you're within government, you can know those, those answers. And so those individuals can, you can know the size of the black budget. Correct. Right. So I have never been in government, but I've certainly been around this a lot. They're huge. Yeah. Yeah. Now, and what so why do we have black budgets? It's a great question, Tucker. I mean, they're just dramatically more transparency needed. And I would say it's one of those areas where not unlike the overclassification, there are, there are, there are things we need to know a lot more about. And I can't tell you, well, what's the optimal level of transparency on that front? But the extent to which you can't have a, as a citizen, and understanding of what the size of your I see community is, that's kind of a problem. I just think you're ensuring corruption and the size of these, these buildings, like you go around and you realize, oh, wow, that, that alphabet has an enormous institutional presence that the country's never even heard about has a real estate footprint real estate beyond what you can imagine. I, I lived as a child in with my brother in a house in Georgetown in high school that was owned by CIA. So there's just a lot, you go out to Northern Virginia Tyson's corner and take chain bridge from DC and from the Virginia and like how many of those office buildings are owned by the CIA or some other intel agency, like a huge number. And so the like, can we know that? I don't understand. We need to know a lot more. And we need the man that we know more like how, how is Congress and, and yeah, they can go into a skiff and they can be given a brief, the baits are supposed to happen on the house and Senate floor. And you can't, you're providing no ability to be able to share with your voters and us as voters, whether we were vote for this, did we ever vote for this military industrial complex, this intel community, the extent to which it sprawled all over the country like who, who got to say in that? It doesn't seem like the intel. I would say is rather un-democratic. Well, the intel committees, the oversight committees in Congress whose job it is to oversee, restrain, keep the intel agencies within constitutional bounds. I, in my whole life in DC from 1985 until now, I've never seen a single member of an intel committee who wasn't in the pocket of the intel agencies. That's my perception. Have you? I don't want to, I would just say this. Devin Nunez was kind of a, a unique character, you know, his ability to provide leadership in that and they came after him with everything they got. I know. He survived. And I think he's a model not unlike that. When you say they, I mean, the intel agencies, the forces that are, you know, some out of government, non-government organizations, the press. Yeah. And working with the intel agencies running it through foreign countries. I mean, it's never like some guy at Langley, you know. And so what, why don't we have more Devin Nunez's? That, that would be the question that I would have is what, what fear factor is there that, and I'm not, I'm not making an accusation of anyone. I'm just saying that with, with all Congress and with all non-governmental organizations, even our own, there's, there's this point where you're like, if I don't, if I go after these individual, this issue said, or this, this, this, this area of corruption or this policy said, and I've sought right after Mar-Laga was rated and we came out really quickly and said, you know, the FBI should be radically reformed. I think I thought it should be, you know, exploded into a thousand pieces, right? Yeah. There, why, why do we have such fear that that is such a provocative position? Because you don't own the government, right? And so that's, that's what we've got to go after. And I think it's a systemic issue that we've got to tackle with everything we've got. I couldn't agree more and you don't have to respond, but I would just say, you know, if there are members of the, you know, intel committees providing oversight of the intellectual agencies, they shouldn't be allowed to serve if they have spouses who work in the intel community. Sorry. That's like such an obvious conflict that it's pretty ridiculous, that that could exist and yet it does. So tell us on a, have much happier note, sorry for the dark discretion. What exactly are Elon and Vivek going to do, do you think with this doge enterprise? Well, I think they're bringing an exhilarating rush to the system of creativity, outside the box thinking, uh, uh, comfortability with risk and leverage and where they are comfortable. Both those guys are comfortable. Amazing. It is amazing. At least, and I love it as, I mean, you, in some respects, this does feel like an intractable problem that we're up against. Yes. Yes. And I don't know. I don't think it is, but I think it feels that way. And we're bringing people that, you know, are trying to get to Mars. So I'm pretty sure they can handle, you know, the ability for us to balance our books and run a government that's, that's much more efficient. So I think that the things that I've heard them say, uh, are things like really going after, from a deregulatory perspective, all of the recent court cases that have said, um, and chopped at the feet of this administrative state, you know, you don't have the ability to just come up with new major questions, you know, rank agency, rank and file agency, you've got to have actual specific language from Congress. Um, you don't have the ability to get the deference for every position that you've taken as just because you're a federal agency. These have been big, uh, acts cuts at these, at the administrative branches. And so I think what they want to do is to use those as the basis for a massive deregulatory agenda and, and, you know, game on. I also think they want to, uh, look for as much that you can do to start cutting costs without Congress or with Congress, but to be really aggressive in some of the areas that I've mentioned in Palmet would be, you know, a huge part of that. The ability to just not spend the money. Um, and so, um, and then of course, you know, being as radical or aggressive as you can, um, in eliminating and reducing, uh, employees, uh, you know, full-time employees, uh, individuals and going after contracts that make, not make sense. So I, I think that that's where they're headed. And I think it'll be an enormous, uh, boon to the country. Can you do it so neither one of them is going to become a federal employee himself. That's my understanding, correct? That's my understanding. Well, I mean, they're not also say that. So how do you do that from outside? Well, I think that you, you know, they will be working with the agencies that do this. I think they'll be working with OMB whoever's in that role they'll be working with Treasury, whoever in that role. And they will be rallying the theory of the case. I mean, I think ultimately that's what's most needed Tucker is a specific theory of the case about what can be done. That's right. And then you give it to the people in, in hopefully that's been a two-way conversation, but you give it to the people that, uh, are on the presence executive team and his administration, and they run with it. And then you've got doge out there providing a political support for what must be done, even just to publicize the ideas. I mean, the US government at this point is like, it's like a bankruptcy or stage four cancers. I mean, it's like so overwhelmingly bad that you don't see a way out of it. But at least that's how I feel when I assess it from the outside. Like, how would you even fix something like that? I mean, we haven't had any spending reductions in like 20 years, right? Like, but we're bankrupt. But we're bankrupt. And there's just this notion that nothing can be done about it. We still pass $100 billion Ukraine checks. Is it like even if you thought it was a good idea, like you can't afford it. Like you never have the affordability conversation at all. Is that is that true? It's totally true. Like literally no one ever talks about affordability. What we can do. And they just can throw in heads of state show up and like demand money from us. And nobody ever says, you know, I like your country or I don't or whatever. I think you've got a good point love to help you. But we're just out of dope. Like nobody even suggests that or dares think that. Like what is that? They just assume the gravy train's going to keep on going. I deal with what to the most with the military, right? But like what's that like? Well, they they they you've got some road miles on you. You've done some stuff. Well, you know, I want to understand these things. I want to understand these systems and these institutions. Why people say that what they do. And there's just there's no understanding what's what there's like a no fiscal conscience at all with regard to the individuals. It's like, nope, we've got to perform a particular function in the world. I read that somewhere in my educational system. I now believe it. It doesn't matter whether that was never voted on. It doesn't matter if that's kind of anathema to where our founding fathers would have been visioned. And so we are going to maintain our presence everywhere in the country. I, the military, get to define my requirements about what's necessary to win that military objective. You, civilian, don't get to ever question my requirements. Those requirements now automatically cost X amount of money. And we wonder why we can't ever have any cuts of defense. And we wonder why then defense spending becomes the portraying guard for the non defense spending. Right? Okay. I know what you're talking about, but we you flesh it out a little bit because I think you fit on one of the keys. So for what we have been unwilling to cut any non defense spending, the bureaucracy, which is the quote, discretionary spending, members have a vote on it every single year. They don't have a vote on entitlements. Those are on autopilot. They have a vote on the bureaucracy. So everything they hate about government, their members are voting on. We haven't been able to have cuts to non defense, not because Republicans are unwilling, although many of them are on well as well, but because there has been a view that those two things have to be constantly considered together. And the Democrats insist and Republican hawks insist that defense has to be growing at X percent to deal with the threats in the world. And that requires you to then bring additional non defense spending to be able to be for that political coalition. And ultimately, if you get your average Republican member, they ultimately care a lot more about the defense stuff than they do about the bureaucracy. Can you say that again? Ultimately, you have your average Republican member cares more about the military industrial complex than they do about the woken weaponized bureaucracy that is oppressing. They care more about flexing their power abroad than about fixing their own country. I know that's true. Because I know I know them. They have zero interest in anything that's not zero, but they have very limited interest in what's happening in the United States and the 100,000 people dying of drug IDs every year. Yeah, that's bad. Yet so bad. Who am I? Harbleeds? The invasion of more than 10 million foreigners into our country without permission. No, that's so bad. Yeah. Got to steal the border. But what they really care about is toppling some government. They don't like or moving missiles to this military base or whatever. And why is that? Well, I think it goes to the unhealthiness of the Republican coalition for like 50 years, but particularly in since 1989. Tell me what that means. So you're kind of national Republican, national review coalition, your fusionist Republican coalition was anti communist. Yes, it was social conservatives, traditional conservatives. Yes. And it was kind of fiscal libertarians. That was your coalition. Absolutely. And it worked until, you know, at a certain level when we had so be union. But when we don't have the so be union, it kind of takes on a life of its own. And now you have to keep us everywhere in the world to be able to justify all of the institutional build up and the the complex that has been built up. All of these, you know, defense industrial companies and things like that. And and Papi King actually talks about this in his book where he says, look, this was a specific strategy hatched out of the Department of Defense by some of the Neocons at the time to be able to continue to justify the largest from a defense standpoint that we continue to be tied down to. That I also think, you know, is is so that's a big part of, I think, why your average Republican that grows up thinking like, okay, I'm going to be pro defense. I'm going to be a free market economics. And I'm going to be a social concern at best, right? Those that's like that's what you grow up to be 100%. And you don't actually then think through, okay, well, what does that mean? Does that mean I have to then be for every war that's been hatched? Right. Right. Do I not to be for making a defense that we can actually afford? Does that mean that I think that from an economic standpoint that we're not actually citizens before we're consumers? Like there's just a lot of unhealthy and all of those. Yes. And it's not a natural coalition. I mean, famously you see this in the Democratic Party where you've got, you know, Hispanic immigrants alongside transgender activists and they clearly have nothing in common. Everyone says that. But few are say the obvious on the Republican side, which is that social conservatives aren't natural pro war people. Most of them are Christians for one thing. So why would they be in favor of killing in a sense? Like they're not actually, they're believers in a religion that specifically prohibits that specifically and repeatedly. So I don't know how they pung together for so long. I mean, obviously about my position on this, I find them repugnant, murderous. So that's my view. But I don't think I'm alone in that. Why are Christians conservatives naturally defense hawks like that's what I'm saying? Not just defense hawks. War hawks. What happened in that? Well, how did Christian conservatives wind up? And I don't want to get two country persons. I don't want to hurt you, but because I want you to get this job. But yeah, I'll just a lot of stuff there. Yes, I agree with that being too specific about it. But they're all kinds of acts of violence against Christians around the world. In fact, it's almost always against Christians I have noticed that Christian leaders, including the Speaker of the House, like defend on Christian grounds. And I just don't think obviously I find that evil. But even if I was in favor of it, I would recognize like that's not something that can last for long because it doesn't make any sense. Right? Well, I do believe this is why we need to be less Dr. Nair on the right. And to think actually think, you know, and read those books you were mentioning earlier, read and to be thinking through and ask the questions and trying to learn more and realize like, you know, a history book may have been written at a time to just to with a particular political benefit and meaning to it. And so maybe we don't take everything. You know, I don't know, maybe some skills we learned in school. Right. And just common sense intuition, this is this is a right. Something that I think is something seems off. It's off. And that's a God given skill that we have. We were born with it. I think it was given by God. But even if you don't believe in God, we were born with it. And you see, we don't use it in some of the attacks on RFK. They say, well, this hasn't been proven. There are gaps in our understanding, our scientific understanding. That's like their bureaucratic way of saying, yeah, your intuition's right. We just haven't proved it to be able to. Well, they train you not to use your intuition. It's like what way to second, I remember being in high school reading an abnormal psychology textbook that I bought at the school bookstore that had an entry on autism that was like two paragraphs long as this esoteric disorder of his origins. We were uncertain of his parameters were unclear, but it was, and I remember thinking, wow, that sounds awful. And 35 years later, it's like a central feature of life in America, like what the hell? And you're trained, and by the way, I don't know what has caused a massive spike in autism, but there has been one. And so it takes a lot of training to get people to ignore that. And I do think the training is all designed to get you to ignore what is obvious. I think it is. I think that that's the systems do it. People get in these and they, that's where they kind of get to the paradigm level. I'm not going to do anything that would hurt national security. I came to DC. I'm not going to do anything national, it's national. And I think that's how we lose people when they go into the skips just to go back to our earlier conversation. And you've got to have courage to say, look, what happens if what happens if you're time in office, you missed a big issue. Like my husband knew issued to me. I admit it. I'm trying to I'm trying to read and I'm trying to read the means book. I read, I listened to your podcast. You know, it's a new issue. But like if I didn't get my head wrapped around it, future generations we have to indict me for me being irresponsible on an existential issue facing our country. So I don't think most people think like that. But in general, I think our Republican coalition is unhealthy and has been for a a long time because we have. And if we are, the country will be too secular, too imperialistic and global and too economic. And I come out of the free market economist Lane, right? That's where I got my start. But we're not consumers. Like the notion that the end of all economic good is consumption. And so consumers get the veto and everything. It's not actually what a citizen in a country in a nation are. And so in each of those, I'm sorry, can you, I feel like you're saying something really important. And I just want to make sure that it's fully explained. What do you mean by that? Economic to economic. So you're not a socialist. I know you're not. No, I'm a free market. I'm sure. Right. Of course you're. Yeah. So, but I don't believe that just because Facebook is a corporation, that means that they get to not have to answer questions about how big they are. What they use, what the impact is on our country, whether they reckon my kids brain. Right. Right. Amazon giving me, you know, same day service on a book or, you know, a product is awesome. I love it. But that doesn't mean that everything that Amazon does is something that we shouldn't be thinking through and that are, are our normal disposition of free market economics may make us bad at assessing companies once they get too big. What does seem like there, as you said a second ago, we need to be less, Dr. Nair. And I, somebody who grew up around, as a conservative around conservatives, there were these pillars, you know, hawkish on defense. Yeah. We need to be less doctor near and I So we grew up around as a conservative around conservatives. There were these pillars. You know hawkish on defense free market And to a much lesser extent socially conservative, which no one in DC actually took seriously at all and they had total contempt for people like you I just want to be doing grew up in DC. I did not Thankfully the the son of electrician and the school teacher. Yeah, so this is exactly the kind of person everyone in DC He despised like some Christian electrician. Please shut up. That was their view. Sorry. I'm sure you know that But it's a fact. I was there so but but on the free market stuff if you asked any questions at all It was like shut up socialist and You sure don't want to be a socialist because that hasn't worked and it was embarrassing But they kind of maintained control of people on behalf of some of the worst interest in the world By invoking that That's slow your socialist or socialist. Did you don't talk about? Yeah, I mean they do in the foreign policy You know that that's a you're a useful idiot for Russia or you know wait They call you a useful idiot for what they're saying that about Chelsea Tulsing right yeah, so I've lived that yes You've seen that I have you in every one of these things when they don't want to have the conversation They shut it down with a slur of course and in that's but on the economic questions I think I've been Cut almost hesitant to draw obvious conclusions Because I don't believe in government controlling The economy right into a greater extent that it does. I just could not go to it and it just it abets corruption So I'm against that but it doesn't mean that we have to like Be in favor of usory right right like why is it good to charge 20% interest on a credit card Do I have to not along with that just because I'm a conservative and that's where if the coalition was working you'd have a lot more interesting conversations Yeah, you know you'd have your Christian conservatives being upset with that having debates with the free market coalition to say like Where's a place that we can land in? In in ways that Previously the conversation wasn't because in this to say okay, that's that's something that would come out of the mouths of Of our our adversaries And we need more of that I think and you're gonna seed and trade right like yeah trades like the one big domino that president I think finally has now you know toppled with his election But there will be a sizable number of Republicans that are very grudgingly going along or opposed To what he wants to do with what I think is a no-brainer policy with regard to you know Universal tariffs and higher tariffs for China and I want the money to be able to balance the books But I also want this country to be a manufacturing Producing hub and what I found Tucker is that even I can win arguments with those who I Who are free traders? because They they themselves have seeded the ground of independence You know if you if you are if you're comfortable with other countries making your stuff That may or may not be important from a national security standpoint or just period because we don't want to have to wait for six months to have a you know a refrigerator You know if you want independence you got to make it here if you don't want to have to rely on China and have She shut down his whole economy because he's dealing with the COVID of course Then then the answer is independence and how do you get to making things more here? And just I also zoom out from a standpoint that my parents are paying my rent on still a child It doesn't matter how old I am right right and like there is a there is a balance in every community We're not all gonna be harpenters or plumbers or electricians, right? Like they're you're not gonna be independent as a person or a community across the board But you would kind of hate it if we didn't have any carpenters in your community, right? You hated if you didn't have any plumbers in your community and we've gotten to the point as a country where we don't make this stuff anymore and That's a real problem and I think it's just kind of an intuition way of getting at something that Has been suppressed for decades. What has been suppressed and there are specific institutions that have made it their mission to suppress it One is the Wall Street Journal the other is the American Enterprise Institute Which for my whole life 55 years have been sort of leading Standards in the right wing from them and you know they EI Wall Street Journal like people really care on the right what they have to say and I can't wait for both them to collapse. I will celebrate I really will celebrate when they go under I mean that but like why haven't People who want to put the country first. It's actual interest first built their own institutions to rival the Wall Street Journal And a I don't know get it. This has been my life's work for the last four years and hopefully, you know over the next 50 is If I'll live that one 50 Well, you're being the maha thing now so they you know get let's get that fit on You look I think this is what is needed is new institution That's why we created the Center for Renewing America because we wanted to make sure there was a home to give elites both in DC and in the grassroots The this is actually how you do what's necessary to be done So like if President Trump gives a speech in the first term term are you from your show or articulating something that must be done We felt that needed to be an institution actually take that and turn it into the regulations the Translating into actually public policy and that has to be new it some exceptions exist I mean Kevin is doing a great job at heritage But that's the exception rather the rule my my view is that you've got to create new institutions that are our scrappy are hungry It doesn't take them two weeks to write a paper. It takes them one day to write a paper You get it out there and if that paper is not read you go in you like get it in front of people so that they Understand it and then when they have read it and you fair why haven't you acted on it? What's you know like you have to work it hard? And that's gonna come from from not sitting around a board table at a prestigious organization That's gonna come from people who are hard and battle tested and really awesome in their mind as to what they what they thinking what they know I mean since we've moved toward an economy where like you can't really do anything without a billion around your side I've noticed luckily, you know good people now have Elon Musk. He's our billionaire which is great but Big picture it's super bad to need a billionaire to do anything meaningful and You wonder our Republican donors Coming around to the idea that you know America needs to be saved and And that what we've been doing isn't working. Do you think they see this? Look, there's a lot of awesome conservative donors. There are yeah, you know and Many of them are coming to our banner over time. I think the issue is You know do they know about your organization the impact and there's a lot of drift on the on the on that's the problem is like you've got it To kind of show yourself there's so much Bull you kind of have to acknowledge There's a lot of drift out here But at the same time do everything you can to just get up in the morning and do your job and do effectively and then people come Where I feel like the issue is is that With everyone you're educating them in the same journey that I think you have I think you've talked about it and I know I have of this Trying it's like what's what has been off about conservatism for a while and been I think the reason why we have lost and been on the edge of tyranny and Sometimes there are there are there are folks that still have viewpoints on that like when we took Ukraine We were the first organization out to oppose Ukraine funding That was risky right because Putin had just invaded and gone over then we don't we didn't want that But we knew where this was headed and that was a long time for us to educate all state Can I ask now I'm being like mean and bitter? But why would anybody who thought that was a good idea have power ever again? Like shouldn't that be a litmus test? I do believe that Ukraine should be a litmus test for the national security team for sure Well, it hasn't been unfortunately well, but I it's certainly in terms of like getting a read on where someone is and then you can have Whatever conversations what you want to have with them, but like that was obvious to me. I'm stupid cable news host You know how to national security expert But I've been around it a lot. I'm just trying to apply common sense like that was so obvious in February of 2022 This was gonna hurt the United States in very serious ways and it has and it has and so over time that coalition that conversation we're having about what could serve of needs? What is conservatism need to be to save the country? Not protecting you know, you're a little niche within that but exactly the country You were given resources to do nothing else but to save the country and that's what your donors are giving That conversation on the idea is why when you come to a one of our events with our donors I hand out books Like I want I don't want you to just necessarily read our policy paper. You know, I'm sure you're gonna do that anyways I want you reading where to chambers. I want you reading Rusty Reno this return of the strong gods right? I want you reading this stuff We're giving that pat you can in books like I want the whole Conservative movement to be going deep in these books so that you're both Enlightened encourage and you come out of fighting for us whether you are the practitioner here in DC the funder on the outside and that is a and that's a long-term Project honestly, but I think it's one that's absolutely vital last question in retrospect One of the things I must guilty about was being used by a bill crystal in particular But just as a young man. I was used by the forces the control Washington to attack both Ross Perot and especially Peppy Cannon You know, whatever they're human beings say flaws are obviously but Big picture they were kind of right about a lot of stuff correct. Yeah, they were absolutely right. They were they were yeah And this has been this has been an undercurrent That has been popped up at times, but it's largely suppressed by the Republican establishment and their intellectual portraying guard national review and others and Pat Buchanan was a major Opportunity for it to punch through and then Donald Trump really punched through and now it's ascendant and It's about us going back and trying to think through like what is what are some of these think what is what are these? What are these viewpoints mean like where were they right? We're wrong? What does it look like in health? What does it look like with AI? What does it look like in all of these different areas? But I think it's primarily remembering that we're not we're individuals with souls We're a nation. They're not just an economy These are the kinds of kind of first building blocks that if you get in place then you can have a much more coherent Convincing and satisfying public policy life, but ultimately I you know, I think it's like Whitaker Chambers married to Pat Buchanan married to Someone like a Donald Trump. I think that that movement over time is something that Trying to find how to give it flourish in life and institutions and and will ultimately We'll be successful and saving the country man if you wind up at this administration. I will sleep better I mean that so thank you Russ. I appreciate thanks for having a talking So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake Google will be putting its thumb on the scale and Preventing you from hearing anything That the people in charge don't want you to hear but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? We could wind about it. That's a waste of time not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it The way that you could actually get information that's true It's not intentionally deceptive and the way to do that on YouTube We think is to subscribe to our channel subscribe and you'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say And we hope you will