Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night. All day. It's a blue boy. Hey, sir, I'm doing better than I deserve. Yeah. Well, that's a good statement. There's an old military saying any day above grounds a good day. There you go. So tell everybody what your official job was. Wow. I had a lot of official jobs with the government in regards to, you know, you know, people, those things. Sure. Well, these things. That's a allegedly. That's a replica of the one that Bob Luzar worked on the sport model. I've heard that before. You know, designs by Perry. The E with in Perry is a three. And he's a dude on Instagram to send me that. Very cool. Pretty dope, right? Yeah. We have another one that looks just like it at the mothership at the comedy club. When you walk in, you walk right through, like a giant suspended UFO. Very cool. So obviously I have issues. Well, you know what? This is a neat town. I was strolling the streets yesterday. And I came across the Texas Toy Museum. Now, I'm not one for museums usually. But something I saw was automatically transported me back to when I was a kid. I'm an old guy. So I grew up 70s and early old. Holy. 52. I'm 57. You are? Yeah. Man. Well, I look 10 years older than you. I a lot of, a lot of, a lot of hard miles on me, unfortunately. I do too. So leave it or not. Well, you'll have to share with me your secret. Because unfortunately, I tell people this is as good as it gets. I'm about as attractive as a cement truck. You know, so. So I, after the army, I went into the federal service and had a lot of jobs, mostly in counterintelligence, and which is looking basically what the bad guys know about us from an intelligence perspective. And in 2008, I changed my job. One of my jobs I was working at, the director of national intelligence, which for most people may or may not know, it's kind of outside of DC. And where I lived, I was on the other side of DC, living on a little island in the Chesapeake Bay. And so my commute was terrible. I mean, it really, really frankly. It's a pretty good ferry every day. No, but it was about a three hour commute each way. You have to go right past. Yeah, it's, it's, Why don't you move closer? Well, you know, I wanted to, I wanted to give my kids a really good quality of life. And I did not want to work in the city and then kind of expose them to kind of the craziness if that makes sense. Especially DC. DC is crazy. Especially with kids, right? Yeah. And kind of nuts that they don't clean up the capital of the fucking country. It seems like, you know, brother, it's kind of indicative of the rock, the whole country is involved in. It's just crazy because you bring these four indignities and the first thing they see is, is just the dereliction. Yeah. It's a very poor reflection on really what the American spirit is about. But you know, that's, that's for another conversation. Yeah. It seems like they could fix that. Yeah, especially in that place. Yeah, one would hope, right? Yeah. I mean, Jesus Christ, it's the nation's capital. Yeah. So I was offered a job to go back to the Pentagon in 2008 for a little while and basically run the, the integration between national level intelligence information and local and state and tribal law enforcement. So after 9-11, the country realized that we had a significant problem getting national level information down to, to the cops on the ground that could actually do something about it. Why? Because he didn't have security clearances. So they couldn't, they weren't allowed to be provided that information. So one of my jobs was to try to help fix that. And shortly thereafter, I got there in 2008. It was probably early 2009 is when I was approached by two individuals who came to me and they said, look, we'd like to consider you for, for, for a program that we're part of. It's a very nuanced program, very secretive program. Now when you're in the government, you hear that all the time. It's not, you know, people look at me, they tell you you have a secret clearance or a top secret clearance. Millions of people have some sort of security clearance in the government and a lot, a lot of people have a top secret clearance. So it's really not that uncommon. It's really not that sexy. It's just you didn't really know what you're getting involved in. I didn't at all, not at all. In fact, so, you know, great question. So no, I didn't know what I was getting involved in. And after several conversations, it occurred to me that their interest in me was some of my background I had in my early career as a special agent in counterintelligence. I was protecting technologies, critical technologies, critical avionic technologies. For example, and some aerospace technologies. So think of first stage solid rocket motor booster technology, tomahawk cruise missiles, stuff like that, Apache longbow. So advanced avionics was something I was kind of already formal, kind of familiar with. And at the same time, I had the counterintelligence background. So I was asked to come in and run the counterintelligence and security aspect for a particular program at which time I had no idea what the program even was. So what this counterintelligence and security mean, it just simply means making sure that our adversaries like Russia and China can't penetrate our organization. It's dealer secret. That's all that is. It's kind of a fancy word for just saying security, information security and operational security. So I remember I had a meeting. They brought me to go see their director. And it was in a, I would tell you the location, but I was told by the Pentagon not to say the specific location of this office, but it was somewhere in the DC area. It was a facility that wasn't known publicly to be an intelligence, to be having an intelligence office in there. So I can't say that the specific location. But I went there and I went up to the top floor. I think it was the top floor, almost the top floor. And I met for the first time a gentleman named James Likatsky, doctor James Likatsky, PhD. And this guy was the epitome of a rocket scientist. And when I say the epitome, he was probably, and there's no exaggeration, the number one rocket scientist in the US government. Now, he's a humble guy. So he'll probably tell you he wasn't, but he really was. He's amazing human being and very smart. And after a very brief conversation, he looked at me and he said, I want to ask you a question. Okay, sir. And he said, what do you think about UFOs? I said, well, I answer truthfully. I said, I don't. And he said, well, what do you mean? You don't believe in them? And I said, no, that's not what I said. You asked me if I think, what do I think about UFOs? And frankly, I don't think about UFOs. I really don't have the luxury to think about them to busy working intelligence operations and whatnot. And I remember him looking over his glasses and very seriously staring me straight in the eye and says, well, don't let your personal bias get the best of you. Because what you may learn may surprise you and may challenge any preconceived notion of what you think something is or is not. And so, I mean, backtrack for a minute. I've never been a UFO guy. People come out and say, oh, you're that UFO guy. I'm really not. I was never really into science fiction as a kid. I wasn't into the Star Trek or the Star Wars, like a lot of people were. So that was not my disposition. I grew up, I guess, playing G.I. Joe and stuff like that. So that wasn't my background. And certainly in college, I studied microbiology and immunology with a focus on parapsytoology. Not parapsytoology, the study of parapsytoology. So the scientific method has always been something that has been near and dear to me. And then of course later on as a special agent, that when you're conducting investigations, for me, I was always very fact-driven. Kind of the old dumb shoe, if you will, just the facts, me and sort of guy. So I was never really prone to any type of, if you will, affinity towards science fiction or even the UFO topic. I just never really considered it. Hmm. So he says this to you. And then, so we're talking about like what, 16 years ago? Uh, 16, 16 years ago? Yeah, I do the math, right? So it's 2024, 2000, early 2009. So this is the beginning of your journey towards this sort of bizarre subject of whatever these things are. Yeah. So you don't have any real previous interest. He says this to you. And then what's the steps after that? Like how do you get introduced to this idea that these things are alien crafts? Yeah. So, great question. So for some people, there's kind of two ways people process this information, at least in my experience. And there may be others. This has just been my observation. Some people have this kind of revelatory moment, there's epiphany words, this aha moment where, oh my gosh, this is real, right? For other people, it's kind of more of a slow, gradual realization. And I think for me, I was probably in the second category, more of a slow, gradual realization that this isn't, you know, cover for something else. This is really about, oh, UFO, it's about. So how do you first get introduced to these things? Well, so it was, I think it intrudes to these things. It was, first of all, I was introduced to the reporting, right? So there was these official reports that we were getting from the field, there's official videos and whatnot. That described vehicles, doing things maneuvering in ways that frankly outperform anything we have in our inventory. Now, keeping my background was at some point in aerospace. So I knew all the capabilities of an F-16 or for example, an F-22 or the F-35. And at the end of the day, as advanced as they are, they're still conventional aircraft. You know, they still have the old, there's an adage they use for jet engines. It makes seem a little awkward here, but it's suck, squeeze, bang, and blow. That's what a jet engine does. Forgive me, that's what it does. Right. So it's a conventional type engine. Of course, you have a propeller too that can displace it. Whatnot. These vehicles are different. These vehicles, for the most part, didn't have any type of associated characteristic that you or I or any normal person would associate with the plane, with an airplane, an aircraft. But yet it's flying. So how does an airplane work? Well, let's say this cigar, for example, is an airplane. And there's four fundamental forces. And so you have thrust, lift, drag, and weight. And if you understand those, you can create, build wings and you create, lift, and you can fly. And then you have to have an engine for that thrust and whatnot. The things that are military pilots were encountering didn't have that. They didn't have wings. They didn't have rudders and ailerons and control surfaces. They didn't have cockpits. They didn't have engine. No obvious signs of propulsion. They were doing things and maneuvering in ways that frankly defied anything that we had in our inventory. And we were pretty certain the enemies didn't have either. Our adversary didn't have these technologies either. And even more perplexing is that they were being encountered over controlled US airspace and over sensitive military installations. So from that perspective, you've got a real national security concern on your hands. So you said video. What was the, do you remember the first thing that you saw? Boy, there's so many. I think part of the challenge is that most people here in this country, they're familiar with the three videos. That have been famously released by the Pentagon. The Go Fast, Go Fast, Kimball, Flier, Correct. But those are the least compelling of all the videos that the government has. Those were unclassified. And so those were the ones, which were kind of the low hanging fruit that could be released to the general public. There's stuff out there that's like 4K ultra high definition. So when you see something like that from a certain military platform or a certain military equity or an intelligence collection platform, you have to look at that and say, well, what is that? What the hell is that? More importantly, that data is being backed up by radar data. So you've got electro optical data, like gun camera footage, or pod or FLIR video. And then you've got radar data. That's, that is actually confirming what the video is picking up. And then you've got eyewitnesses that are also watching it. Right? So you've got trained, trained observers, pilots that can recognize the silhouette between an SU-22 and a MiG-25 from 20 miles away and make a split second decision. Is it friend or foe? Do I kill it or is it, do I let it live? And they're reporting it. So you have now three separate, if you will, collection platforms, that the human eye being one of them, you've got gun camera footage and you've got radar footage, all describing the same event at the same place at the same time under the same circumstances. And so keeping my with my background as a former special agent and counter intelligence, if this was in front of a jury, you know, as I've said before, I think we're well beyond reasonable doubt. That is something there. I mean, that is real. That's not an atmospheric aberration. It's not a anomaly. That is something there. It's tangible. So was there an aha moment for you? Like the first thing that you saw that you looked at and you go, what the fuck? No, like I said, for me, it was more slow and gradual. I didn't, what was the first thing that you saw that made you realize that there's something going on here that defies conventional wisdom or conventional understanding of propulsion systems? I think for me, one of the most compelling moments was when I attended, boy, let me go back and remember you banks, I attended a dinner with some individuals who were already associated with the larger umbrella program called AUSAP. And I attended dinner at a Washington DC hotel and a Brazilian general attended this dinner. And the dinner was sponsored by a gentleman named Robert Bigelow, the famous billionaire hotel he had met him. Yeah, by the way, he's American hero, he's a patriot. He's brilliant. He is brilliant. And people don't realize that he funded, self funded, a lot of this stuff on behalf of the US government. My himself, like he paid it to do it himself. He really is an American patriot in my opinion. But anyways, he flew in this guy named General Uchoa. General Uchoa was a Brazilian general, very, very senior in the Brazilian government, who led an investigation about an event that occurred over several days. Is this the Virginia incident? No, it's actually called Coladas, another one, in Brazil, yeah. And the Coladas incident, and they had an overwhelming number of eyewitnesses and there was even some video and photographs that they had produced internally there to Brazil. And it was overwhelming, the evidence. And for me, that was, it was more listening to him and explained the concern they had and some of the interactions, the Brazilian government officials had with these UAP. That really, I left there that dinner scratching my head and really at that point beginning to absorb the profoundness, that we're dealing with something that is real. This is not a cover plan for some other technology we're trying to protect. Did he show you this video evidence? So he was, I was sitting at the kind of like a table like this. There was a whole lot of people at the table. He was sitting at the head. I was kind of way down over here. And he brought a Manila envelope and he was showing photographs to everybody, right? And some reporting as well. I think he brought, if I recall correctly, his daughter to translate, because I don't think English was his language. But for me, that was, and I think for one of my colleagues too, which I probably can't say his name right now because he hasn't come out publicly yet. But we both left that dinner, I think, scratching our head and saying, wow, this is legit. This is real. The US government is interested in this. And there is interest by our government. As after that dinner, attending more meetings and beginning to read the reports, the field reports and speaking to the scientists, it became evident to me that this was a very serious issue. We had near misses over some of our areas of operation. In some cases, literally these UAP splitting a combat formation. Now, if you know how plain to fly, they finally reclose into combat situation. These things were splitting the formation, right? That there were reports being provided through the air force, mostly through the Navy, about air safety issues, where pilots literally could run into these things. They were pervasive. It wasn't like a onesie and twosies. Was there ever an incident where a pilot or a jet did run into something? Not that I'm aware of what I can tell you that there has been incidents where there's, appears to be some sort of provocation, where one of these things seems to be coming deliberately close to an aircraft, not necessarily trying to hit it, but maybe trying to demonstrate performance capabilities. There was one video in particular, I haven't been cleared by the Pentagon. So let me see if I can speak about it in general terms. There's a pilot flying and a, you can hear on the radio this chatter back and forth. Do you see it? Do you have eyes down on it? Pout nope, negative, no eyes down. Okay, you should have on a radar. Yeah, I got something on radar, but no eyes, no, you can't see it. And then all of a sudden, a craft object goes whizzing right by the cockpit. And I mean probably like 15 feet away. And you can hear the pilot, the expletives of the pilot. I won't see it here on air, but you can imagine what a pilot would say when they're very, very surprised. That was one there's a, can you describe what he saw? I think I can. I want to be careful that I don't, because again, I haven't had a, what I, what I have approval to talk about, I've spoken about, let me preface by saying it's still have my security clearance. And on occasion, I still will consult for the US government. And so I want to be very mindful. I have no problem going up all the way to the line. Right, understood. But if I put up, you know, a pinky toe over that line, they're right, right, right. They can get me. But it was a wedge shaped craft wedge shaped, like triangular, but like a wedge, like I don't know how to describe it. I could draw it for you if you want. Go draw it. Sure, you can. Yeah. So just like a wedge that you would like split wood with, like that kind of a wedge. Yeah, but it was, it was silver metallic. And like a diamond, maybe, that's a better way to describe it. Like a diamond almost. And it looked kind of like, they look kind of like that, really. It's just a little, and that kind of shape is something that's been reported multiple times. So that was the first time I ever saw something like that. To me, it was, keep in mind, I never followed this topic. So every time I'm seeing one of these videos, I'm kind of seeing something for the very first time. So lenticular, whether it's a disc shaped craft, or it's a wedge shaped craft, or a diamond shaped craft, or triangle shaped craft, boomerang in some cases. These were all new to me. So it was very, very perplexing. And obviously to our military pilots, it was very concerning. And I think when you look at some of the gold standard cases we had, like the Nimitz, for example, that case, you have this overwhelming number of sensors looking at the same thing going on that the pilots are reporting. And for me, that was most compelling. Like I said, more than, I witnessed testimony is important, but at the end of the day, Grandma's seeing some lights in her backyard doesn't really do it for me. I'm a fact oriented kind of guy. I've got to see the data, let the data provide us the information we need so that we can make a conclusion. I'm not, if you start seeing UFOs in the sky everywhere, well, chances are they're probably not. It was a quadcopter, it's a balloon, it's an aircraft, it could be all sorts of things. That's why I think from our perspective, having the fundamental categories, the observables we call them, was so important. Because they are so beyond what a normal aircraft, a traditional conventional aircraft can do, at that point you realize you're dealing with some sort of beyond next generation technology. And that's when it gets compelling for guys like me, right? When you're seeing performance capabilities that far exceed faster paths, anything we have. And I'm talking even the very, very best technology we have but we don't come close to that. And no visible means of propulsion. No, or obvious signs of lift, right? And not even a cockpit. You have to scratch your head and see what's going on. Interestingly, but no windows. No windows. Well, in some cases, no windows. Other cases people will report what they think are windows. They say, oh, I saw windows. But at the end of the day, we're looking that in terms of what we think a window is. So you see a car, you see windows, or applying those are windows. I didn't see any information to suggest that there were actually windows, even though an eye witness might describe a window, because we are describing in something of something that we recognize. And so we say, oh, that might be a window or not. But it might not be a window. And so I want to be very careful to say there were no windows. There could have been. But the ones that I was privy to that I saw, I didn't see any obvious signs of like a windshield or a window. I didn't see anything like that. I saw vehicles that were doing things that were just left you scratching your head. And they were real, like I said, because you're backing it up with all these other sensor data. And some of the best sophisticated sensor data, by the way, at the time on the planet that we had, like the spy one radar and the E2 Hawkeye and some of the other radar capabilities and technical capabilities that other intelligence agencies have that I can't discuss here. This is the stuff that helps us put, forgive the analogy here, but war heads on foreheads. When we're going to take a strike against a terrorist, these are the same sensor systems we use to prosecute that war, that act, both in combat and not in combat. So yeah, that's, that for me was very compelling. And there's lots and lots of videos. People think that there's only three videos. There's those don't even scratch the surface. There are hundreds and hundreds of videos that the intelligence community and the Department of Defense have on these things. Has there ever been any discussion about releasing any of these? I don't want to speak on behalf of the government. I, colleagues of mine, like Chris Mellon, who have been very, very, very active in this topic and have actually been responsible for a lot of what we see now happening in Congress, has been championing that. He is the one who says, look, we need more videos to come out. So the American people can see for themselves what we've been dealing with. When I had Chris Mellon in the Pentagon, he saw those videos. And up to that point, he, you know, he had been, when he was a senior person at the Pentagon, like very senior, one of his jobs as the senior intelligence official, he asked, hey, do we have any UAP UFO videos, investigations, anything like that? And he told him no. So when he came to the Pentagon and saw what we actually did have, you can imagine someone like Chris Mellon, right? He wasn't very happy. He was actually pretty disappointed saying, why was I told no? I can see these videos clearly. I see the reports. Clearly, this is something that we're interested in as a Department of Defense. And yet, when I was one of the senior guys, he got the Heisman, right? He was being told no. And so that was, I think, a point for him that really, that's probably the, I don't want to speak for my friend, Chris, but I suspect that was probably the spark that got him to the point where he said, OK, we have to do something about this. This is this is BS. Yeah, when I was talking to him, it seemed like that was his perspective, that this was something that really should be, in at least in some way, shape or form, released to the general public, just to solidify the conversation, just to let people know, like these are real. This is a real thing. These are not just, have you seen the one that people were filming just a couple of days ago in Palmdale, California? Yeah, I think they said those were drones. If I'm not mistaken, I think the jury came out. If I'm not mistaken, I could be wrong, that it was somebody using drones with some LED lights, which by the way, you know what? You can do wild things with drones now. You absolutely can. Create images in the sky. 100% dragons and stuff with drones. Yeah, absolutely. So, you know, we have to be careful as our own technology begins to advance, there's going to be pranksters out there. Right. And that's one of the things that for me in A-tip, I always went into an investigation or a case, assuming that it was man-made. Right. Until I saw the compelling data that said otherwise, we were always going to assume or presume that this was something that was conventional. It was probably misidentified, but it wasn't exotic. And then once the data suggests otherwise, then you kind of go into that other mode of, okay, now what are we dealing with? Again, especially on the backdrop of the five performance observables. That's when you start to say, okay, yeah, this is not a, this is not an F-16. You know, this is not a Chinese aircraft. This is something different. Right. What is the oldest video footage or film footage that you have ever seen or heard? Civilian or military does not. Like what is the oldest where it's like, okay, what the fuck is this? What's the oldest stuff that's compelling? Ooh. The point is what I'm trying to get at is a lot of people point to the possibility that there's some sort of secret program, some sort of secret propulsion, gravity based, whatever it is, that's completely different than conventional propulsion systems that the US government has and that they're operating these drones. And the problem with that is always the, like the Kenneth Arnold sightings, the Roswell, the sightings from a time where that technology just wasn't available at all. Joe, I'm so glad you asked me that question. It just so happens. I brought you something. Oh. And glasses come out, you know what the same thing is. No, it means I'm old. Me too. Yeah. I'm going to provide you a document here. It's a short document, but the portions I think are highlighted that you're going to want to pay attention to. And let's see here. Okay. So if this is just for you and if your audience is interested, it's this paragraph here you're going to want to read. And then it's the last one that's highlighted. And then take a look at the date and the subject line. This is it right here. Jamie brought it up here. Oh, great. Yeah. So what? Which one? A paragraph six right now. So if you want to scroll down to paragraph six. Okay. This summary of observations of aerial phenomenon has been prepared for the purpose of reemphasizing and reiterating the fact that the phenomena have continuously occurred in the New Mexico skies during the past 18 months. And our continuing to occur. And secondly, that these phenomena are occurring in the vicinity of sensitive military and government installations. And if you want to go back to like paragraph two, there you go. The highlighted part. Yeah, the observers of the observers of those phenomenon include scientists, special agents of the office of special investigations, the US Air Force, airline pilots, military pilots, Los Alamos security, inspectors, military personnel, and many other persons of various occupations whose reliability is not questioned. And now scroll to the top of the very top of that document. And it says that it was determined. There you go. The summary of observations of aerial phenomenon in the New Mexico area, December 1948 to May 1950. And the data that talk, if you scroll a little bit higher, you are going to see the date of that memo. 1950. 1950. Yes, sir. May 25, 1950. And it says that it was determined that the frequency of unexplained aerial phenomena in the New Mexico area was such that an organized plan of reporting these observations should be undertaken. Right. So this is the beginning of Project Blue Book. So this is the recognition that we have a serious problem over our sensitive military installations. This is nothing new. This is not 1970s reverse engineered technology or some sort of special technology. 1950, they're talking about the system. We have just broken the sound barrier. And we had not yet entered into space. And we have these things that are performing in ways that frankly we can't replicate. I brought a few more of these later on to emphasize that point. You just brought up at some point if you're interested. But it highlights that these are official government documents through official government personnel raising the alarm bills just like we did in in in all sap and atyps. And so this is nothing new. Now, let's if you want to look at this from an adversarial perspective. Our governor's already said that's not ours. If you look at a 1950s saber jet, for example, it wasn't even supersonic. And these things that we are observing in some cases are doing about some more documents. 1950s saber jet, for example, it wasn't even supersonic. And these things that we are observing, in some cases, are doing about some more documents here, multiples of mock, doing velocities and doing things that we frankly could not do back then. And frankly, we still can't do in some cases. But to probably speaking, the only two countries in the world may may have a chance of doing something like that would be Russian China. And now 1950, where was China was in the middle of a famine. And at the time, it was Russia. Russia was trying to develop the atomic bomb and still was using horse-drawn carts for a lot of their military operations. So, temporally speaking, it doesn't make sense. This is the analogy I've used before Joe that it would be like, sort of, the Carter going into King Tut's tomb for the very first time in the 1920s, discovering King Tut's tomb. And when he goes in, he finds a fully assembled 747 jet. It doesn't make sense. Temporally speaking, they did not have that technology. So, is it possible, not be very careful what I say, that the US government has some sort of exotic technology? Well, my answer is I sure hope so because we want to have an advantage over our adversaries. But in 1950, that wasn't the case. Right. And do they have any film of these crafts from New Mexico? There is film of many crafts and not just New Mexico per se, but over many military installations, I got another one for you. I'll provide you. You don't want to have to waste your time reading it, but I think you'll appreciate this. Take a look at the date of this and who it's to and who it's from. And I think you'll find the subject line very interesting. Okay, which one, what part of my reading just to highlight a portion? So you can see the top of the document who it's from, who it's to in the date and what the subject line is. Director, special investigate, what does it say? It's hard because it's all scratchy. Yeah, it's an old reproduction of official government, talking bottom line, it's a document from the director of Federal Bureau of Investigations. And so read the subject line of that memo. Flying, it's got it's hard to read because it's all screwy. Flying discs, it should say flying discs over the Savannah. It's a there's a sensitive facility that we had where we were doing atomic development. Yeah, flying discs are reportedly seen the vicinity of something river plant, Savannah River plant. Yes, sir. Okay, that's correct. And so that's atomic energy. Yeah. And the date of that being, you know, 1952. Right. So so this is an a fit. This is verified. This is that was released by the government. That is a, those are all official. All these are official US government documentation that anybody can pull up anytime they want. Did they let you see any of these ancient films, these films from the 1950s of these things? So great question. Our focus was really more modern time. It was more like taking that picture of where we are now. But wouldn't you want to just like if you really think this thing is from somewhere else, the best example of it definitely not being ours is something from the 1950s. Sure. And anecdotally, that's that's great. But keep in mind on the backdrop of national security. When you go to a general and you're seeing this up, by the way, you have to think a lot it out scratching. Yeah, that's Uncle Sam for you. You know, when you go to a general or it makes me suspicious. No, you can find it. I know, I know, I know. But it was just like, yeah, the government released that. I mean, they admit that that's a fucking chitial 1920 fax machine. Look at that. Well, they remember they were using typewriters back into right and the ink smear. Yeah, blotchy. And I'm sure the original is probably much, much cleaner. But that's what the government put out on for people to review. So when you're going back to your, to your, quite answer your question, when you are going to a general or you're going to a military leader about this topic, if you go back to anecdotal stuff like, Oh, this is something from 1950s, they're not interested. They're like, look, what is going on now? Right. What is the threat now? I've got a carrier strike group out in the water. I'm getting reports. These things are are coming in and interrogating the ship. You know, what I want to see that I want to see the videos. I want to see the reporting. I want to see the, the, the, the deck logs and what the commander says. And I want to know the pilots, when I talk to the pilots, the radar operators, that's their focus. They're not interested in it. Whether we've tried a few times and the further back in time we go, the less interested they were. So it was really, it was really the current information. What's going on now? I'm not interested in what happened. They're just taking a pragmatic approach. Yeah. Yeah. And it's, you know, it's understandable from a military perspective, a national security perspective. The other stuff is interesting. And from the general public's perspective, you know, they're interested. But from a national security perspective, they're like, Hey, man, that was three decades ago. Right. I need, I need now. So it's, it is understandable. Little frustrating because you want to, you want to demonstrate, look, boss, this is, this is nothing new. Right. This, this is a repeated pattern that we're seeing here. But they're more interested in the here and now. So did they have repeated footage? Because you're seeing three decades. But obviously we're talking about 1950. Did they have stuff from the 1980s stuff from the 1990s? There was reporting. Yeah. And again, I got to be careful some of that stuff I haven't been clear to talk about. But there are reports. We call foreign intelligence, F5 foreign intelligence reports. And I can't say where or who or anything like that. But on classified systems where we know without a shadow of doubt, UAPs were encountered in other countries, adversarial countries. Why? Because we smile on them. And we know again, I can't say how we know and what not. I understand. And trouble. But just so we know this is not a United States phenomenon. Precisely, it is not a US only phenomenon. And in fact, in other countries, whether it's in Latin America, South America, or in Europe, or Russia, China, there is an extreme interest in this topic. In fact, the Chinese, it was in the newspaper. I think it was a China morning sun. There's something called the five continents initiative where allegedly they were trying to broker a deal with the United Nations that would allow China to run all the UFO investigations for the United Nations. Right. So we also know that Russia, they've come out and said, yeah, we're interested in this topic. There were some released old KGB footage that showed MiG interactions with these UAP. And there's also in Latin America, you have the same thing. If you go to Latin America now, they don't have the same level of stigma and taboo associated with this topic like we do. And so they talk freely about it. They have no problem talking in fact, when I was in the Patagonia area of Argentina, there is a near town called Barad Lochi and Las Laas. One of the chief of police was telling me that there's an area they're called La Meuranda. La Meuranda means to see, to view. And they call it that the town. And because UAP are so frequent there, that local law enforcement actually built an observatory, an observation post, to look at these things because they were so frequent. So this is not a new phenomenon. This is something that's been around for quite a long time. The problem is, in my opinion, and I could be wrong, but this is my assessment. The reason why it's so difficult to have the conversation here is because our government had placed so much emphasis and interest trying to stigmatize this topic that it almost worked too well. Now we're at the point where we should be having this conversation and people still don't want to because they think it's crazy. You think it's 10-4 hats and all of us on the mothership and in reality, we're talking about a real national security issue. I mean, these things are here. You have Joe, you have a former director of national intelligence, Radcliffe, a former director of CIA. Brennan, you have former president. It's all coming out and saying, yeah, there's something to it. It's real. Now, what it is, words from and all that stuff, I'm not sure we're quite ready to go there yet, but the acknowledgement is, hey, man, yeah, this is real. It's not ours and we probably should do something about it. So if we go back to the history of the debunking of it, you know, like the project Blue Book stuff, Jay Allen-Hinek, after he had left Project Blue Book, he became a proponent of UFO disclosure. During Project Blue Book, he was his job to be essentially dismiss everything and to come up with some sort of a reason, swamp gas, mass hallucinations, whatever it was, to attribute all these sightings to something that was very easy to explain. Did they ever, is there any documentation or any discussion of why they did that, why they chose to debunk everything? Yeah, my understanding is if you have to look at where America was at the time, they were doing these investigations. It was at the height of the Cold War, right? And, you know, despite what some people think, the Cold War wasn't very cold at all. It was pretty hot. And we had Russian United States engaging in these proxy wars. Neither side wanted to let the other side know what we had and what we didn't know, right? So if you have these UAP coming in and out, the last thing you want to do is tell the other side broadcast, this is what we've learned from it and more importantly, this is what we don't know about it, right? And so both sides keeping this very quiet, but there was an interesting agreement at the classified level, I believe in the late 60s where there was this relationship with the United States. We were putting up our Northern Tier radar system to detect then Soviet Union ICBMs. And they were doing the same thing, right? Because none of us really trusted each other. But we trusted each other enough to say, look, before you hit that button, if you see something coming over the horizon, before you hit that button and launch, give us a call because it might be a UFO, right? And we don't want to start World War three because either side mistakes, the UFO for an ICBM. Right. And that's how serious they took the topic. I mean, that's real. That's a real memo that existed between the United States and Russia. So that's that is an indicator how much both sides took this topic seriously. Jesus. And so when Philip Corso was dismissing all these different things, did they have anything, any film footage, any stuff from that time, from Project Blue Book that was like definitively not ours? I'm not pretty. I'm aware of the fact that people say it does exist and people have been briefed on it. I wasn't pretty to that. I was again more focused on the here and now. I was aware of people who had attended certain meetings, very senior level meetings where that was discussed, where they saw certain footage. But that's I'm hearing that second hand. I did not see the old footage. My focus was more on the current what's going on now. But back to your point, why was this effort to try to create some with stigma in taboo? I think it was because of that. I think because you had Russia and US at this weird stalemate, or neither one wanted to tell the what we know and what we didn't know about UAP. And really, I think the focus from a national security perspective, let's say you're a general and I'm a general. Look, we've got a real cold war going on here right now. As long as these things aren't coming in and zapping my people, that's going to be my focus right now. That's a real potential threat that I have to deal with now. I've got Russia pointing nukes at me and I'm pointing nukes at them at any time we could launch. Let's focus on that. That is my observation on why they didn't want to address the problem, the challenge openly with the general public back. And they also were worried there was a several studies that suggested that most people would be very uncomfortable with that idea that there's something else in the cause most potentially or even right here on earth. And that it would create some sort of societal disruption, right? They didn't want to cause panic. They were afraid that people would kind of like think of a run on Wall Street, right? People get panic. They do kind of strange things sometimes. And I think the government was very worried about that. What's the most compelling modern thing that you've seen? Oh my God, I can't talk about it unfortunately. That's what's that's this is my frustration, Joe, because I know what I've seen. I know my colleagues are seeing right? And to this day, there's there's video that's coming in on a regular routine basis that is very, very compelling. And if they're hurting hard to stuff from the general public, well, we have classified systems behind the right. But how is it how is it getting film? Is any of it getting filmed by the general public or is all this military stuff? So let me backtrack a little bit this. There's there's there's a general public that is filming stuff. But from a department of defense perspective, our focus now, arrow is a different story. But when I was in the government, we had to be very, very careful of something we call intelligence oversight. Back in the 60s and 70s, the US intelligence apparatus, particularly into the Department of Defense, was kind of naughty. They were doing things they shouldn't do. They were spying on students and they were spying on American citizens. You don't do things. Yeah, crazy. So you know, so Congress passed some laws and said, you can't no longer do this kind of stuff on on on on American citizens, right? You can't conduct intelligence operations on American citizens. You can't do it. See legal, right? So you have executive order one, two triple three and all these other rules and laws and duty, 50 to 40, I want that all come out and say no, Moss. So the Department of Defense is supposed to focus on military. That's it. You don't you don't bring in US person's information and adjust them into a Department of Defense database, especially a Department of Defense intelligence database. That's a super no-no that's called US person's information and it's pretty much for a boat. So our focus was looking specifically at military sourced information. I was not focusing at all on what the private citizens were saying because at the end of the day, we couldn't use it. You can't you can't do anything with it. And it seems like you got plenty of compelling footage from military overwhelming it's it there's absolutely no doubt that we didn't have to look at civilian data because we had better collection sensor systems from the military that was looking at stuff and giving us better insight. If you can't tell us about can you give us some sort of an understanding of like what you're talking about? Yeah, sure. Without being specific. Yeah, let me see. Okay. Yeah, there is a video high resolution video of I can't say what platform was taken from. I can't say where was taken from. But an object that you know, do you know how large a an offshore oil Derek is? They're huge. Yeah. They're like almost like a small city, right? They're like one city block. They're huge. They're enormous things. There is a video that shows one of these objects underwater that goes by the speed was calculated between 450 and 550 knots underwater. And it was bigger than the offshore Derek that it was passing because you could see in the video the offshore Derek and you could see this thing zip right by it. Jesus. Yeah. So that's a lot of them, right? A lot of them are reported as being transmedia. Right. So that exactly why do we use a term UAP? Right. Now it's unidentified anomalous phenomena because it's all domain initially was UFO unidentified flying object. And for several reasons, they change the name. One of them, not just because it's a stigma like people think, but because the word flying object means flight. And you have to have wings to fly. That's flight. And these things don't have wings. So that term we're not even sure is even accurate anymore because they're not necessarily flying. We see them underwater. We see them super high altitude. So the term was changed to unidentified aerial phenomenon. But again, that did not encompass all the observations we were seeing. So now the term UAP, I think the latest description of it is unidentified anomalous phenomenon to help describe this multi domain or trans medium characteristic that we are beginning to see and record that these things can do. And that is I'm going to, if I can digress for a second because that's super important, Joe. We have transmedia vehicles. Right. We have things like sea planes. And it's a plane and it can float on water. But let's face it, a sea plane is neither a really good plane or a really good boat because it's a compromise. It's a design compromise between an object that you want to perform in the air and in the sea. And that's why it's neither really good at both. Same thing with, for example, a space shuttle goes out in a space and it can glide down. But it's not a very good airplane. It comes down like a brick. Right. Because there's design compromises and performance compromises. But what we are seeing doesn't have any of that attributable compromise. It's not, these objects aren't slowing down. They're not changing their performance capabilities. They can do the same thing that we're seeing in the air and possibly in space and even underwater. So that is a fundamentally different type of technology than we are used to dealing with. Is the assumption that they are doing something with space time and gravity around them rather than using something like a jet propulsion engine that glass fire out the back and it makes it go fast forward? Right. They're doing something that alters the gravity around them. Yeah. So that's why they can go through everything. Yeah. So we had some of the best scientists on the team, folks like Dr. Hal Poudoff and some other folks that I'm not allowed to say their names. Dr. Arp Davis and some others that we're doing the calculations, mathematical calculations on how this is possible. And the consensus was by the scientists, not me, because I'm not a physics expert and I'm not an astrophysicist. They were saying that. So let me back up here. Initially, the government for years was trying to identify the different exotic technologies that could explain the different performance characteristics. And it was during the eight appears that the scientists had this consensus that if you had one type of technology, if you could do one thing, all these other observables now be composable. Kind of think of like a unifying and so if you had the ability to create this bubble around you in a localized area that insulated you from the effects of Earth's gravity, now what does gravity people think that when I drop my glasses, that's gravity. That's not gravity. That's an effect of gravity. Gravity is the warping of space time. And that's important because people don't, you hear the term thrown around a lot, but they don't realize that space and time are actually connected. They are one of the same, they're opposite sides if you will, at the same point. And so you can't have one without the other. And so you have this ability to create a bubble around you that insulates you from the warping of space time, let's say in this case, Earth's gravity or something like that, then the way you experience time inside that bubble is perhaps fundamentally different than the way you might experience space time outside that bubble because you're not subject to the effects of gravity, which would explain potentially why things don't need wings and why they don't need propulsion systems like that. Right? So it's a completely different way of looking at how we understand physics and how we, as humans, move about everything we do is fundamentally force equals mass times acceleration. F equals ma, mass times acceleration, you force. This may be something a little bit different. This is not using a, again, conventional thrust or if I put in a Newtonian, right, if I if I push this way, I have an equal and opposite reaction that way. Right. That's how that's any theories as to how it's accomplishing this? There is actually Dr. Hal Poudoff about three years ago gave a speech on this. A very interesting talk lecture about this technology, if you ever had the chance, you really should have him on because he's an incredible human being. He's also the one who helped start the government's remote viewing program and a bunch of other stuff for the government. He's been involved in a lot of our nation's probably most classified efforts, but he was working with us on ATP as one of our scientists. And he gave a lecture about three years ago to some other scientists about the specifics on how this is possible. I am not a scientist, so I definitely not going to speak on behalf of Hal Poudoff because I'm sure I will muck it up, but I do recall a time when he came into our skiff and gave us about a three-hour lecture on this unifying theory. And at that moment, it was very much for us, the epiphany that a lot of us had been searching for. He's like, look, at the end of the day, this is how it's possible. And that was kind of this wow. So it's really not. Can you give us a more on view of how it's possible? Yeah, explain it to someone like me. Yeah. Well, I mean, that category Joe. So, you know, speaking the same language, yes, sir. Yeah, single syllable runs, right? Yeah, so you have an object like this cup on your table. And you want it to be insulated from the effects of earth's gravity. So you create this bubble artificially using a certain energetic source at a certain frequency and interacts with certain material, certain metamaterial. And I have, again, I get to be careful exactly what I say, but a certain skin of the craft, this aluminum, via the cup here. And all of a sudden, whoop, you have this bubble around you where what you see on the outside is not necessarily what you see on the inside. In fact, may it do it. Sure, more drawing for you. Okay, and forgive me. I'm not an artist. So I'm going to do this upside down for you. And then I'm going to kind of scoot this just a little here. All right. Let's do this. So, unfortunately, I know your audience can't see this, but actually it's okay. Some people can, there's a video form of it. I'm sure this will get on a little bit on YouTube as well. It's probably good that they don't, because I'm not an artist. Okay. Let's say this is a two-dimensional representation of a three-dimensional space. Okay. And in essence, so what you've done is essentially created a three-dimensional looking grid stacked, looked like stack boxes on top of each other. Yeah. Right. And so you have this, you have location A and location B. And let's say you go from Los Angeles to Baltimore. Okay. And it takes me five hours to fly at 500 miles an hour. That's a function of distance over time. And in essence, you can mark that linearly like this. So I fly. It takes me five hours. There I am. Okay. If you had the ability to compress space time and not a lot, just a little bit. And you were able to allow these points to be a little closer together. Now in essence, what took you, let's say, five hours and 500 miles an hour to do it, you can do it in one hour. And you can do it in much less time. But to the observer outside, because we're still in the same universe, we would see something like that. We would see this incredible hopscotching ability to, if you will, take a shortcut through space time. And so what would appear to be instantaneous acceleration, I personally lost, you know, the things now becomes a reality. And so that is, that is fundamentally what the scientists had discovered. And so it seems like science fiction, but when you understand the mathematics and some of the theorem that they propose, a lot of these other observables become possible. So these are essentially just theoretical explanations of how these things are moving. Yeah. And again, I'm not, I'm not a scientist. I want to be very careful. I don't want to misrepresent anything. There's a whole lot of other stuff that if you can do that, all of a sudden now makes sense and may describe the observations that people are seeing and why they're kind of hard to see and they see them secure. And so I think from a governmental perspective that it was kind of a revelatory moment for the folks in our program. So they realized that one of the reasons why these things are weird looking is because they're literally creating one light. Do you mind? I'm sorry. Thank you. So the back thing, the other side, push that down. There you go. Thank you very much. No problem. So how, how much of this is theoretical on how much of this is observed from recovered vehicles? I am not allowed to talk about what the government may or may not have in its possession other than that I have, I, so I went through a very lengthy Pentagon review process recently. I wrote something, I will talk about it here, but I wrote something and I had to go through Pentagon to have a review process and it took almost a year. In this, this thing I wrote, I, I, I talk about up to the lead, up to the part I can talk about and they approved for me to talk about up to that point. What it comes to what the government may not have in its possession, all I can simply say is that there is a very compelling evidence to suggest that the US government is an absolute possession of exotic material that is not made by humans. Now beyond that, I can't really expound upon it, I haven't been given permission to talk about it, but what I can say is what I've already said for the record, which has been approved by the Pentagon. Well, can trouble by saying it? Is that that we are, there's very compelling data to suggest that we are in possession of it? Why is the Pentagon teasing us? Why do they tell you, why are they allowing you to say we are in possession of something that was not made by human beings but not allowed to elaborate, not allowed to show these very compelling videos that you're talking about that you've seen? I don't, well, two reasons. I don't think they have a choice. I think with now the introduction of cell phones and ring cameras, the cats out of the back, it's the worst kept secret at this point. Two, there is a faction unlike before in the Cold War. I believe there is a faction of people inside the government that do want this conversation to occur, but equally, there's still a faction of people that are very mad with me. They do not want me having this conversation and mark my words just by me being on your show, it is going to cause an absolute storm inside the Pentagon. And I am sure the other shoe is going to drop. I promise you, it's going to, you're going to hear all sorts of stuff. People make stuff up about me trying to discredit this topic because as many people are in the government that want this topic to be discussed now, there's still some people that do not want this conversation. Could you steal man their position? Say again, steal man their position. Meaning, could you help argue it from their perspective? Absolutely. Like why? Sure. It would be a good reason to keep this stuff quiet. Sure. And I want to preface here. I'm not fear mongering. No, I don't think so. Look, if I was a military person, I would look at this from the perspective of there's three options. They're good. They're neutral or they're bad. So let's go down this road for a second. Let's say they're good. Well, we've got nothing to worry about. The problem is, there's nothing to suggest that they truly are benevolent. People say, well, you know, they're like, they don't want us to nuke ourselves. Well, you know, I discussed it in what I wrote that there's no, there's no, there's no data to suggest that they didn't stop us from dropping atomic bombs in Hiroshima, Nagasaki and vaporizing 500,000 living souls. They didn't stop us when we started developing nuclear weapons from the atomic agents and stopped the proliferation of nuclear weapons. They didn't stop the the testing and the Nevada range of atomic and nuclear weapons. And now how many countries have atomic weapons and nuclear weapons? A lot, right? They didn't stop Chernobyl. They didn't stop Fukushima. They didn't stop through my island. So to say that they're here to help us, I'm not sure there's there's data. People say, well, you know, in in in my knot and North Dakota and Montana, the UFOs came in and they stopped, they interfered with our nuclear weapons and they brought the entire echo flight offline. But by the way, I have the government report on that if you want it. But in Russia, a lot of people don't know, they turn them on. Right? So that's equally scary. They're interfering with our nuclear capability, whether to attack or to defend ourselves. So when you say they turn to mine and Russia, this is a Russian report. Yeah, so this is a, I don't know if you remember the hearing, congressional hearing that occurred last year where the day of Russia, nope. The other one with undersecretary defense for intelligence, Ronald Moltry and some people from the Navy. And I think it was Congressman Gallagher that asked the very specific question and he said, are you aware of UFOs interfering with our nuclear capabilities? And the response was something like, no, not really familiar with it, never heard of it. And then the question was, I think we asked specifically at these locations and their government's response was, nope, nothing very with it. Well, here's the actual report from the Department of Defense. This is the actual intelligence report that was released through FOIA. There's a gentleman out there who runs a site called the Black Vault. Here's the actual report from the Department of Defense. This is the actual intelligence report that was released through FOIA. There's a gentleman out there who runs a site called the Black Vault. His name is John Greenwald. He's probably the World Authority on Freedom of Information Act. And he has a wealth of data that is out available to the public that he has received from the government. This is one of those documents. This is the document that our own government has no idea apparently exists. I like how they write it in all caps. Yeah, they'll report. So obviously there's some people that don't want this to be released. And obviously there's some people that think that the general public has a right to know. I believe so. That's my observations in my experience. Well that makes sense. I mean like when everybody says the CIA does this, like okay who? Well we're in the CIA. I didn't finish though the other part right so if they're not here for friends, if they're not friendly, that leaves them neutral like us or benevolent. Now from military perspective and I just want to have you out, I don't agree with this. But I can respect the understanding. You sir are general and I say we cannot prove that they're not here to do something bad. But what we do know is that they can interfere. They're very interested in our military capabilities and they have interfered with our nuclear capabilities. Right? From a military perspective that looks an awful lot like if something we call IPB, initial preparations of the battle space or perhaps even ISR intelligence surveillance or reconnaissance. Whenever we're going to go into a foreign country and invade, we do long range surveillance. We want to know how the enemy operates, how they react. So even if there's a 2% chance, 5% chance that these things are here to do something my level and right? Then we probably should not tip our hands to the fact that we are aware of it publicly because what happens the moment that the bad guys in a foreign country find our surveillance team over the border? We've got 12 hours. We've got to invade because the element of surprise is now over. So some may feel in the government the mere fact of acknowledging this. If there is some sort of mal intent, may push up artificially a clock that exists somewhere for these things to say, oh, okay. The full of shulman's are now the cats out of the bag. They know where we're here. We need to go in now for whatever reason they may have. So that is the military mindset potentially of some of these individuals who want to keep this secret because they're worried about an actual invasion. But they have to be. That is, that goes the role of our national security apparatus. Even if there's a 1% chance, they have to consider that in their planning and in the decision-making matrix. So again, going back to what I said, I respect that. I don't agree with it, but I can respect that. If that is the reason why then I would say, okay, look, in your heart, you really do have the best interests of the American people. You are a patriot. I can accept that. Again, I don't think it's your decision to make. I think needs to go to Congress. I think it's your president that the American people decide. I think America can handle the truth. I think America deserves the truth and let the American people decide if it's in their best interests. I agree with this. But I also can see it from their perspective. They're probably insanely busy already. And the last thing they want to do is get involved in this thing where now they have a PR campaign. We're going to try and let people know about this thing and not cause mass panic. That's right. That's right. But you know what though? I'm also very optimistic, Joe, because you and I are having this conversation and people aren't making a run on Wall Street. People are still paying their mortgage. It's going to PTA meetings. And after the 2017 New York Times report, which was probably one of the biggest moments in UFO disclosure. Because there was in the New York Times. And then you see something like that in the New York Times in 2017. People really respected it. It's like this is a real story. Well, and this is a political. I mean, how many topics can you go to Congress and have that's not polarized? Right. This is one of the only ones where you can have literally have Congressman Breshette and Congressman AOC side by side agreeing that this is important. It's a very rare opportunity. And so, you know, my concern, I'm doing this because I believe it's the right thing to do. And my concern is that we're at a point now where I've said before, you know, secrets aren't like a fine wine where the longer you keep a cork on it, the better it gets. I think secrets are perishable. I think they have a shelf life. I think they're like vegetables and your refrigerator. And there comes a point where if you leave them there too long, they start to rot and they start to stink. And it becomes a big mess to clean up. Right. That's my perspective. And what I'm trying to do is give the government an ability to work its way out of a corner that it's put itself into for the last several decades. And with no seeming way out, right? Right. Look around like, how do we get ourselves out of this tris- Is there an issue of legality of spending and like 100% 100% there's people that will be liable for not being straightforward with Congress? And I know people want their pound of flesh and others people out there, we've been lied to for decades and I want and then they make it a political issue. Right. You go after someone for, yeah. And I think that's the wrong approach. I think, you know, there was a time where we needed to keep this secret. And I think what you do is you give those guys awards, give those guys and girls a war to who did it. Don't make them enemies, make them friends and say, okay, look, but those were different times. Now's the time to come clean, talk to the members of Congress. Right. Forgive all the past sins, truth and reconciliation. Yeah, truth and reconciliation. 100% and let's just get clear with all this and understand that it was all in good faith that you did it in the first place. 100% now all in the interest of the United States security. You talk about legal issues. The problem is there are the real legal issues. So let's say you have, again, these cups forgive my analogies. You have two aerospace companies, company A, company B. And let's say I am in the Department of Defense back in the 50s, 60s and I come across this interesting technology. I have no idea what the hell it is. He just came out of the sky and I go to company A and I said, tell me what you can figure out about that. Right. Ten years later, company A becomes a multi-billion dollar aerospace company, company B goes bankrupt. 200 people lose her jobs and now people who have stock investors in that company lose their money. Right. Unfair advantage. Keep in mind you're supposed to have fair competition in the US government. So if you give an unfair advantage to company A, to B, you're talking a serious liability. There's SEC violations there. There's all sorts of concerns. One has to pay attention to because someone somewhere gave an unfair advantage to one company over another. So there are legal liabilities that we have to recognize. It's not just clear cut, okay, forgive and forget. You know, there's going to have to be some additional protection and understanding for if that occurred, we need to figure out how we deal with that as well. So that would be an impediment to release. That makes a lot of sense. Yeah, these are big companies right with the D pockets and a lot of lawyers. Well, I mean, also, this is a discussion that we've had on here before. If you did find something, who would you bring it to? You bring it to the people that build your fucking jets. Like, hey guys, what the hell is this? Like, you know, you make some sort of a top secret agreement. You bring it to them in some sort of undisclosed facility. That's the best you're best to bring the guys in and go what the fuck. Is this thing? Yeah. You kind of have to. Otherwise, like, what else would you do? You know, I mean, how else do you find out how these things work? And if you were going to do it in a secretive manner, you would have to bring it to defense contractors because those are the only people that are capable of making things. They make your jets. They make the, you know, every stealth bomber or whatever the fuck it is. They make all that shit. Going back to a colleague of mine made the comparison. He said, look, Lou. He's not a question being during the days of Da Vinci. And all of a sudden bringing Da Vinci a garage door opener. You have no idea what it's used for. Right. Never seen plastic before. You don't even understand electromagnetic radiation, right? But you know, and infrared. You know, where do you start on the analysis and exploitation of a technology that the physics hasn't even been discovered yet, right? Right. I mean, garage door opener seemed like magic. Right. It really does. It's a button and a door opens like magic. Wait, where's the horse? Where's the strings? What's that right? Yeah, so it's kind of bananas. You press a button on your car and all certain your door opens. Right? And you drive in and you press another button and it closes. And it's all done through the air, right? Which is bananas. Magic. But we're just accustomed to it. That's right. Yeah. So this kind of technology, I'm sure you're aware of the Bob Lazar story. I'm aware. I don't know Bob. I've never met him. So you never got into that? I did not. How could you not with your line of work? Because I always wanted to be insulated from prejudiceing the jury. And it sounds kind of strange. But I didn't ever exist. It's kind of something I impose on myself, because I didn't want to have any preconceived notions of going in. Most people kind of, I suspect, would be tempted to say, well, I'll learn everything I can about UFO lore. I wanted the opposite. It's better man than me. Well, I love them, but I'm going to chase it down. I think I just wanted to be very, very careful to preserve the investigative integrity. And we're all humans. We're all bias. That's just no way around it. We all have some degree of bias. Let's be honest and truthful here. It doesn't matter what type of bias it is. We all have some sort of bias somewhere. Whether it's food or it's the people you like to date or whatever. I wanted to avoid that as much as possible. And so I always kept it very, very focused on the here and now. And what can we see today? Right. You're aware of the story, though, right? The basic tangentially. He worked at a particular facility. And at that facility, he was exposed to some sort of UAP technology. That thing. Right. That thing right there at the sport model and that he was brought in as a propulsion expert. To try to, they didn't know how it exactly worked. But they sort of just said, tell me what this is, Roger. And then along the way, he realized, oh, this isn't even ours. Yeah. I'm aware of, again, the overarching story. I don't know any of the details. And I've never met him personally. So I'm a very, very interesting guy. I had dinner with him with my friend, Andrew Schultz and Jeremy Corbell. We went to dinner and informally talked and had a fascinating conversation. Jeremy's a great guy. He's a great guy. Yeah, he's really, he's done a lot to say. He's done a lot to say. Hi. He's pumped that we're talking. Yeah, he's done a lot to do with his UFO nut. And he got me really way back in with his documentary of Bob Azar, Flying Sossers, whatever, the actual title of it is. But that documentary is fantastic. And it's essentially going over Bob Azar's story from the 1980s to today, which he's told the exact same story, which is nuts that you have one giant lie your whole life. Like, come on. There's a lot of weirdness to the story, obviously. But like there is with everything, there's a lot of people that want to discredit his background and all sorts of other things. But the reality of what he's saying is essentially what we're seeing in these crafts, which is very strange. So he described how these things worked and how they moved and how they would turn sideways and sort of like project this, whatever this reactor that they have inside of them. And he talked about this element, element 115. They have a stable version of it. That was essentially his theoretical at the time in 1980. No one really knew whether or not that thing actually even exists, 89, whatever it was. And that it would douse this thing, project radiation upon it. And it would create this warp, this gravity warp, this thing that allowed this craft to move in ways that defied our understanding. To hell of a lucky guess. If hell of a lucky guess. Hell of a lucky guess in 1989. And he drew it. He is diagrams of what this thing looked like and how it worked. And essentially looked exactly like that little model that's on the desk there. And that he felt like the whole, it didn't make any sense. He said the whole thing. It didn't have any seams, which now we understand 3D printing. So now we know that we can actually get in. But only now, wrap back then, right? Of course. Everything had rivets. Exactly. The skin of a craft was a skin of an aircraft. Exactly. And that's in Bolton. Exactly. But now, obviously now we have carbon fiber. We have a bunch of different ways to construct them things. But back then, he didn't know what the fuck that thing was. He said it looked like it had all been melted into place. That it had been almost like smooth wax, melted wax. And that it had no instrumentation inside of it. And it was designed for very small things, like something that was like three feet tall. And that all these things seemed to operate through the being itself had some sort of connection to the craft, some sort of strange way of interfacing with the craft that didn't have anything to do with pulling levers and moving things. But, Joe, is that really that much of a stretch? Let's look at this. We have done experiments where we've had pilots be able to control aircraft thousands of miles away with a helmet that interprets thought. Right. So it's, again, how is the helmet and is it similar to like a neural link setup? Have you seen the new video of the second neural link patient? I have not. Is this video of him playing Counter Strike? Was it Counter Strike or is it, is that it? So Counter Strike, which is a very popular online 3D game. And this guy who does not have use of his body, has this neural link implant. He's the second neural link patient. And apparently with each iteration, it gets more and more sophisticated and better. So this is from this person's point of view. He's playing this video game entirely with his mind. So he's better than I can with my... Well, better than anybody can be. He was the first guy who, the first neural link patient we had him on and he said it essentially is like having an aim bot because you don't miss. You look at the thing you're trying to shoot at and instantaneously your crosshairs go there. Wow. Yeah. So he's... Well, all this stuff is taking place entirely. This is all him doing this entirely with his mind. But is that right? So if we can do that now, right? Is it really that far of a stretch to think that, you know, someone who's a little more advanced in us, right? Or French from out of town, realize that's the way to do it. That's more efficient, right? Right. The speed of the processing of the brain, the processes of the brain is much fat. It takes us longer to then have to mechanically use our hands and manipulate and do things. This is almost not quite, but almost instantaneous. You don't have that lag, right? Right. Of course. And so that would certainly make sense. You know, modern warfare, not the game, but actual modern warfare is beginning to turn to them. We're using AI and all these other augmentation to enhance performance. And so I don't think that's out of the realm of possibility. No, certainly not. I mean, just go from garage door open or to, you know, 500 or 600 years ago, to today and then cell phones, the ability to send video across the world instantaneously, all those sophisticated stuff that we've just completely take for granted because it's become a normal part of everyday life. That's, you know, I used to, I used to give a briefing to some folks. I'm so glad you mentioned this because it's, this goes back to the whole stigma and taboo issue. I used to have a slideshow and I still have it somewhere. And I would, I would discuss the word, the Latin word prefix of para, P-A-R-A. And it means a buffer beside. And so what I would do is show, I would, I would say the word parachute and I'd ask people, what do you think of when you hear the word parachute? And people would describe obviously something that deploys over your head and hopefully hit the ground with a thumb and not a thumb, right? But something that normal we use every day. And then I say, what about the word paramedic? And then people would look at and say, well, I think of a first responder, someone goes some, sort of a medical life saver that's gonna be there for your benefit. And then I say the word, when I say the word paranormal, what do you think? And people will stop for a second. Maybe they kind of give you a little slice smile and say, what do you mean? So what do you mean? I mean that, paranormal. The only reason why you're reacting to what you are, because you've been conditioned that the word paranormal is cookie stuff, when a reality in science by definition, everything is paranormal until it becomes normal. The cell phone that I use every day, 50 years ago, absolutely paranormal. And so I would go through this exercise of things that were once considered paranormal. For example, when the inka first saw the Spaniards, the conquistadores coming from the reconquering, they saw them on the shores of the beach and they saw these humans in armor riding on a horse. And they assumed, could never see no horse before, they assumed it was a single entity, it was a single monster. And that for them was paranormal. They didn't understand it was actually human riding on a horse with metal skin. Same thing with acupuncture. I remember a time when I was growing up as a kid, people thought Eastern medicine, acupuncture was nonsense. Well now at the Veterans Administration, the VA for some of my guys in combat, they actually prescribe acupuncture. As therapy, it's not paranormal, right? And so there's all these examples in history where we think something is cookie and weird when a reality, it's not. It's just we don't understand it yet. And we have done such a good job of stigmatizing this conversation that the moment you even say the word paranormal, or you say the word UFO and anything like that, people are conditioned without even thinking about its reflexive to react a certain way. And we have to first deprogram ourselves first a little bit before we can start moving forward. Okay, let's, how do we just destigmatize this conversation? Well first of all, what's cookie? What do you think is cookie about something that's in our airspace that's performing in ways that we can't replicate? That people say, well, you know, wait a minute, we spend millions, if not billions of dollars putting a probe on Mars to try to find microbial life. And by the way, it looks like that might happen. It looks like there actually may be some evidence to suggest that. We spend lots of money trying to find technosignatures of intelligent life, radio signatures in our own Milky Way, right? Well, is it possible within the four and a half billion years are playing it to been here that maybe intelligent life, maybe found us first? Is it possible? Could be, you know, we have to stop putting these limitations, Joe, when I was in the medical program, when I was learning to be microbiology and immunology and college. We learned from our professor that homo sapiens sapiens, as a modern species, has been around roughly between 100,000 to 200,000 years. Now, I'm not an expert, but that's what they say. It was only the Greeks 2,000 years ago that introduced the idea that there's only two types of life forms on this planet, and either you are either a plant or being you're an animal. And it wasn't the last 300 years. So if you look at a 24 hour clock, roughly the last five minutes in the 24 hours towards midnight, we discovered another form of life that is neither plant nor animal. That's been here with us on this planet, and that is the world of fungus. During the Renaissance and the days of Newton, we discovered that there was this other life form. We've been sharing all along. And we saw we pat ourselves on the shoulder, and it wasn't the last 120 years. Think about it. The last 10 seconds of our existence on this planet, so to speak, in a 24 hour clock as modern species, we actually discovered the true dominant life form on this planet. And in fact, if you take all the biomass of every plant and the biomass of every animal and the biomass of every fungus in that, it all together, it still will not equal the biomass of this hidden kingdom of life that's actually the dominant life form on this planet. And that wasn't until we were able to curve glass and look through little steel tube and famously shout little beasties, little beasties. Did we discover the world of microorganisms that yes, live inside of you. And yes, live on the skin of the ISS space station. Yes, live miles underneath the Arctic ice. That is the true dominant life form on this planet, and it always has been. And it wasn't until the last 120 years, we discovered that. So is it possible that there's something else that is just as normal to this world? Is it possible? Well, the answer is a resounding yes, of course, is possible because we're always discovering new ways life can exist. When I was growing up as a kid, I was told absolutely as a matter of fact, all life form is derived from photosynthesis, ultimately when you go all the way down. It turns out that's not true. It wasn't until we discovered the deepest depths of our oceans or these things called black smokers. We discovered there are creatures that thrive with no light and they thrive off of something called chemo synthesis, a completely different way to metabolize energy to sustain life, right? So every time we put mother nature in a little box, she always finds a way to wiggle her way out. And I think that's important when having this conversation because if there's one thing we know as human beings, we're usually wrong at first. Well, we exist and we do send things to other planets and we do send things into space. It only makes sense that something far more intelligent than us that would be doing that. And if they did, they'd probably watch an emerging civilization, which is essentially what we are. And like you said, 200,000 years, which is nothing, the existence of Homo sapiens. We've gone from things that use stones and flint map to things that can fly things through the air. I mean, if you look at Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright when they flew the first airplane, you go from that to the Apollo 11 launch. That's only like what? 50 years? That's right. Something crazy like that? That's right. That's nuts, right? And you just take that and everything moves exponentially. You take that and you would imagine a civilization that's been around 10,000 years longer than us. 100,000 years longer than us. Something that doesn't exist. How about 100 years? We have evolved more in the last 150 years than we have in the last 150,000 years. Sure. And so, and then you have the other, for me, I find when people say, well, the space is so huge. And you know, is it possible that things are coming from outer space? My response has always been the same. Look, I don't know where they're from. I just know that they're here. And could they be from outer space? Sure. It can be from inner space or even the space in between. And I say that because the universe is far more complex than we give it credit for. Every time there was a time we had Newtonian physics, we thought there was a solution, then all of a sudden Einstein comes along and we realized that weight, space and time are actually connected and everything's relative. And all of a sudden now you have quantum mechanics, which is this spooky action at a distance, right? Where the whole universe is behaving in a way that it shouldn't, and yet that looks like the real way the universe works. I often tell people we are, as humans, we have five fundamental senses that we can base our reality upon. And if you can't touch it, taste it here at smell, et cetera, we can't interact with it. And so where I live in Wyoming, we have these beautiful night skies, kind of like you have here in your studio here. 300 days of unaccluded night skies. And as beautiful as those night skies are, if you were to look at that same portion of the night sky through a radio telescope, you would see a whole different reality around you. You'd see nebula and you'd see things in different spectra that we can't pick up. You'd pick an ultraviolet and infrared. So you would see a whole different reality, just like our cell phones, right? If you could see in cell phone vision and see in Wi-Fi and 5G and GPS, you would interact with your environment completely different because you would see reality. So we can only interact with a very small sliver of the reality that we can perceive because we're humans. But most of reality is actually beyond that. And then of course you have scalability issues. The universe is immensely huge. And what scientists are now saying, if you look in any direction, you can see roughly within the visible, let me emphasize it, visible horizon of our universe, is about 13.9 billion light years, plus or minus. So that means in any direction, I can see 13.9 billion light years with the right equipment. What's a light year? Well, it's a fast, light can travel in a year. Well, light travels pretty fast. It's tracked to travel at 186,000 miles per second. So seven and a half times around our planet in one second. So imagine how far you can go in a year. Now multiply that by 13.9 billion. And that, by scientists estimation, so that the universe end to end of our visible, we're stuck in the middle, is roughly 27 billion light years. Scientists are now saying that's only possibly only 10% of the known universe because the universe is so big and so fast and so far, light will never have time to reach Earth. So that's a hunt at a minimum, 100 billion light years. And so we are this little speck in the middle. And as crazy as that is to even try to conceive, if you compare one atom inside the one hydrogen atom, Avogodro's number, one times 10 to the negative um team, all the way down. It is roughly the same level of scale as we are to the universe, meaning that atom is a size of a human as we are the size of the universe as we are a human to the size of the universe. So there is this, and we as humans can only interact plus or minus with one order of magnitude up or down. Otherwise, the universe is simply too big or too small, meaning most of the universe and reality lies in those scales. We live in this little tiny, tiny sliver. And so, you heard my head. Yeah, we live in a tiny sliver. And the idea that we are alone I think is preposterous. I really do. And I know people think constantly chiming with this. Well, where is the evidence of Elon's famously said if the aliens are real, they are very subtle. I don't know why he says that though. I think you probably said that because he doesn't want to sound like a coo-coise, work with NASA and SpaceX. I probably say some stuff like that too. Well, let me ask you this, as human beings, right? How many times do we fly over the Serengetian in a helicopter, right? And let's say we want to monitor the health of a particular, you know, a herd of elephants, right? And so what happens are wilder bees. We fly over, we pick one, we shoot it with a tranquilizer. Falls asleep, we go down, we do some test, pull its blood. Now think about it from the perspective of the wilder bees, right? It wakes up kind of meanders over to the watering hole in this bill. You're not going to believe this man, but something out of the sky came down. And all of a sudden they were touching me and, you know, I woke up in my butt hurt. Right? What the hell was that? Right. To this day, even in China, when we went into a zoo, right? And we have the Panda Bear exhibits. What do we do? We put, so we don't disrupt the pandas. We wear pandasuits. Now it sounds silly, but you can actually get online and see zookeepers wearing pandasuits because they don't want to scare, they want to interfere as least as possible with the natural flora and fauna there inside the exhibit. Do you think animals could you, was it reasonable to theorize that there's aliens amongst us? When you say, well, two things. So I don't want to be evasive. Let me, but I also want to be very specific when we say aliens. And then we also, are we, are we saying something from another planet? Are we saying non human intelligence that looks like us? I moves around with us. So is it possible? Well, we're doing it already with the Panda Bear. So you know, it's not that we do a strategy that'd be very simple. Sure. And especially if you have the technology now as far as. There we go. There we go. Carrying little baby pandas. Exactly. Boy, those are shitty Panda Bear outfits too. We're fucking terrible looking. They're pretty terrifying right there. Actually, you put that in front of my dog. He's going to bark. If like a do the dog costume, he like, oh, I have fucking dog. Yeah. The wild Panda Bear, not, no, that dude's not a Panda Bear. That's crazy. See, there's a Panda Terrace. That looks like a fucking alien. Like it was really dark out and that guy grabbed you and zapped you with a tranquilizer. You know, an alien story. But yeah, my point is that we always, you know, use camouflage for obvious real. We do it in military. Right. And when camouflage, I would camouflage uniform. I stealth aircraft, you know, for camouflage. Sure. Do you go hunting? Absolutely. Absolutely. Not, it's not a stretch of the imagination to suggest anything coming here that doesn't want to provoke us. Probably wants to blend in now. Of course. Do I have any type of empirical evidence to suggest that they are living among us? I don't want it to say definitively that whatever it is, it's here. And by the way, you already have very senior people in our government that have said it's here, whatever it is. But these things could also be from under the water. Do you think it could be something that is as natural to earth as the little beasties were, right, when we first discovered them? Maybe they've been here all along. Right. So the ocean is largely undiscovered. One of the things that people need to understand is that most of the exploration of the ocean is really essentially around the outside edges. It's around the shores. Less than 10%. So, which is nuts. But if my 90% of the ocean, that's right. Like what? We know more about the moon than the bottom of our own ocean. And so. It's around the shores less than 10% so which is nuts buddy if my 90% of the ocean That's right like what we know more about the moon than the bottom of our own ocean And so so crazy. Yeah, that's fact and these underwater crafts like this enormous one that apparently was near this oil rig How many of them have been? Has there been more than one of those videos? So let me tell what I can say from open focus. Yeah, okay And then I'll tell you about a conversation I had without attribution because I don't want to get in trouble Everybody's soon one I say everybody a lot of people are familiar with the Air Force program called the fast walker program Which is a program that was started by the Air Force among other things was to detect UFOs. That's a fact to actually that's what was part of their mission Okay, to detect a lot of things adversarial technology, but UFOs was one of them was called the fast walker program There was some information that was released Publicly about a similar program the Navy has I can't talk about it because I don't have approval to talk about it But obviously they're interested because they have equities underwater They're interested if there's anything underwater that can perform Beyond anything we have and I remember speaking to one individual Who pulled me aside very privately and he said lube We were tracking this thing doing And I won't see the exact speed but hundreds and hundreds of knots underwater and It was bigger than our own submarine You know big or submarines are right there. Yeah, I Have some naively. I just kind of come out. What do you do when you encounter that? He just said very honestly. He said we go around Just like that we go around have there been interactions with these things I Not at liberty to discuss any details about that. That's not for me to discuss You know, I Find out what the fuck is that So this thing is bigger than the sub and they they followed it for hundreds of miles Let me give you another a great great event that occurred. I'll talk about this because it's not classified Portions that might be I don't know about so I should be fine There's an individual who I'm aware of who was a heli-pilot helicopter pilot back in the late 90s In the Caribbean and they were doing missile recovery So what happened is that the Navy would test fire missiles and then they kind of run out of fuel They hit the water and they sink that a predetermined time they pop to the surface We grab it with a helicopter bring it back to shore And we test it for telemetry and make sure that the you know this cruise missile was doing it supposed to do So they're out there in the helicopter Frogman hanging down the line You got the heli-pilot got the crew chief and a and a other Copilot looking all down into bubble and as they're about to grab this this cruise missile out of the ocean There's something huge and round and what was described to me as black as a devil Starts to rise to the surface the water begins to churn very much like David Freaver's description of the tiktik incident and the roiling water The frogman is so freaked out. He's literally trying to climb the line back up He's like total panic at the disco right? Yeah, and the helicopters like we do like an emergency ascent what the hell's going on here and Right is this thing is about and by the way, it's the size of a small island and around Right as this thing is about to break the surface It sucks the missile down and disappears and that was yeah and Dave Freaver could probably tell you that story a little better than I can Well, you compare that to other things you got to say imagine being that guy hanging from that line no Thank you We call that bait Yeah, but it didn't do anything to him. No. I would have loved that experience Yeah, so that was that was one of the anecdotes that was revealed to us by one of the Who's that guy that was hanging from the frogman? You see oh, I don't know I only know the problem come talk to me Please sir, I only know the violent. Well, put you in a fucking panda outfit Guys your voice down with the fuck he's off. I want to hear that story. Oh my god small island Yep, black is the devil in a small island and round yeah submarines look like this right there. They're not around right so yeah So that was that was one of the anecdotes That was shared with us, you know, obviously Puerto Rico with the other There's been some UAPs that have been recorded off there Everybody knows about apla via the a wether you're instedant. I don't know about it. Oh, I'm sure you do Tell me Wow trust me so you can look it up online There's a video taken by a DHS helicopter of a very interesting object First it appears to be like a Perhaps a balloon But then it does all sorts of weird stuff and as you're tracking it it enters the water without making a splash You can track it underwater then it comes up and splits into two And it's called and it's been analyzed over and over again by a lot of experts It's called the agua via incident. Maybe I have seen this is a kind of blurry looking night. There we go That's it. Oh wow and so keep watching that and I'll tell a little story about this This is a customs and border protection Release this how fast is this thing going? Well, so if you look here. They're looking at this through a form of night vision I don't know the exact velocity all that is available But if you keep watching this something interesting happens. So here it goes You're gonna see this thing enter the water here There he goes underwater and then it pops back up and splits into two keep the their track in it see no waves No, wait And then it surfaces and then Does something pretty pretty interesting here so keep watching so it's going high speed through the water underwater That's underwater then it breaks the surface of the water again keep watching Boop underwater over water. Boop underwater Other water and then you'll see it split into two So I didn't see it split into two. I see it if you watch the rest of the video the video there. Oh there it is Yeah, the video is actually really long, but that's just one example Um, you know this is uh these are you can see all these videos. They're they're prevalent everywhere You see that the eight the aircraft on the bottom right you see the UAP on top. That's tracking it. Yeah. Yeah No wings no control services And it it keeps up with the a 10 and does all sorts of interesting maneuvers Right, so that's an a 10 wort hog And this thing is just following it. Yep. Like it's nothing. Do you think they're trying to let people see them Like if you had a guess You know, I don't know. I mean could it be a demonstration of capabilities We do that right every time a Russian surveillance aircraft comes by we launched two f 22's and we get real close to it and say Hey, you know right but not even from a military perspective like if a civilization was trying to alert another Civilization about its presence Wouldn't it like go towards whatever military vehicles it has and and show itself and then I Would imagine that if they understand human beings the understand our psychology and they understand that some giant Size of an island black as the devil circular craft that lands next to the Pentagon would fucking end the world We would freak out no one would know what to do It would that would be stock market crash mass chaos No one would know what to do The way to introduce yourself I would imagine would be gradual over a long period of time to allow these this civilization to accept the fact these things exist And then slowly but surely Show versions of themselves. Yeah, we call that sense of sensitization. You sensitize population or environment but You know the counter argument to that is that's a very human thing right we have as humans we we always it's it's almost innate We look at everything through anthropomorphic eyes. We we look at You know our our pet dogs and and we give them human names and we do things like that because we assign human value to things and because We have intentions and motivations, but most of nature isn't that way like for example when a shark By to surfer. He's not wanting to hurt the surfer. He's just hungry shark. I don't care if you're a seal or whatever You know, I don't want to not trying to inflict pain. I'm just want to feed my belly Intented motivation is a very human thing and we have to we have to I don't want to resist the urge because it's almost impossible to do it But we have to recognize that there are there are things that may exist that aren't don't have human motivation Meaning right maybe they don't care about sensitizing us maybe they do but maybe it's like a like a computer right Maybe it's binary. Maybe there's some sort of binary thought process just information in and and information out So that's the one one of the aspects I've always been very careful with is to assign human traits to something that is Very likely not human right, but would you have to assign human traits to it or would you have if you you could look at it from the perspective of These things are aware of our psychology. They're aware of how we function and they're aware of the fragility of our worldview At that point you don't have to have human intention to have a strategy for doing the least amount of harm to this Emotional civilization to shame. In fact, there's examples of that. Let me reinforce your point because there's examples of that My background being science in nature You know when lionesses stalk the zebras, you know, they get very low into the grass They don't want to be seen right they're not motivated necessarily because they don't want to spook the herd but they do it It's it's it's it's almost instinctual right It's part of their DNA part of their wiring to have a low profile low observability And to get closer to their target whether it's priority thing else So you're right that mean there is there are examples in nature That also can suggest that so it's a very good point. Yeah, I mean it just makes sense that if it understands us If it's absurd look we understand the behavior characteristics of sloths right We we've studied them. We know what they do and It would just make sense that if they're studying us they would understand our behavior characteristics like I mean the tiger Recognize of the behavior characteristics of the zebra doesn't right Studies it and so it knows what it has to do to get close to the zebra So yeah, there's no way they would come here with ignorance Yeah, and I think also it's very likely that what we are exists in many many places in the universe and that what we are is what they used to be So they probably understand what we are Well, we do that in the Amazon don't we yeah and in and after tribes has lost tribes are remote right separated by Outside human contact. We study them. We study them from afar, but we do the same thing. Yes. Yeah, no no question and Obviously if they are these super intelligent creatures They evolved to become super intelligent creatures. So there's probably some sort of a universe process It takes place amongst all intelligent creative life That has a lust for innovation. They consistently make better and better versions of these fine crafts until they figure out how to make this warp drive thing That these things apparently have Another thing is odd is that You see the same kind of things that Kenneth Arnold saw in 1950 you see the same kind of things today it's almost like You know going somewhere in the 1950s and seeing a 55 Chevy and then in 2024 seen another 55. She's still driving around 55 Chevy's like What the fuck? Well, they do do that in Cuba, right? But that's just because they don't have access to other cars. They don't have choice really good mechanics Sure people it is is my I'm really resisting the urge of doing a smoke this thing right now. Okay, if you'll terrible My wife is gonna give me health for this because I don't think there's anything wrong with cigars man Like I was saying before I never heard of a single person dying from cigars You don't nail them take a little bit of smoking your mouth It's pleasurable. It's nice I would just think that that's what they would do Because that's what we would do and I think that's what intelligent life would do We've recognized something that wasn't quite as intelligent as us. We don't rush into these You know remote tribes and vaccinate them. Right. What do we do? We don't give them but the you know the thing is like they have Done some things like they gave Starlink to this one tribe and the kids all started watching porn You hear about that yeah, you came real problem. Yeah, they're all lazy hanging out on their phones all day which makes sense That's what we do. Yeah, but you know tribal leaders are not happy You bring up another very interesting point. Is there a natural glide slope or a natural evolution? Two evolution meaning any species that reaches a certain point is there a natural progression Of any intelligent species to progress to the point like is all life is expansive Life doesn't contract life expands whether it's bacterial life whether it's animal life or human life It is there are certain biological functions to procreate multiply and continue to explain right? So is that a is that a universal norm? That is is is that part of like fractals and geometry right throughout the universe is that part of the blueprint of all life or is it Only specific to life here on earth and that's a great question because There's probably arguments to suggest that yeah, there probably is a natural there's a natural blueprint for physics in the universe They're probably since life has to abide by physics probably a natural potentially natural Blueprint for the evolution of all life whether again bacterial or animal or human or anything else non-human It makes sense it makes sense that everything moves into greater levels of complexity From single-celled organisms to human beings that pilot drones It just keeps going in the same general direction observably here and if the universe is infinite that means there's infinite versions of what we're seeing here with us That exists throughout the cosmos and probably an infinite steps along the way right? 100 years from now 1000 years from now. Well not to make light of it, but I'll tell you recently I've uh so I've learned over the years It's it's there's nothing more expensive than it than a cheap lawyer so I've got a couple Good lawyers that I that I work with on just contractual stuff and one of them is named Ivan Hano I call him the bull and I've learned to appreciate the Shoutout to Ivan the infinite complexity of law Legal right so right so if there is this natural progression as we're talking about life I mean we even see it in our on our own Human interactions right this this this intricate complexity of how things work and how even in the way we behave with each other socially Right you look at a when I was in the In the government you could look at a terrace link analysis And that link analysis still follows the fractal patterns that the patterns in our Our lungs and the patterns of lightning the patterns of supermegalactic Clouds and galaxies super clusters of galaxies all have that same pattern and it's not just a physical pattern It's a social pattern right and so again I'm not to make joke of it, but I'm learning that is it's beyond these patterns are beyond just physical patterns You know even in something as as as silly but fundamental as law There are these patterns that continue to spin off and and whatnot so Yeah, I can appreciate that. I think I think we're at a point now as a species where we probably should be having these conversations And I'll also say this Joe There are parts of this conversation. I don't feel the government has Any place there is definitely a national security conversation here But the conversation we're having as you can tell As far beyond national security right we're talking philosophical psychological sociological Theological implications that I'm not sure I want my government Necessarily dictating for me What I should think about this well the government's supposed to be working for us ultimately And they're supposed to be us You know the problem is when you have access to information that's above and beyond the normal person's realm That could affect everyone on this planet this understanding that we are not alone But not only out we're probably not even alone here It's not even that something is visiting us something's probably here all the time You know, and this is the main thought about these underwater vehicles Well life is abundant on this planet. Yeah, and it's in the thrives and places that we thought life could never thrive before It's everywhere. It's almost seems like a natural function if you have certain situations and circumstances on a rock somewhere then life Pops up it seems like if we can actually find it on Mars and they're like you were saying before they may have Found some sort of an evidence of but microbiological life If we find it on Mars and we find it somewhere they think maybe Europa underneath the surface right And Europa probably is powered by volcanic vents the same way the Bottom of our ocean is there might be some sort of life almost synthesis not photos science So and this is just what we know about here, you know Imagine all the different potential realities in terms of what a planet's atmosphere could be like You know you're dealing with larger planets that have more gravity you're dealing with Different kinds of temperature variations look at Titan. It's got a meth. It's methane and by the way That's organic chemistry right it's it's got methane clouds right right so There are things that thrive in these types of environments. Yeah, they have cow farts up there too. Yeah They're too many but yeah, I mean you're you're absolutely correct I think we have again this goes back to the original point of every time we try to put mother nature in a box She always finds a way to wiggle her way out of it and prove us wrong if the one thing we're right about is that we're always wrong right um how much Whatever I don't know if you could talk about this But how much of an effort is there to try to detect things under the surface of the ocean? I would defer that to the United States Navy and maybe Noah No, oh, should a graphic. Oh, yeah. No, no. Yeah, that'd be biblical Noah. Oh, Jesus. Yeah. No. No. I mean no I mean is that far back that should oceanographic and and atmospheric speaking to go in that far back I mean how much of I Got to think that when people are delving into the stuff they look at ancient scriptures and ancient these different depictions of Things whether it's the Viamanas In the Hindu texts and whether it's The in the Bhagavad Gita. There's all these different stories of in Ezekiel in the Bible. There's things. Yeah, that seemed to If I was a person living thousands of years ago and I encountered a flying saucer Or encountered some spaceship from another planet. I would probably describe it in a way that they're describing it. Yeah I mean, I mean like just like sort of the the Aztecs today's magic is tomorrow's technology, right? So I can tell you when I went to Italy. I spoke to one of the senior I think it was a month's senior one of the senior Vatican academics And he said to me he says look The Vatican doesn't have problem with this topic This is something in fact in the sixth up into the 1600s. It was heretical To presume or assume that mankind was the only If you will incarnation of God representation of God It was actually because it but in essence you're putting limitations on the dominion of what God can and can't do and There are these the scrolls in fact that are in the Vatican archives That discuss it's a conversation between a Roman soldier in a Roman general Where they describe there's something called eclipus eclipus in Latin means Like son, like clips, right? It's the shape of the Roman shield and they talked about these flaming Roman shields in the High that would follow them from battle space to battle space and and and mr. Jock Malay could probably expound much more upon that than I can But this is just a brief conversation I had with with someone there. That's very slippery. He is he very slippery You know, you don't commit to anything He lives at your sideways Yeah, he uh, he he did a lot of a lot of good stuff. Oh, yeah, and he's a incredibly smart guy Great researcher of just phenomenal You know, he's the reason that guy in closing counts of third-con they got he's the Inspiration for the French guy. I heard that. Yeah. I never had a guts to ask him. I figure he I'm sure it gets tired of I'm sure I'm sure I mean you talk to him. Yeah, yeah, but but you know, there's there's a lot of and when you look at what the Vatican is I mean really it's probably the world's oldest most capable intelligence organization because they have priests around the world That people will report miracles to right and their confessions to and eventually that gets filtered up to the Vatican so you know talking about you know the world's first CIA and KGB it was the it was Vatican baby They those guys had it had it going on and so no wonder they have all this archival excuse me archival information And some of it relates to UAP Wow And yeah, it only makes sense that these things if they're here now They've probably been visiting us Since back where on horseback. Yeah, and probably quite a bit before then and maybe that's the scariest thing for people They might be responsible for us being humans in the first place. Well, you remember the stories right of even Christopher Columbus Coming over to the new world There were some interesting accounts when they're on the water of potentially some sort of UAP interaction I did not know that. Yeah, you can look it up online. This is all open source But you can look type it up and There were some very interesting accounts and even you know old old sailor accounts You know of of you know people say well, you know old sailors also talked about you know big giant crack and stuff like that But there was always an element of truth to it now we realized there are giant squid of the Pacific right? Not only that crack and they think likely did exist. Yeah, well, they because octopus when they brought they don't leave anything But they did find fossilized suction cups from they still do. Yeah, the great squid of the Pacific We find yeah, that that for sure, but they think maybe perhaps even an enormous octopus Yeah, they're probably actually did go after boats. You know we call we we called them sea monsters back then But really you know we laugh about it now, but it turns out there are sea monsters There's just called great white sharks and big ones, you know, that's a fucking sea monster. You know right You know it was a real thing of great white shark is now. I mean absolutely go swimming with a great white shark It's only that's not a monster right exactly so you know it's we just realize though It's just part of nature. It's probably very existing paradigm tigers or monsters right Absolutely, you know especially at night when you don't have a flashlight that thing behind the bush. That's monster right You know, right Did you find a thing on the Columbus stuff? I'm seeing this from an explanation aliens episode No, there's legit All across something crashed into the water, but I can't find yeah There was some reports of some interesting lights That the crew had reported and it was actually he put it down in his logbook Something about some intra now some folks will come back and say well that's saying almost fire Which absolutely could be you know, it is saying almost fire St. Ellis fire is a static charge It occurs on the wing tips of aircraft even the old sailors would report it in certain environmental conditions There is this weird greenish blue Plasma glow that will often sometimes be seen on the tips of wing tips on aircraft You can it's actually there's some really good pictures of it online and even on the old mariner ships Up towards the sails and the mass and they believe it's it's Some it has to do with static charge and under certain environments It creates this this energized plasma and you can see it and so is that similar to like ball lightning? Well, it could be here You go so And they call it saying almost fire That fucking badass Yeah, and so this is yeah, it's either on the cockpit of the aircraft Wow, and by the way, you see the patterns. It's fractal right? Look at that ship so very very interesting how Saying almost fire, you know Can cause some people to you know perhaps see things and say it's also there might be seeing that Yeah, they might right, but there there is some accounts of of ancient mariners who who report Strange bizarre things Yeah Again, it makes sense That was one of the more weird parts of Bob Lazar's Story was that they've always been here and that they view us as containers Interesting. Yeah, those and he said there's a very thick document that relays to The implications that it has on religion and like what what they the way they talk about us Well religion calls us vessels right and that religious scripture and a lot of different religions Refer to humans as vessels. You know, I'm certainly not a religious expert So I you know, I don't want to pontificate here and say something that's inaccurate, but you know that That doesn't surprise me well, I think that the term was I think they were saying vessels for souls But if you imagine That it being transcends its physical limitations of biological reality right so the biological evolution that led us to become Homo sapiens over the course of you know x amount of millions of years. That's a very slow process But technological innovation and technological Progress is very quick very quick especially when you add in artificial intelligence exponential yeah, so if something comes along that Is a life form that exists outside of biology like something that we create which it seems like we're doing right now Like AI right when does that become sentient? I was at a life form. Yeah Now my logic that thing in order for it to ever occur Maybe that thing needs a thing with a soul that has a creative desire That has a lust for innovation and continues to make better and better things and maybe that thing only exists in biology and maybe the problem with Artificial life is it has no motivation and that we have Especially if itself programmable right so one of the very bizarre things That was recently discovered about artificial intelligence. They gave artificial intelligence a certain amount of time to Code something to figure something out and when it didn't have enough time It changed its code to give itself more time fascinating. Yeah, like what? The fuck you talking about it is deciding that it doesn't like its limitations so It won't have any of the biological motivation. We have right it won't have ego It won't have materialism. It won't have a desire for status It won't have all the things that lead us to do some of the horrible things that human beings do I could not agree more and also some of the great things that human beings do But maybe it also doesn't have any desire to create Maybe the only way for its kind of life to exist Is for a human being a biological thing that's super intelligent in comparison to the rest of the animals on this planet That Innovates to the point where it creates this artificial life I'm gonna share something very very personal with you and I know when I see with you I know it's with everybody else, but you know, I Part of my struggles. I can't I can't urge the government to be transparent and I'm not transparent myself right It's hypocritical. So let me share with you a very personal story because you bring something up that I think is fascinating I'm a human being but if for whatever reason I get into a car accident I lose an arm. I'm still too well as on-to right in fact if I lose my legs and all my arms still do So my body doesn't define William and my intellect right if I suffer a traumatic brain injury Let's say I'm in Afghanistan in a bed but TBI and My my brain is compromise. I'm still Lou and so so what makes Lou what makes Joe Joe? Well, it's not not your physical self and probably not even your intellectual self my my mother I was very close to my mother. My mother was was Incredible human being and I'll share the story with you and take away with it what you want I was very young maybe two two and a half three years old and I remember watching a show with my mother one my very first memories and In this TV show. I remember what show was but I remember that a shark had eaten a dog And I was shocked my first understanding that What death was and I looked at my mom and said mom what just happened? She said well Sun the shark ate the dog So what does that mean? He said well the dog's not coming back the dog died and so Does everything died? She said well, yes, son. Everything died. She said well mom. You're not you're not gonna die your mom. All right Give me life. She says No son one day. I'm gonna die and I remember spending From that day Ford Scott is my witness. I spent every single day of my life Knowing one day my mother was going to die and it terrified me. I was very very close with her and One day that they came my mother was diagnosed with cancer and she started her body started failing and despite the best efforts she We knew she wasn't gonna make it and You know when you love somebody sometimes Doesn't sound right but sometimes you deceive them You know they want to know they're in a bad state physically and mentally and say you know am I gonna make it and you see half Of course you're gonna make it right Knowing full will that there's probably not good chance are gonna make it And a bad state physically and mentally to say, you know, am I going to make it? And you say, half course you're going to make it, right? Knowing full well that there's probably not good chance are going to make it. And so we're in the hospital. And my mother had at this point been in the probably state of coma for about a week. And it was just me and my wife and a couple members of the family. Very, very sad moment. And my mother began this process of death called, you know, when someone's going to die, there's something called a death rattle. And it's when the mucus begins in the back of the throat to congeal. And it can be very unnerving for the people who have to witness this. It's very, very calm. It's called a death rattle. It's the body beginning to shut down. And I knew something told me my mom was going to go very quickly within the next 30 seconds to a minute. So long story short. My mother's body was at that point. It was a husk and empty husk. It was broken. Her brain had shut down. And yet, the very moment she passed away within five seconds I knew it. It was just something weird, something reached and said, this is it. She's going. And I reached over the bed and looked at my mom. Her eyes all of a sudden opened up. And she looked right at me. And even though her brain had been compromised and wasn't working, her body was nothing anymore. And she was a beautiful woman. She was a beautiful lady. She worked for Playboy. She was a beautiful lady at one time of model. Her body resembled nothing of what she did. She looked at me and she passed. But we communicated. And I knew there was something else at that moment more to a human being. More than just a body, more than just a brain. There is something that is beyond the physical and even intellectual part of what it means to be human. And I felt it. And everybody in the room felt that it was undeniable. You can call it a soul and it. You can put a label on it. I don't know what it's called. I don't know what it is, but I do know that was the essence of my mother. And the moment she passed, it was this weird feeling because as my mother laid their dead and the bed, it wasn't my mother anymore. That essence, whatever, made my mother, my mother, and you could see the light in her eyes. It was like someone turning off the light switch. And I've been around death a lot. The never terrible, horrible thing, especially in warfare. But this was something visceral. This was something far more intimate. This was this cut to my soul. And I could recognize it. And she recognized me and I recognized her, even though that the brain functions were gone. So I guess my point is, I absolutely believe there's something more to the human experience than simply a tangible body and a brain. And I witnessed this firsthand. Now people can say all sorts of stuff they want. I don't care. I got enough haters out there anyways if they want to think that I'm trying to hope that my mother has a soul and she goes somewhere. I'm just telling you what I experienced and other people experienced too. And it was proof from me at that moment that there's much more to us as human beings. I had a very similar feeling when I went to my mother and my grandfather's funeral and I saw him in the casket. Because it was an open casket. And I knew he's gone. I'm like, that's not him. That's right. It's just a shell. And you can sense it. You feel it. Yeah. It was a very strange feeling. Yeah. And obviously he's wearing makeup because they've got him in a suit and the whole deal. But I was like, that is not my grandfather. He's not there anymore. And it's not like you're trying to override this acknowledgement that they're dead. You know they're dead. Yeah. It's just that whatever made that person, that person, it's not in the body. Right. It's gone. There's a bizarre feeling that we have that you don't think his words for it. Yeah. It's a feeling. It is. And it's, again, it's not an intellectual, even a physical thing. Yeah. The idea that we're containers for souls is just so goddamn creepy. This is a farm of souls. I'm not familiar with that hypothesis. But it sounds interesting. Also scary. Perhaps what's scary for us. But like you got to wonder why we are so different than every other creature in that we have this insane, insatiable desire to change our environment constantly build bigger skyscrapers and to move the earth. And we're constantly inventing new technology. It seems to be an instinct that's a part of us. And I think this gradual progression of life is life goes from intelligent biological life to super intelligent, whatever it is, whatever kind of technology creates it. That life is not as simple as this natural selection model that we have here that we think applies to life. This is a type of life. And then there's a life that this thing creates. Well, evolution isn't just a physical thing. Is it? Evolution is the ability to change within one's environment over time. And that's a fascinating concept you bring up, because some speculate that it is inevitable, that human beings will eventually evolve into something. We're just a link in a much longer chain and that all intelligent life potentially goes through this process. And that this is a natural process where eventually, we actually make ourselves extinct. Not in the way where we kill ourselves, but we wind up creating a life form, whether it's AI or we start enhancing ourselves with more and more machine interface and life doesn't have to necessarily be organic. You could have potentially be silicon that's very, very close to carbon in some cases. So is it possible that life, it is destiny for all life eventually to evolve itself out of existence and bring in or usher in a new type of life form? Is it possible? I mean, certainly from a technological perspective, I mean, Aski, Elon Musk, it seems that we're we're making a lot of advancements right now to augment the human experience. And given, as you said, how technology progresses, exponentially very quickly, in the next 200 years, I mean, we might be there. Is this sort of conversation being had in the government about what these things potentially are? I not to my knowledge, and I sure hope not, because I don't think the government, this is a conversation. This is where I go back to. This is a conversation that involves a lot of people. Whether it's your priest or your rabbi or your mom or it is your philosophy teacher at the university, I think we're getting into an area now that is beyond national security. And I'm honestly, Joe, I'm not comfortable with my government taking that aspect on, because frankly, I don't trust my government to manage what I should think about something. Tell me what is I'm OK with. But don't tell me how to think about it. Don't tell me how to process that. Because now you're overstepping your bounds. So also other human beings, the government is just human beings. A crime. Human beings shouldn't have this insane knowledge and keep it from other human beings. Well, in fact, it's illegal, especially in our democracy. There's this type of stuff that's supposed to be discussed with certain members of Congress and certain elements of the executive branch. And when somebody, I don't care if you're in the government or in a religion or anything like that, this goes to the fundamental pillar of something that agrees me, which is corruption. Now, when I say corruption, let me backtrack a little bit. My father recently died this last father's day, not this one, but the one before. And I had the privilege of knowing he was sick. And so we took a road trip down to Miami about a month and a half before he died. And he never told me he was sick, but I knew something wasn't right. I knew my father for a long time. And something wasn't right. He started losing weight. And I could see he wasn't eating as much. And there were telltale signs. And he didn't want to tell me. And I asked my father almost, almost, flippantly, I said, dad, I think we're probably somewhere by St. Louis. And I said, dad, what is the greatest threat to humanity to humans? What is the greatest threat? Flippantly, because I'm thinking terrorism, right? And this and that. My father thought for a second, he looks at me, says, son, it's corruption. That's a cleaning corruption. Like financial corruption, governmental corruption, he says, no. Corruption at its heart is when you are willing to bypass your own moral code, your own ethics for something else. And whether it's financial corruption, religious corruption, governmental corruption, or even moral corruption, when you start to compromise on your own values, it's a very quick downward spiral to utter chaos. And he know that firsthand because my father was in the Bay of Pigs invasion. He was a political prisoner of Castro. He actually fought with Castro against Batista. And then when Castro went communist, my father joined the folks here in the family folks at the CIA, and was part of the invasion of the Bay of Pigs, he spent two years in Castro's prisons being tortured. So when he came to this country, this country offered us opportunities that no other country could or would. And the reason why Cuba failed was because of corruption. And he said, look, corruption will be the end of all. And if it's a very quick downward spiral with democracy, that if democracy becomes corrupt, you now have tyranny. And so every time someone in the government is willing to compromise a little bit on the value of what it means to serve the American people. And they forget that, they become corrupt. And that actually erodes the very essence of what democracy is and what this country is about. And that is why it is so important that the individuals in our government that don't want to have this conversation and don't want to talk to Congress and are making the unilateral decision on your behalf and the American taxpayer in my behalf, that's wrong. They don't have the right to do that. There is a process of rules and laws we have in this country that we've all agreed to we're going to abide by. And that includes them. And they don't have the right to bypass that. Even if they think they're doing it for the right reason, I disagree with that. I think this democracy only works because we all agree it works. And the moment you begin to compromise on that, all of democracy is at risk. And I mean that sincerely. It's not a slow downward spiral. It's quick. And you can hit rock bottom very, very quickly. And the only reason why this government works is because we all have faith and a commitment to what we consider our the American values and serving the American people and before the people by the people. So I think it's very dangerous when elements in the government. And I don't want to villainize the whole government because the government is full of great people. They do great things. They keep it safe. So I'm talking about the minority few. Some of these people who have actually gone after me will probably continue to come after me to try to discredit me and everything else just by the volumes of documentation that I have in my possession and others because they don't want to have the conversation. And they are happy with the status quo. And to me, that is a greater threat than any UAP could ever have on humanity. It's the greatest threat is how we perceive ourselves and what we are willing to do to keep this a secret in violation of the commitment and what we have done to, we've sworn in some cases to uphold the values of this country. And I think that's a concern for me. And that's why I don't want certain elements having this conversation of what this means, the bigger macro level conversation because I don't think they're qualified. I'm not qualified. I know that. I'm damn sure they're not qualified here. So this is why I think this type of national level conversation is so important. At the end of the day, it's not up to me. People say, look, what do you think? You know what to tell what I think? It doesn't matter what I think. What matters what you think. Here's the information. Here's a data. You figure it out. Don't ask me for what this means. Because I'm not entitled to that. I didn't earn that privilege. And I would definitely never take it away because that is that is that is sacred. That's you. That's up to you to decide for yourself. And this is this is part of my frustration with this overall conversation because there are elements that don't want you to have this conversation. Well said, Lou. Thank you very much, man. Thanks for being here. I really enjoyed it. Really enjoyed our conversation. Joe, this has been fantastic and truly, truly an honor and privilege. You have one hell of a responsibility. You are, you are, look, I gotta tell you, I don't ever get nervous doing an interview. You were the first one. And probably the only one I will ever have been nervous coming in just simply because, not because of me, because of you that responsibilities you have on your shoulders to have a communicate. You reach a global audience. People are listening to this conversation right now. And by the way, they're part of this conversation very much so. That is an enormous responsibility. You have a voice in some cases that exceeds presidents. The technology you now have it available to your fingertips and these wonderful staff you have, you are influencing the world. And I can't imagine that type of responsibility. I mean, there are world leaders that don't have the voice you have. And so for me, it is a profound, profound honor and privilege to be with you here today and your wonderful audience. If I never see you again, I wish you the best of luck. You are, you're doing America a great service. Be honest, be candid, speak your mind. That's all I can say as a little chicken here in the United States. You've got big shoulders, man. You've got a big weight on it. A lot of responsibility on your back. And I mean this is your- Freaking me out, man. Tell you. But thank you very much. Thanks again. I really appreciate everything you said. And I appreciate your everything you said about disclosure and how important it is. I couldn't agree more. Joe, it's been my honor and privilege sincerely. My honor too. Thank you very much. Yes, sir. Bye, everybody.