Hello freak bitches. Well, why would I put my job on the line to have an opinion about compelled pronouns? I know why because the ability to speak your truth is the bulwark against hell and Losing your job. That's nothing. That's nothing compared to Where things can go when they go badly for me. It was just preventative It's like this isn't going in a good direction Well, should you take a risk? It's like you don't have that choice Your silent that's a risk now most people don't understand the risks of silence I happen to understand the risks of silence because I've been studying them for 40 years is if frustrating for you to get so little support for these actions and for for your your protests Well, I wouldn't say that that's what happened I mean so little support because you get a lot of support outside of the in the outside of the university It's okay. It doesn't matter where the support comes from like I mean It's it's disappointing in the same way that it's disappointing for me to say I think the university's now do more harm than good that's disappointing, but But it doesn't it's not surprising to me Like it isn't as if intellectuals are characterized by an intrinsic moral superiority Oh, they're smart. So they'll leap to the defense of what's right. It's like no There's no evidence for that Intelligence and moral wisdom aren't the same thing Like and if you're corrupt and smart all that makes you is way more treacherous. It doesn't make you less likely to be corrupt It just makes you much more your 50 snakes instead of two Or your 56 headed snakes instead of two like I've had clients who were who had very serious personality disorders Who are very intelligent it's like that's not necessarily a good thing for them. They're just better at arguing for their Pathology to themselves that is a real problem where people automatically assume that intelligent people are going to be healthy Yeah, well, they're healthy in that often like a lot to better in the world, you know because More social yes, there's skills are more marketable and so on, but there's no evidence that there's any relationship between intelligence and morality I mean God let me tell you a story man one time I had this client this woman was just ruined She looked like a street person, you know, and she had very dirty clothes and she was so shy that she couldn't even Approach you she had to shield her eyes from you as if you were emitting light and she did that to everyone on the street like she was bent over and and and humble like a like a Chinese peasant brought before the emperor, you know and one of the things I was doing with her in behavior therapy was trying to just get her to present herself in a more normal manner so that people wouldn't shy away from her and you know be instantly prejudiced towards her and And she'd come to the behavior therapy clinic and she wasn't bright this woman The thing she had only had like a seventh grade education. She was quite intellectually impaired and she lived with her her sick aunt who was who was schizophrenic and who had a like a satanically possessed alcoholic boyfriend that was always tormenting my client she lived in absolute hell But she had this dog and she used to take it out and walk the dog all the time and Then she she'd actually come to the behavior therapy clinic partly because of her own problem But but she'd come to this place called the Douglas Hospital and she'd been an inpatient in the Douglas Hospital And in the in the Douglas Hospital There were these long-term Psychiatric clients and they looked like something out of a piranha maspache painting or Dante's inferno I mean these people were this is way worse than one flew over the cuckus nest These people were seriously destroyed and they couldn't be let back out in the streets during the Institutionalization like they were lifers and she had decided that part of the reason she wanted to come to the hospital It's because she had been institutionalized there and she thought that maybe when She took her dog out for a walk she could go and get one of those damn inmates and take them out for a walk too Now that was a person who was a moral dumb as a post just screwed in 50 different directions Nothing going for her and she had the bloody moral capacity to decide that There was someone worse off than her and believe me that wasn't easy to find and that maybe she could do them some good If if the hospital would let her which they didn't by the way Yeah, well, that's the story of the soul. That's not the intellect. That's for sure so So I didn't expect any support from my from my colleagues and And it isn't that I don't care if I got it, but it's a it's in some sense. It's irrelevant It's irrelevant to me because my goal was I'm not saying those goddamn pronouns and The reason I'm not saying them is because they're made up by left-wing ideologues And I don't like left-wing ideology. I don't like ideology period and I know where corruption of speech leads and I'm not going there and You know one of the things I tried to learn when I was taking apart what happened in Auschwitz and Trying to put myself in the position of a notch with camp guard which by the way you can do if you use your imagination a bit I wouldn't call it exactly the world's most pleasant meditative experience But you can call up parts of yourself that would be capable of taking someone who just got off a Transport train and having them carry a hundred pound Sack of wet salt from one side of the camp compound to the other in back You can conjure that part of yourself up if you want and that'll teach you something about what you're like People don't do it because it's too frightening But I know perfectly well that I could do that sort of thing and so once I learned that I could do that sort of thing and maybe that I could even enjoy it I thought okay fine. I get it. I'm gonna see if I can figure out how to live so that if that opportunity was presented to me I wouldn't take it and I think that's the lesson that people need to learn from the 20th century It's like that's what human beings did okay? Well, we're all human okay So how is it that we should live so that we don't do that again? well part of that is to try to say the truth No matter what because the alternative is worse and it is worse The truth no matter what and that is the real problem that you see with being forced into using these made up pronouns Yeah, absolutely. It's my language I'll take responsibility for what I say. I have not say in your words and Being compelled to say your words by law. Well, that's that that that makes it that that takes it past the point of Absurdity to the point of tyranny and in my estimation and I've seen some criticisms where people are saying, you know He's talking about this, but really he's grand standing because no one's doing anything legally But oh, you potentially exist. Oh, that's such rubbish, but that is one of our criminals Yes, they wouldn't have changed the damn criminal they put it in the hate speech category and altered the criminal code It's as simple as that and then you could say well, no, we didn't really mean it It's like oh, yeah, you did you really meant it two of the social justice warriors that have debated being the last two months Excuse me directly of hate speech. Oh, I had to do was poke them a tiny bit and they came right out with it And then the university's legal team reviewed everything I said carefully believe me and they decided that oh It was not only illegal to not use these compelled pronouns It was probably illegal to make a video saying that I wouldn't use them Because otherwise why would they write me a warning letter and tell me that I violated university policy on the Ontario Human Rights Act I did that lightly have they acted on this at all is there a well They won't know well they've acted in that they sent me to warning writers and told me to stop talking and they don't the idea that I was going to be teaching in January again because I teach all my undergraduate courses from January to May That was on the table and I think the only reason that it hasn't happened One of the reasons it hasn't happened and I'm not attributing nothing but malevolence to the University of Administration because obviously it's very complicated and they did agree to host the debate for example But the idea that I wouldn't be teaching in January and still might not be isn't by no means That was a perfectly plausible outcome and had this not caused a firestorm much of which has emerged in support of me then I Would say there was a 5050 chance that I would have had my teaching privileges revoked It's happened other professors So the idea that I'm making it like that this is a tempest in a teapot. It's like yeah, okay fine Why do you change the criminal code then and why do you put it under the hate speech laws? exactly So no doesn't wash and I and the fundamental proof of that is the university's response because For sure their legal team crafted those letters You know it was like recalcitrant employee your responsible form. Okay. What do you do with the recalcitrant employee? You write them a letter telling them what they're doing wrong and asking them to stop then if they don't stop you write them a second letter That's more strongly worded than if they don't stop you write them a third letter even more strongly worded Then you take disciplinary action That's like HR 101. That's how you do it So so here we said at the end of November closing on December you're literally a bit more than a month away and you don't know whether or not you're teaching your courses in January It seems highly probable that I'll be teaching them. I wouldn't say it's certain But if I'm teaching them it's because the cost of having me not teach them would now be too high It's not because the university believes that What I'm doing is either necessary or acceptable If someone who's listening to this or watching this feels compelled to Act out in your support. How can they do that? I think they could do the future authoring exercise And that that would be the best way to act on your support. Yes, and I'm I'm dead serious about this is like Sort yourself out sort yourself out So we try to figure out the world and that's that's the primary objective. That's your that's your most important thing that you can do So what's your self out sort yourself out and and marshal your arguments and put yourself in order so that when Someone pushes you a little farther than you should go You can say no and you know what's going on now