I mean, it's a little weird for me because you're a libertarian and In fact, you could even wind up with a libertarian ticket at some point if not the cycle. No, but I'm gonna say if it happened right? So you're you're literally a libertarian and But for some reason we have the same instincts on almost everything I would say There are a lot of people in Conservative media who I always have felt like I had a lot in common with and now I don't and it's not because I've got an liberal I've cut away less liberal. I see them as way more liberal so what like what happened to Conservative media not all of them I have a million friends in it, but like a lot of the big name seemed very liberal to me Yeah, I mean, I think that it's kind of the same thing that happened to Libertarians I think they're in Washington DC and that's not where you're supposed to be no That's right and so the best like the best libertarian Organization in the world is the Mises Institute and it's based in Auburn and they Alabama, yeah, they specifically put it there because they like want no part of Washington DC and then you see all of the You know Keto and guys like that who are based out of DC they get very corrupted and they and you can look at it It's like it's the same thing We were just talking about Don if you calling out Chris Matthews back in the day You're having cocktail parties with the fed chairman, but you're a libertarian you shouldn't be doing there actually doing that Yeah, oh, yeah yeah, absolutely doing that and I think a lot of that's the same problem with the kind of conservatism ink or whatever They've been they've been corrupted and power is seductive And I'm sure you know that from like being in DC for so many years that you I'm not saying like you're kind of an anomaly They think about all the people in Washington DC and how much all of them wanted to suck up to power almost right like what 90 something percent at least that's why they're there right and so it's a It's a difficult thing. I didn't get that for some reason for so long. I was living in the middle of it I don't know. I'm not a super genius. So I didn't Didn't realize how corrupt it was everyone always said it was corrupted felt like a really nice place to me The raised on my kids there and but when you realize how corrupt it is I mean, it's horrifying Yeah, but that's also I think there's something like the uh the the nature of conservatism or the conservative movement in America has always just been to lose Right there it's like built into them like every generation just loses and then moves on to the next Thing to lose I like the the old right the um, you know Robert Taft right way they uh they were largely in opposition to the new deal That was they were fighting back against the yes CR's new deal we're in opposition to that and then you know you cut forward 20 years and and It's FDR Democrats are the new Republicans right Ronald Reagan is like it's it's nobody would dare question the new deal And then of course there was a movement pushing back against the great society and yes And now of course no Entitlements are like no one would ever dare question medicare it look just recently I saw Donald Trump who's not a traditional conservative But he did the most traditional conservative thing when he said uh he said when we get in there again We are gonna fix Obamacare And I'm like okay, right? All right, so that's where we're at now right The legs it's a no more repeal and you don't even hear Republicans talk about it anymore right So it's always like the next round of big government increases the next round of centralized power in D.C They will put up a little fight. They will lose they will then a few years later Except this is something that we is is consensus amongst all of us, but But you see we're against Whatever the next thing is you know transgling the kids are you know student loan bailouts We're against that now, you know, but they'll lose and then eventually Excellent what why would you so that what is that suggested with them? They don't it's this is a performance This is not sincere. Yeah, I mean conservatives typically have Played the role of being against Consolidating power in D.C. Right But that's you know, that's obviously that's going against the wind not with it And so it's almost like it almost seems like a professional wrestling Thing where they're like they're the ones who are supposed to lose at the end of the day They kind of say the right thing never really mean it, you know and then ultimately acquies I have to say I was disgusted by the lack of fight in a lot of professional conservatives during covid like disgusted by it You know banning freedom of movement freedom of speech bodily autonomy Like the whole thing was like so mind-blowing to me And this actually was the totalitarianism. We've been worried about or talking pretending We're worried about for a long time it came and a lot of them didn't say anything about it But I was totally bewildered by the libertarian response Which was also kind of silent. I thought kato would be I don't know camped out in front of the White House for the CDC or like what what was that? Well, it shows you I mean it's um well just and and because you use the word totalitarian And I think sometimes when you use that word it's it's perceived as like being somewhat hyperbolic But it's really like what else could describe lockdowns. Well, that's what I mean that that is totalitarianism You had American citizens turning on their TV every morning to find out from their governor What they were allowed to do exactly like I mean the most you couldn't imagine like the question was like can I have a funeral for my dad They're sorry. No. We've decided you can't you know I mean like the most intimate details. Yes liberties that we would all have taken for granted um and so okay to your point right not only did conservatives Not fight against it. I think the majority of them cheered it on or went along with it. I noticed um And as far as the you know the point about libertarians There are kind of like there are these moments Um and I know you experienced this a lot when you were on your Fox show There are these moments where there's like a storm where there's something's like a white hot issue You know and it becomes very easy later after that passes To be on the right side of that. It's like everyone's on the right side of Iraq now You know what I mean John McCain wrote in his memoir that Iraq was a mistake So even John McCain could admit many years later But the thing is that didn't that doesn't really matter as much as if you were opposed to it when it was Happened because like in 2002 if you were like hey, I don't I don't think he has weapons of mass destruction You everybody knew that well that just means you're a queer basically You know and you know and you're contrary in your week and you're and so it you know There's there's a little thing You know the example I like to use a lot because I remember you Broadcasting through this so you'll remember it well But was when when Donald Trump announced that he was gonna pull out of Syria And for like two weeks it was like the Kurds Remember we're abandoning the Kurds But our allies the Kurds like by the way If there's one thing that has been consistent in American foreign policy in my lifetime is that we always screw over the Kurds But forever They have a state of law Yeah, I mean we George H W Bush encouraged them to rise up and overthrow Saddam who say and they went that you know I thought of that and again, I don't think so this is obviously just slaughtered all I mean, you know, but why am I laughing? It's what's what's our system? But the well, it's that we're not laughing up played of the Kurds we're laughing at the hypocrisy of the Of course, but for like two weeks if anyone said they wanted to you know, they supported Trump pulling out of Syria It was like you're a bad person. You hate the Kurds by the way Has anyone checked in on the Kurds since that has the media ever talked about them again Like it was totally just used in that moment and that's just a little example like that's not the big one But like our our historic enemies the Houthis right. Yes, man. I remember growing up in Laoya in the 70s hearing about the Houthis and my father said I just want you to grow strong and Resolute so we can fight the Houthis Your one purpose in life is to get strong enough to take on these Houthis when the day comes and it will where these Houthis challenge our freedom You must be prepared right is that it's so ridiculous, but like look I remember so you It was either in It might have been April or May of 2020, but I remember you covering on your show And I also covered this on my podcast at the time got to a smaller audience But you covering the the lab leak yeah, like hey, this is a really like plausible Yeah, area of where and in fact it seems to make a lot more sense because already there was it's not that we had like a conclusive case that you could take to court, but there were like big pieces of information that were really Narrative shattering well, and they were also the bats weren't close enough to where the wet market Well also wet markets is seafood markets Why were they selling mammals and a seafood market? Just pangolins and bats and then there was a group of Chinese researchers who in December in January of 2020 wrote this paper They said no, we think this was a lab leak and then they all disappeared. Yeah, that was on the internet There were like four scientists from the lab that were hospitalized in November with COVID like symptoms and you were like That's I don't know my eyebrow is raising his ears not raising you know, but at the time This was and I know you were aware of this this was a crazy controversial thing to say you were racist So now it's more racist to think that the Chinese had like a lab than to think they were like biting that heads off Or like it's so bizarre But by the way now as I say this to you now This is not controversial at all. This isn't a white hot issue It was then but it's not now and so a lot of a lot of just what back to your original point about like the libertarians who failed on the job A lot of it has simply comes down to be a matter of courage It's just a matter of like hey when the issue that might make everyone hate you and all of the powerful people call you the worst names Which naturally human beings have a tendency to not want that we don't want to be ostracized You don't want to be called these names Right some people just kind of have this personality trait and this isn't like whether you're on the left or right It's something that you have it's something I have it's something Alex Baronson has yes, he's kind of like I don't care I'll say it right now when it's gonna get me called all the way It really it I remember about 15 years ago It was in July and I was in Maine and I my kids were playing on the dock and it was like the happiest day You know, it's like perfect bluebird day Sound of laughter of children. It was like just I was like oh since such a good mood And I was looking at my kids and sort of walking along and I stepped on a beehive and a whole swarm of bees flew up my shorts and Just attacked me in my nether regions and I went in about no exaggeration Ten seconds from being plastered and happy to being in agony on fire and I jumped in the lake wrecked my cell phone that is the experience of these hysterical moments right all of a sudden it's like being stung by a swarm Everybody's against you everybody's saying exactly the same thing you go from like plastered happy calm clear thinking to totally unable to think clearly and On all these issues the Dayton of Allen Lee died in custody and custody. It's like we decide of course Putin killed him or whatever and To be able to see and think clearly in that moment like that's the key right there when you're getting swarmed You may have come to the obvious conclusion that the real debate is not between Republican and Democrat or socialist and capitalist right left The real battles between people who are lying on purpose and people who are trying to tell you the truth It's between good and evil. It's between Honesty and falsehood and we hope we are on the former side That's why you created this network of Tucker Carlson network and we invite you to subscribe to it You go to Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast Our entire archive is there a lot of behind the scenes footage of what actually happens in this barn When only an iPhone is running Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast You will not regret it. Who's the guy? Who is the he was the science editor for the New York Times at Wade? Nicholas wait wait right I mean that guy was like Nature's and and you know like all of the biggest scientific publications was the New York Times guy It's like that like that you're done And they call the racist yeah, yeah It's not just it's not just like oh you lose your job or something like that Yeah, it's like you we're going to smear you in the most vicious ways to like all of these and and work social creatures We're we naturally respond to that but how does that happen? Well like you've watched this carefully? How I mean it's speaking in B's it is the hive mind at work but it's it's so like perfectly and Like great discipline executed It's like in a space of four hours The entire machine turns on one guy and destroys him like how What is that you can see why people come up with conspiracies to explain that right sure yeah and and they are quite possibly right I mean I don't know exactly what the conspiracy is but it is quite possibly is one But no descent at all yeah, but then my thing is just that I do think and I think this is Something I've benefited from I know this because I hear this back from my audience a lot that it's like oh When you were right on those issues when it really mattered you kind of gain credibility well that's and I also think that like you know, let's say there's like um I don't know like a right wing where conservative Commentator who's telling you how you have to feel about the new storm right now It's like well just tell me how did you do on the last three storms You know like like where you were you telling dopes to get the vaccine Were you telling everyone to be socially distanced or were you like on the right side of that? Where were you on you crane? You know where you saying that like oh? You know like they can win or whatever the story is you know what? I mean like it's and and I do watch a lot of people who go like got everything consistently wrong It's the same way. It's the neo-conservatives right like even if I mean I hate them so much It's hard to speak about them like with any type of sense of fairness But how do you listen? Let's just say you got six wars wrong and you were wrong about every single one like let's just say you were for the war in Iraq And then you were for you know regime change in Afghanistan against the Taliban who did not attack us And then you were for overthrowing Gaddafi and then you were for overthrowing Assad and then you were for backing the Saudi war in Yemen And like all these things and it's just nothing but disaster every one of them Okay But then you're gonna come out and confidently be like and I'm for this next war And let me tell you why you have to be too and you don't have like enough just Like you don't feel humiliated enough that like you couldn't come out even if you were for this You'd be like not really think we should fight this war But I can't come out and say we should fight this war because the last six times I said it It was nothing but a disaster You know but the same people who were like you see Tucker when we overthrows Saddam Hussein democracy will sweep the region And you see we're gonna be greeted as liberators We won't be fighting off a 20 year insurgency You see though greed is as liberators because they love us and then democracy will sweep the region and then Iran will lose influence in the region And then Hezbollah will start being nice to Israel and like all these grand predictions and every last one of them Oh, it'll be paid for an oil. Do you remember all the things that you say well? I mean it's um It's you know, it's a cakewalk. It's a slam dunk that is weapons of master structure So every single one of these things you were wrong about You get to now be the person advocating the next one But you wouldn't ever allow that kind of behavior in your children Of can't let a lie stand kids lie you catch them lying And the whole point of the exercise is to get them to admit to your face. Yes I did this No, I won't do it again Like that's that's an integral step right you have to go through that or else you don't improve as a person You become shittier as a person. Yeah, that's right And I would also maybe this is me adding my libertarian bent to this But I would also say that in the in the Private sector and I mean not like the crony connected to government right It's like to put like in true business. You also don't get away with that stuff Of course you can't just fail over and over again They know I agree This only happens either in the government or in You know Companies that are essentially the government but you know like live off no big government contracts or something like that But yeah, it's uh and it's it's the major problem Is that Look like at least there are problems with free markets and they're it's made up of human beings So there's always problems, but there's at least like a cleansing mechanism There's like profit and loss. Yes If you lose too much you go out of business in With the government The the worse you do the more funding you get but so this is the kids can't read we need a higher education I completely agree with you And for all I piss on libertarians and of course I was one for most of my life I'm gonna bring it back No, it's it's just interesting. I think the reason I'm at it libertarians is because I don't see a free market in the United States. Oh of course not right and so I mean I look at green energy or the defense space And like there's that that bears no resemblance to a market at all And a lot of finance Yes, but I would also point out that like look there are just like with every group just like conservative There are different camps within libertarians. Yes, so just to point out like the thing I said about the last five storms if you go listen to what Ron Paul was saying throughout the entire He was perfect Tom Woods Lou Rockwell Jeff Dyeys like there's there's this group of libertarians who were great the entire time Well, I totally agree. I've never stopped loving Ron Paul So so the difference between say like the Ron Paul the Ron Paulian libertarians which I would consider myself to be one of and say like the Cato or groups like that is that Those the the Cato types tend to like almost have this academic discussion of what it would be like in a free market And then talk as if that's what we're living in right now, but that You know, I mean I was a fellow at Cato so I remember this very well That organization that foundation by 1c3 is run by an oligarch Actually, yeah, it's run by Charles Koch. That's right. Right. So he kicked out the old head He brought in the new head and you sort of wonder if you're a libertarian You can't you're not for the you're not for government power, but you're also suspicious of oligarchs right? Aren't you well of course and particularly like say the same oligarch who's not only funding the Cato Institute? But it's also funding the Republican Party in general and the party who Consistently is growing the size of government every bit as much as the Democrats are I mean It's almost like you know, it's only it's become a thing where if a Republican were to ever say You know say we need smaller government or the like Nikki Haley was talking about smaller government You just roll your eye because it never means anything They've been talking about this forever There's never been one time and there's been several times in my life where the Republicans have controlled the Congress and The White House never once been a cut in spending of course spending always goes up There's been some cuts in top marginal tax rates, right? You know not even drastic cuts, but there but yes We'll have rich people pay less taxes. There's never a cut in spending this because that's a cut in the power of the federal government And they're not for that and so if the guys who are funding that are also funding this Libertarian Institute to write policy paper for recommendations that are never going to be implemented anyway It's it does raise some eyebrows. I would say like Look to the bigger question of You know libertarians in the site like like I've heard you say before the the US federal government is the biggest most powerful Government in the history of the world by far. There's not a close second Yes, a government that can snap its fingers and overthrow regimes anywhere in the world and does it yeah? regularly and so that is Look as the country is kind of spinning out of control and everything has just gotten more and more corrupt That's directly related to the fact that DC has gotten more and more powerful and this is to me like I've been saying this for a while It's not my original thought. This is something Hans Hermann Hoppe said back in the 90s Where he he basically said that Libertarians need to learn a conservative lesson and Conservatives need to learn a libertarian lesson and what he meant by that was that Libertarians basically need to learn that okay just because We might believe that the government Autotnot bash someone over the head and lock them in a cage for doing something doesn't mean we have to celebrate it You don't have to celebrate degeneracy. You don't have to be on the side of that Yes, in fact a functioning society needs good family values and yes Just like a fact now that doesn't we don't believe that should be enforced at the point of a gun But we that doesn't mean like you know like even if you think say like Whatever you think prostitution should be legal you could still have a feeling that it's horrible Yes represents a tragedy on all sides And so that's like kind of the the conservative lesson that libertarians need to learn I think a lot of libertarians in the wrong poll kind of school did learn that And the lesson that I would say that Conservatives or or Trumpian populist types need to learn is that if Donald Trump's gonna say drain the swamp It's like okay, but what does that mean like what? What does that look like? How do you actually drain the swamp and it's really actually very simple? It means cut government spending as long as Washington DC is the most powerful organization in the history of the world And they're spending over six trillion dollars a year that is by definition of swamp That's why more millionaires live in the suburbs outside of Washington DC than anywhere else in the world They don't make anything except weapons You know what I mean that are purchased by the government. It's I've no effort to talk about this They need to make them there right right. I mean there's no There's not a single act of creation. Yeah in the entire DC the DMV as they call it right well no and it's it's literally not only are they not creating but they're parasitic by nature they're taking Americans money and this is what I mean I think this is kind of the central source of why the country is spending out of control and why we're So incredibly corrupt at every level is because there is this parasitic force in Washington DC That's grown bigger and bigger and more I absolutely agree with that and I do think I saw it change I remember the moment it changed and it was the moment when the Democratic Party subverted The business the so-called business community Which was always a kind of counterbalance against this because the idea was the government makes it actually harder for people to conduct Business it stifles free markets and we're against that So the chamber of commerce and business roundtable were always sort of pushing back against the growth of government Bill Clinton changed that and he changed that by declaring a cease-fire between the Democratic Party and the rich and He did it during the tech boom. I'll never forget this Democrats were always saying and I thought you know I didn't agree with him But I sort of thought it was important for the purpose of balance to have this they would say they were suspicious of people with too much money That's too much power like what about the value of labor right? You know the value of capital value of labor They're kind of in conflict with one another and more on the side of labor All of a sudden Bill Clinton's like no there's nothing wrong with being you know making a billion dollars at 32 for creating an app You know running web van or e-toys or pets.com Everything you could think of totally and it was so smart he did it for the purpose of fundraising and all of sudden the Democratic Party became Far richer than the Republican Party and all the formerly Republican leafy suburbs Around the country, you know Greenwich Connecticut and McLean Virginia. They all went left actually it was brilliant and evil But its effect was to completely wreck the country because There was no counterbalance against power at all. Yeah, so once the government You know the people with the nuclear weapons and business that people with the largest bank accounts are aligned That leaves everybody else like who's defending them? Yeah, and then you said something last night when we were having dinner that I thought was so interesting I was thinking about it after we left that you were talking about how Like traditionally the rich people were in suits and ties. Yes, right? Your uniform matters. I mean that's why we have uniforms, right? And that's why the bus driver wears uniform in your airline pilots have their stupid outfits and your your stewardesses are dressed up Like they are because it says a lot about Their role in your society and rich people used to spend a lot of money on clothes and the whole point of that was to say We're rich we're in a separate class and That comes with tons of advantages, but it also comes with obligations no blessably as the thing and all of a sudden in the 90s You notice the richest people in America start dressing You know in like t-shirts and hoodies and like what's the message of that and the message of that is we're just like you Which is another way of saying we have no obligation to anybody but ourselves actually we don't owe you anything And it comes out of this mindset that they do have and I know them of course well So I know that they feel this way that we're the we're the richest because We came up through this credentialing system that we claim as a meritocracy and we won We won all the prizes because we're superior. It's it's some it's so fascinating I don't like chess and why I prefer backgammon Because backgammon has probably 30 or 40% of a luck element to it just like life right right Just like life like why didn't I get leukemia and diet five tons of five year olds do I don't know But I should be grateful for that so like I've been Relatively successful in my stupid little category That's not all my doing Like you show some be magnanimous about it Well, this is why I was thinking about that because I think it's such a good point because there is something kind of counterintuitive To it where you'd be like oh, but if they're dressing like the people then maybe they'd feel more connected to the people But in fact, it's actually the opposite because it is it reminds me in a way This is what I was thinking about literally last night in my hotel. I was thinking about you making this comment and it was reminding me of when the lockdowns first started and There there were all the celebrities would come on and be like we're all in this together And you're like Ellen DeGeneres you're in a mansion You're not in the same situation There's a guy out there who's got three kids and makes 60k a year and he was just deemed non-essential and he is like Terrified about the future of how he's gonna support his family and Ellen's sitting here and her messages were on the same boatman You know like we're all in the same. I know one of my servants got COVID and come in today So I only had a team of five, you know and you're like So in a sense you're like while the message is we're all in this together And that kind of superficially sounds like a nice message. It's actually the the worst message Much a much better message a lot of knowledge Exactly not in this situation that you're in at all that for me. It's actually fine to be lost You're in the leadership class you have And I mean I've been in my whole life. I know You have a moral obligation to admit it. Yes Because once you admit it out loud Then you realize there are you know massive benefits to it But they're also massive obligations to it. They're shirking their duty That's right. That's what they're actually doing and that's actually the opposite of being noble That's it's it's a fraudulent. It's it's disgusting. Yes, and it's it's a lie Your whole thing is based on us. It's Sam Bankman freed. Of course. Oh, I just drive like a shitty little Toyota It's like oh actually you're defrauding Michelle Obama goes to Princeton for free And it's been the ruling class our whole life Yeah, and she's still lecturing you about how she's a victim of racism Hillary Clinton exact same thing goes to Wellesley spends her entire life in the ruling class and she's still whining about how she's discriminated against Why are they doing that and did you ever see um don't have like pictures of Side-by-side, but it'll be like pictures of like a Jimmy Carter's house. Yes, you know, bamas house And it totally represents something about the like corroding of our soul that you like we would allow People who call themselves public servants, which of course is ridiculous They're not but but still they don't even have to pretend to keep up a facade of that like it's a live in this insane Like mansion off what because you were president and you get to cash in on that now in a white neighborhood You should be required to live in the hood if you're if you're Barack Obama and you if you're using that car You use that card. You will be the only reason you got elected was because of your race You spent your entire eight years in flaming race hate in our country And then you go to Martha's vineyard the white as if code in the world not allowed. Yeah, you're not allowed to do that Well, it also I mean it did it did so much damage His in flaming racial hatred and and I'll say after You know Barack Obama's campaign in 2008 First of all, it was a just leaving how you feel about the guy aside It was an amazing campaign. It was unlike anything that had ever been run before genius It was yes, it was totally brilliant. It was um His now of course it wasn't what they presented it as it wasn't like a grassroots campaign it was he was approved of by the powers that be he didn't just happen to his a junior senator Get like a prime time speaking slot in 2004 where he gave that speech. He wasn't even a senator. Yeah Was he a state senator? That's what I think Walking down the streets smoking a cigarette in Boston on my way to dinner at the pommel never forget it And I met him and Jesse Jackson Jr. They pulled over I that's what I think that's right yeah walking down the streets smoking a cigarette in Boston my way to dinner at the pommel never forget it and i met him and jessie jacks and jr. They pulled over to say hi to me really i never heard his name and i covered politics for a living right and he gave the keynote at the end of that week that was sunday night he spoke on thursday and he was not a u.s. Center that was that was the campaign it was great it was absolutely so crazy so it was clearly kind of orchestrated by the proctor family of course but listen his the speeches that he gave and much of the message first off i actually there's probably a lot of things that i would have agreed with him that he was running on i agreed with a lot of things george w bush ran on in the air to that i agreed to run it in govern like that at all let's sort of like elect the black guy and get past the race stuff i loved that well especially because that was his message that was a message and let's get past the race and love that you know and even and there was a broader more unifying thing i mean i remember the because he was such a powerful you know like public speaker i mean you never really said anything but it would still be beautiful the what you know yes i remember in his uh acceptance speech at 2008 at the dnc we had this whole line where he was like uh he was like i love this country and so do you and so does john mccain the men and women who have fought for this country have been republicans and democrats and independence but they fought together and died together not defending a red america or a blue america the united states of a marriage and then it's like oh what i mean he didn't really say anything there but you know but it was beautifully put i'm a hundred percent for that yeah the message was great and great looks he also was very critical of the george w bush illustrations excesses and i'm gonna end the war in a rack i'm gonna re institute habeas corpus we're gonna end torture we're gonna do a lot of i didn't do any of that i mean i guess he had the order act eventually and then reinvated the country because the ice is fighters he was arming invaded the country is but but then i think essentially what happened uh and it was around obama's reelection campaign this were things really went off the rails in this country was that he got in there and continued and expanded all the worst of the bush policies oh of course so they almost had nothing to run on and so they decided to pivot to a culture war instead and this is this was a decision and i again i don't know exactly what the conspiracy is but this decision was made from the top down that i think it was a response to obama's failures it was a response to to these movements like the tea party and occupy wall street i can get a little bit too close that's right a little bit too close to the target and all this you know i'm sure you've looked at this before but where there's these nexus charts and you can chart out like how many times all the woke terms are used you know transgenderism all that and it's all like right around 2012 it's all sudden like you know uh systemic racism goes from being mentioned like this many times about history to like shooting at like the new york times and watchin so very famous graph and i've used it many times and trying to explain this but you that's exactly right like fight amongst yourselves yep i think it was the fan it was the hangover from the financial crisis yeah well that was a huge part of it for sure on and also that obamas you know like so in the year like from 2007 to 2010 um the median net worth in america shrunk by like 40 percent yeah like people lost like 40 percent of american wealth was lost and you know you can imagine especially now like having kids you know the time i didn't have kids and i was young like whatever you know the bad economy that sucks but you can appreciate now like oh what that would be like if you just lost 40 percent of your net worth and you got little kids like how destabilizing that is and obama solution to this right the obama recovery was uh okay it was record high government spending and record low interest rates this was right this was the solution was this is how we're gonna save the economy we're gonna bring interest rates down to zero and we're gonna bring government spending higher than it's ever been before at that time and so what so you can say on paper there's a little bit of a recovery here but what really happens in that environment you know it's like all the politically connected people in washington d say they make more money and the speculators have a field day because now everybody in wall streets making more money because that you have to invest now right because you're losing money if you just save and so this this ultimately is what built then they throw the culture war in there to like you said fight amongst yourselves and the result of that was Donald Trump the result of all of that was the condition for Trump zero interest rates that had a greater i think negative effect in the country than any where we've ever thought it for one thing it just asset prices ballooned yeah i mean this is fake everyone knows what happens over time uh... with free money the money becomes worth less and so there's a rush to assets and now you can buy house right that's right and then and then the boom is always followed by the bust and so you have all of this malinvestment because the like the way it works and this is this is where all street economics which I'm maybe I know I have never disparaged I'm just mad about the results but it's not a result of Austrian economics or libertarianism it's a result of abandoning all agree right so it's but look the the basic thing is that like interest rates are a price the price just like anything else it's the price of money of course the price of borrowing money and so just like every other price there's information given in these prices so if if steel becomes very very cheap that's gives information to a business man that like hey we're producing a lot of steel very easily now right if you wanted to do a project that requires a lot of steel now is the time to do it because we're producing steel now that works when you have real prices because oh there's a big production of steel so you can but if the government just came in and said you know we have price controls and we insist that the price of steel is very very cheap what's gonna happen is people are gonna start building projects with steel and then realize we're at a steel pretty soon because it wasn't a real signal exactly so I agree when you when you make interest rates zero for a decade it's a signal for people to say borrow money when they wouldn't have otherwise borrowed like maybe you wouldn't borrow if rates were eight or nine percent but it's zero this is a good time to borrow this money but again it's a fake signal we're borrowing all this money and maybe I am a little bit sharing because I I got all kinds of advice from so I'm not sophisticated at all with money but all kinds of advice borrow money it's free and I never did yes not one dollar yeah well it's a really bad idea I feel like the amount of debt that people carry is the untold story in the United States and I don't know why we're like in favor of the credit card companies or people are getting rich from the it's just bad having a lot of debt is bad I don't know why that's like if you say that by the way it's considered super radical but like why is that radical but yeah I think about the idea that we have all of these policies designed to get people to gamble their life savings like why would you are not caring yet when I made money in not that long ago when I was like finally could pay off my the first thing I did was pay off my markets that's the first thing I did in my college roommate is really much more than I am made a ton of money he's like that's crazy you have to pay a fair what it was but like you lose the the tax shield and it was like 18 grand I had to pay 18 thousand dollars year for the privilege of not being in debt right to a bank yeah what yeah and that the system is like or officially designed to be that way you know what I mean that it's like oh these are the tax laws that will encourage people and also wait your your penalizing me for not being in debt like that's cool these laws like I think about just think about what the income taxes they penalize you for working well that's right I'm to work on the punishment is a fee the more the more productive you are the more punishment you so let me ask you this question as an Austrian economic economist why why the disparity between the tax on labor and the tax on capital well because that's the rules that the government made well let me say right because I think you're totally right about this right that it's like look I've heard you talk about this before so like if the capital gains taxes 15% but then someone working pays 30% so like what are you saying we would rather exactly but so here's the next level to that this is all I think that you're missing in that because I think you're completely right in your like your your critique of that but okay so if we were let's say to fix that that disparity there's basically two ways we could do that one would be to raise capital gains taxes of 30% okay so the result of that would be that I guess we would disincentivize certain types of investment maybe the government let's say it works out perfectly and these we are able you know like the the people in Wall Street don't have an army of tax lawyers and so we can get them out of this stuff as they always end up doing so then DC gets more money so then the corrupt most powerful government in the world gets a little bit more money they will then leverage that to borrow three times as much and just so that was more it will go to politically connected cronies right it'll be however let's say the other option to that yeah is we could lower exactly individual taxes to 15% and now give every working family in this country a huge raise a huge way that would be more strong so that's all I'm saying you're right about the discrepancy there and it's totally corrupt but it's like what's the solution to that the solution is look if you tied them to legislatively and just said you know they're going to be the same the tax on capital always be the same as the tax on labor. Then the average person and which includes me I don't have any investments I just work on my salary right so like most people. The average person would benefit from the lobbying power of Wall Street right right so that right so they're always giving the same but like all of a sudden I have an army of. Bank lobbyists in private equity lobbyists keeping my income taxes low yes look and theory I would love that I guess it's just if the answer there is to just like. You know it's unbelievable to me that particularly like people like um you know like Bernie Sanders types will say that they care so much about working people and they want to do whatever they can to help these working people and yet the biggest bill. For working people is their federal income taxes and and and I mean the IRS I mean I know stories from good friends of mine they are ruthless I mean they go back 20 years. No one knowing people and this isn't just like it's like people kind of have this idea that there's like economic issues over here and social issues over here. As if they're different but they're really not I mean you go back 20 years on somebody and say you know a guy who's making 30 grand a year and they go back and maybe it's only just like. you know a few thousand dollars a year that he goes but they go back 20 years on you and you have three grand a year and so now you have 60 thousand dollars yeah with you know what I mean yeah this is what leads to divorces to put pistols in their mouth yeah you know it's growing up without their dad around I mean it's like these things are interconnected and you see that just over the last few years. With the price inflation how bad it's been I mean like this is ruins people so why isn't that a news story I don't understand if. Everybody I mean I will say you know because of my age and income I'm a little cut off but. I try not to be cut off and people I talk to the all complain about grocery store prices yeah like a lot and they're shocking but I never hear anybody say that. Yeah I mean I certainly talk about it a lot I think that there's um it's not it's not it's not in anybody's interest I guess like it's not in any partisan interest to really talk about that because both parties are totally complicit yeah so it's you know no matter who. You know people because we live in this weird like. Two party system and everybody becomes partisans especially in an election year and they're all just trying to kind of get their guy over and no one's really you know I mean there are Trump supporters who like to talk about. The inflation under Obama. I really want to talk about it too much because it all started with the money that was being printed in 2020 that's right Trump was championing the whole time right actually and and and smearing Thomas Massey. For for daring to say hey we should have a vote on this before we spend more money than we've ever spent when we're broker than we've ever been and he's and Trump of course bragging that it was the. The biggest bill you know because it's so Trump because it's the biggest because a lot of people are spending bills minds the biggest spending bill you know and like look I thought trying to you know there are Trump is like the most entertaining. The character and he's hated by all of the right people and a lot of his instincts are correct and he was also framed for treason by his own intelligence agencies and so there's a lot of Donald Trump that I. Can sympathize with and relate to his supporters but the truth is that it was such a desire to lock down the economy and to say we're just going to print our way out of this was such a disaster. I agree and he totally got rolled by all the people around him and just did not. Have the wisdom or the courage to stand up to them and he kept fauci on that task force through all of 2020 I mean he just kept so many people who hated his guts around him. And it's really it was a tragedy Nikki Haley Mike Pompeo. My sense. Oh yeah no I agree. I mean all of them you know Mike Pence is a guy he was in his 60s and if he were to go this is the guy who he was going to leave us as president of the United States. Mike Pence. There's something really where there's something wrong with him. Yeah there's there's a lot wrong you can feel it I really appreciate you ruining his political career. No it wasn't personal I mean I feel sorry for Pence he's not comfortable with himself at all and that's the vibe the strong I've known him for over time on 25 years I know him since he got to Washington. And he's got some talent and I don't think he's evil or anything but there's something really damaged and I always felt that he was put in there. He wouldn't be the first VP to be in this position but he was put in there by permanent DC to keep an eye on Trump. Yeah obviously. Yeah but that's always how it works right like that's the same thing that happened with Reagan and George H.W. Bush being that you put in the guy of course we're going to have our CIA direct. Next in and you're for that I mean this is like this is the oldest story there is. So Trump is coming to libertarian convention. Yeah. So let me just ask at the outset you're you're involved in libertarian politics like actual palta party politics. Would you ever be on the ticket? You know so just for people who don't know it's kind of like inside baseball but so my there was kind of a civil war. Inside baseball is too broad it's more like in typical ball. Yes yes that is actually a really good thing but in this very irrelevant corner where I have a lot of. So there was basically like a kind of civil war within the libertarian party over the last few years and it was about a lot of the stuff that you were talking about at the beginning like. Basically there's like you know as you know because you covered it there was what was called the wrong Paul revolution. Yeah and that's what I was I was one of the young people in this wrong Paul revolution that totally changed you know the way I look at the world and I became obsessed with all of this stuff. And so there were a bunch of us and a lot of us had hoped that. Ram Paul was kind of gonna carry the mantle and continue this this wrong Paul energy and now I'm not saying anything against Ram Paul I think he's one of the best senator probably the best senator he was great during covid grilling fauci and all that stuff but for whatever reason there's there's several it didn't work out that way and Donald Trump came in and stole the Republican party and stole I mean he won it but. Anyway so when that happened there were a lot of us who were like kind of disappointed about round Paul and then. The we had Ron Paul running in the Republican party but then a lot of us started looking to the libertarian party like oh they were the third party candidate and they ran Gary Johnson and Bill Weld we were very disappointed with that campaign particularly with Bill Weld who's just. Horrible sad defeated guy and also just told he was like a Raytheon lobbyists who is like what are you doing total for the point if we're gonna have a third party and putting that guy up. and then during 2020. The people who are running the libertarian party completely failed and didn't oppose the lockdowns and and then started like virtue signaling during the black lives matter riots about how we must be anti racist real yeah it was hard. So basically then there was this group called the mise caucus that I joined I was led by this guy named Michael heis and Angela McCartle who ultimately is she's currently the chair of the party and we basically went and took over the whole party. We got for in the name of Ron Paul and it's like if there's going to be a libertarian party it's going to be represented by libertarians and so anyway cutting to so once that happened it was kind of my group who took over and they. They wanted me to run for for president on the libertarian ticket I was considering that for a while ultimately. Just wasn't the right time for me I got two little kids I got a lot going on in my career it's like it's just wasn't the right time for me but so now. To what you said Angela McCartle pulled this off to her great credit that she's got Donald Trump coming and speaking at the libertarian national convention. It looks like RF K. When and where is this is the end of the month it's a May 24th through 26th I believe in Washington DC that was a decision made by the old guard we would not have had our convention in Washington DC nowhere this in DC. Yeah it's at like at some hotel I'd have to look at it yeah it's at some hotel in DC. But anyway I mean RF K just challenged Donald Trump to debate him there which I don't think is going to happen but would be very interesting if it did happen and so it is at least to me it kind of represents the libertarian party who is this third party. Trying to engage in relevance of some sort and trying to at least look obviously we're not in a position we're not going to win the White House or even when any Senate seats or anything like that but I do think the libertarian party could effectively be used to put pressure particularly on the Republicans yes to be better and to not run like awful neo cons and run better candidates I certainly. Prefer the kind of America first strain of Republicans to the neo conservative strain and I think right now there is. Well I mean there's kind of been a civil war in the right half of America since Donald Trump came on to the scene but I don't even know if you'd call it a civil war because Donald Trump just won so dominantly you know it's not like. The Republicans were split between Jeb Bush and Donald Trump or something right no like it was ninety five to five percent. But particularly and I know you've talked about this a lot since the the war in Israel or I should say the war in Gaza or I don't even know if I should say the war the attack of Gaza whatever you call it a war when one side doesn't have a military but whatever you call that. Since that you've seen this kind of divide grow where I think largely neo conservatism had been rejected. By the by the voters yeah republican voters but when Israel came up it's a little bit different and I don't know exactly. the conservative you know conservatism is like chicken pox like you think you defeated and then when your defenses are down it comes back as shingles like oh crap they're Democrats now Jesus no it's just lays dormant it's always there and but when it comes back in it's second iteration when it manifests again. It is disabling and that's what we're watching like I. If there's one thing I wanted to help do is get rid of that the world to you but it seems stronger than ever. Well I think you have done a lot I mean I really I mean it's like everybody in the republican party is completely on board with the idea. That wars non essential wars make America better or something I that's so nuts it's what's what's so wild to me about it is just after the twenty years of terror wars. That have just been such a complete disaster that America would still be entering these conflicts that are very clearly wars of choice. Like I mean I'm I know they can make an argument like they were making the argument that putting if he takes you crane is going to take poll and then is going to take which is nothing he's ever said. There's not one thing Putin's ever said that you could point to in fact when you interview me some words said if Poland attacks us that's the only scenario I. It's not the largest country in the world it's the biggest land mass on planet earth it's incredibly complex run as 20% Muslim they have all these sort of semi autonomous zones. He wants more land I don't think he wants more land no look he's always like insane. It's been very and it's not just that he's said it but like almost everyone who is being honest has said it at the top levels of the American government as well as at NATO is what his issue was Ukrainian entry into NATO. He was always his issue and we kept pushing that and kept pushing that and that's what got him to react and even the head of NATO himself Strosenberg whatever said that Vladimir Putin said that if you just signed a deal put it in writing that Ukraine won't join NATO I won't invade and NATO refused and so he invaded. but is there a single news story even now that doesn't describe reflexively describe almost like it's like a block text in you know in the in the computer program the unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. They always have to say that there's never been a more provoked invasion well I mean they did it on purpose they pushed Russia to invade Ukraine well I mean like let's say we had like a fairly pro American government in Mexico that. And Russia wanted to get them to do an economic deal with them and then we were trying to convince them not to do that economic deal but to do an economic deal with us and ultimately we convince them that they're going to be an economic partnership with us. And so then Russia came in and overthrew the democratically elected government and installed the pro Russian government and then that led to a civil war where 15,000 people died and let the pro American side was get you know what I mean like would you go. So unprovoked. Yeah and then Russia said we're going to get Mexico to join our defense alliance and we're going to put missiles in the wrong. Right. No by the way that had been floated out for years and in fact in 2008 we had formally announced that that Russia had formally announced that Mexico would be joining their military alliance then we went I'm sorry for people out there you right it was a totally organic uprising made on revolution. Victoria Newland happened to be in the middle of having out sandwiches that don't let that you know like John McCain and they were going there a lot and like yeah sure it was Soros backed NGOs that were funding it but whatever that's a totally organic movement you know. And so yeah no it was a series of provocations very unnecessary ones and not just like not just ones that like libertarian doves like me or something like that were against but what George Kenan. The cold warrior right the founder of the containment strategy what he said which is great piece with him and Thomas Friedman and the New York Times and I think it was in 1999. He laid it out right there when we first started the first round of NATO expansion and he said the people advocating this expansion are going to keep advocating it until there's a Russian. response and then when there's that response they'll say see this is why we were right to expand NATO. Obama even made noises that suggested he understood what you just said. Yes well he refused to send weapons in. He was there when the government when Yannakovich was over. But he wouldn't send the weapons in and then Trump ultimately did and I think you know I think my you know like that was the big scandal about Ukraine. Right was that Donald Trump kind of did this you know kind of like a very Trumpian kind of gray area thing where he's like you know I'd really like you to investigate the buttons maybe you don't get these weapons if you don't investigate the buttons now you. The reason why that was so ridiculous to impeach him over was because there's totally legitimate to want to investigate what the buttons were doing in there by the way. but it was very corrupt involvement in Ukraine. But that being said what no one ever talked about in the story was that Trump caved. Of course didn't get the Biden investigation and gave them the weapons and like that never that was all the other reason why the impeachment was so ridiculous because there's no print. Quit pro quo when you don't get anything for any. You know what I mean like you can argue it was an attempted quid pro quo you know what I mean but he never got anything but he sent the weapons and I do think part of this. This was the really you know effective the way that the intelligence agencies really won was that because a lot of people would look at it like okay so the the rush again. Was an attempted deep state co and essentially it was I mean Andrew McCabe admitted on 60 minutes that they debated at the Justice Department. Invoking the 25th Amendment and then they ultimately settled on a special prosecutor you know I mean like they were trying to overthrow the guy but so on the surface you could say oh it failed. It failed but you know in another sense Donald Trump explicitly ran in 2016 on Détente with Russia. Let's work with Russia let's work together to kill the terrorists we all don't like terrorists who cares about overthrowing Assad that's not in our national interest like we don't who cares so let's be friends with Russia let's get along with them. And then when you're being called the Russian spy every day in on the news and you know then when he went to Helsinki and said you know I believe Putin I you know I don't I don't think he interfered in the the 2016 elections by the way there's still never been a shred of evidence presented that he did. They've got like one company that they claim had Russian IP addresses because no one can fake an IP address you know it's like the most ridiculous. Claim that it was once at a party with Putin or something like that if they've nothing and so Trump just said yeah I agree with him and they were like so you don't trust your intelligence you know everyone was freaking out so much. That it got to a point where he couldn't have made a deal with Russia because if he had that would have just been proof. right like imagine in that environment when Trump Russia collusion was being said all day long Donald Trump had made some deal with Russia. Bill like see proof he's a Russian puppet and so Donald Trump I think went out of his way to prove what a Russian property wasn't. It was like here's how much I'm not a Russian puppet all send weapons in the Ukraine. Well and that happened on a bunch of different issues unfortunately but the problem I would say at this point is like the desire to go to war with Russia has been pretty much the animating thought in our form policy. Establishment for over 20 years so now we actually have a hot war with Russia we're conducting a war against Russia. Using our proxy Ukraine totally destroyed Ukraine in the process we're losing that war. So Ukraine's not going to win that I can I don't see how we Ukraine it's impossible. So what happens when that becomes really obvious that all we've achieved is destroyed this country and killed a million of its young man and. Like how does the State Department and the Atlantic Council in the Aspen Institute and Joe Scarborough and the whole sort of blob like how do they respond to that. I mean I'm sure I mean I think basically it's it's over and I don't think anyone even I mean this latest round of funding is just it's an election year and Biden's trying to kick the can to not let this fall right now. You know what I mean be totally obvious. Also it's easier to steal the money when it's out of the country. Well that's for sure that's that's for sure I mean we have no idea where all this money has been going but we know Ukraine is a totally trustworthy government. You know no corruption there. But I think look I'm sure they will attempt to spin it in some way where if Zelensky still controls like the western portion of Ukraine they'll be like. She didn't lose the whole country and Putin would have been in Poland if we hadn't thought this of course will all be completely ridiculous. We could have avoided this war by just by just saying we're not gonna admit Ukraine and to NATO and putting that in writing we could have avoided this war this is not according to me according to the head of NATO we could have avoided this war by doing that. And these whatever the number isn't who knows you never know in the fog of war I mean it's not until they really test the access mortality rate no that's what it's clearly in hundreds of thousand. I mean they've got 50 year olds fighting for them at this point so that tells you something. They're force conscripting men would down some years. Yes that means a lot that means all your boys are dead essentially for sure and the ones who couldn't you know manage to flee. And so yeah it's a total disaster it's the like incredibly dark irony of it is that all the people like cheering on Ukraine have just as John Mirshimer said in 2014 which aged very well. unfortunately said we were leading Ukraine down the Primrose path and that's what we did you actually sharing them on but you're leaving them to their demise and it didn't need to happen it's terrible and. I'm not absolving Putin of responsibility I he was certainly put back into a corner but there had to be another answer of the guy you know it's just horrible. But I know at the end of it it'll be another disaster and the hawks and DC will try to spin it as best they can and then they'll all get promoted and have better jobs that seems to be the track record. It does feel though that we're coming to the end of something it's like this was the last effort to exert a certain form of American power abroad it failed. Does that make them desperate and crazy I feel like a loss in Ukraine increases the chances we use tactical nukes against Russia for example. Well I mean I hope I'm wrong well here the thing is it decreases the chances that Russia uses them so there's that I mean you know there's Joe Biden all. For example, well, I mean, I hope I'm wrong. Well, the thing is it decreases the chances that Russia uses them. So there's that. I mean, you know, there's Joe Biden always Pretended that the war in Ukraine was a must win. You know, like that we couldn't allow Vladimir right when the war and you could but that's all just an act Doesn't it's not I'm just saying however you feel about it. It's not actually vital to us survival Whether we whether Russia controls Ukraine or not. That's just that's absurd But Vladimir Putin really believed it was a must win and that actually is a much more reasonable case that you can't lose a war on your border. That's a proxy war to you know even in the Cold War We never had you know we fought and Vietnam, but That's not on Russia's border. You know what I mean like that's right. This is a whole different game and so the the to me the real fear From the very beginning was not that Vladimir Putin might win the real fear was that well What if the West ones like what if Vladimir Putin is humiliated right on his border and feels that his death is imminent? Because that's that's the time when nukes might be absolutely in that sense. You know It's it's quite possibly the better outcome. I mean no nuclear war is always the better outcome I do think and I gotta say I think you're a huge part of this I think that if you look at like say 2002 when the war drums were beating for a rack There was just nothing like what we have today. I mean like the the biggest shows and cable news the big they were all for it They were all good for it. Yes. Well, I was for it until I went to Iraq in 2003 I immediately apologized. I would say you might do fence. Yeah. What is it that what about the trip major change in mind? Oh I was so shocked by the whole thing so the invasion was in March of 2003 and I mean I was hosting a chat show a debate show crossfire and Actually, it's true story. I was at lunch with my father head lunch with my dad every week at the same table in this place and this Command's called in Washington I'm never forget this in the fall of 2003 And he goes when you go into Iraq and I was like I don't I don't know. I don't think I mean I don't plan to go to Iraq. I've got a daily show I have to host he goes oh, so you're a journalist and there's a war But you're not going to cover the war And I was like no, I've got you know like four kids and a daily job. He's like oh so but You just kind of kind of sit this one out and he like shamed me to it. It's too story He was like so unimpressed that I wasn't going to see it and Yeah, I was like okay, you're right. I should go so I went I took a leave of my show and went for a couple weeks with some friends who were contractors defense contractors of all military guys buddy of mine called Kelly McCann and a bunch of a bill frost all these really impressive Contractors and we went to Iraq and the first well the first thing that happens we get to Kuwait We're gonna fly in and the Insurgency shot down a DHL plane Coming into by-op or you know the Baghdad airport and so we couldn't fly in I Was like so we've occupied the country now. I went in December early December. So that was I don't know through nine months And we had at least unequivocal victory over Saddam right he was hiding into in fact He was captured to create the day. I got there So we had just won and we can't control the airport Right so then we we drive in from Kuwait immediately Got like it was out of control people were shooting it was it was chaos It was full chaos and then we stayed outside the green zone for In this just this house that they had rented and one night I'm sitting on the roof on a sat phone trying to talk to my wife back in Washington taking our dog to the vet and Someone starts shooting at me and then all these people start shooting in our house. There's a gun battle at the house Look what Do you have a gun when you're over there? Oh absolutely. I must have fired for it Actually amazingly You were told to carry a gun It was so out of control when I was there that Journalists and NGO workers here. I don't know. I certainly me you had to go get a Certification from the state to buy still have my badges hanging in my office right there that you qualified with this It was in AK 47. I actually had an AK 47 already not fully automatic, but just I might arrange I knew how to operate it, but yeah, you required to carry it. That's how out of control it was so and then a buddy mine got killed there A journalist was killed there. I called Mike Kelly was a really great guy and The bottom line was we're not good at Colonialism because we don't have the self-confidence. We're not sort of bringing Christianity and civilization There's no like clearly defined goal for this and We're bad at it and the armed forces is not designed to do that and the effect was super obvious It was chaos and the one thing I cannot deal with and I hate and I think all people hate instinctively is chaos People can handle repression. They live under a pressure of regimes. You know all through history They have they can't handle chaos and we brought chaos To Iraq and I just thought this is the opposite of what a great power should be doing This is disgusting and I saw really really clearly That it would never get better and and I'll just add one more thing to this which I've never forgotten We went into the green zone one night and had dinner with some generals I did and this and I had always sort of liked my dad was the military I sort of respected the military I didn't realize how corrupt and disgusting and feminized the officer class was and politicized Just repulsive people actually at the flag officer level So we're sitting at dinner and this general is telling me about I saw something really touching today I saw we had this female Officer and she was killed her legs were blown off by an IED and her husband was there and He you know they've got three kids back in Virginia But he held her hand as she died of this ultimate sacrifice for America and I was like What? You're like celebrating this a girl got killed a mother I thought we fought wars to protect mothers and children First of all if you're sending girls to fight your wars you're disgusting Because you're violating the most basic agreement. There is which is the man protects And in exchange for that the willing is to sacrifice his life He gets to be revered as a man. It's at the head of the table and All the benefits of being a man and there are many But if you're sending your children 100% If you're sending women to protect you if there's a home invasion at your house at three in the morning You're like honey I dealt with the last one go go defend us. I hope that she leaves you and she will by the way So if you're sending women to defend you, it's not a civilization worth defending that's how I feel you imagine I mean going up with the mother of your children Going to war with the mother gets her legs blown off and I think that's a good thing And I lost control with the table with this guy and said almost exactly right I think it's disgusting And it's not because I don't think women should be defending our country not because I don't love women Because I do love women. They're above that. We should we should be defending our women. Yeah, I don't know how supporting women getting their legs Exactly Exactly and this guy accused me of being like a woman hater or something here I've got a wife and three daughters who I revere who I would die for without thinking and I'm like I hated him. I don't think I've ever hated a man more than I hated this general I wish I remember his name and the PIO that fairly well known sort of spokesman for the provisional authority Dan Seanor was sitting at the table. He was very offended by my behavior But I was outraged and that rage has sort of never has just exploded on you. Sorry, but it's never left and I really enjoyed it I came back to Washington and I was like and I did an interview with the New York Times I said I cannot believe I supported something like this is totally evil what we're doing And I've never moved from that position. I lost all these friends for saying that whatever I don't want to talk about myself continue to talk about myself, but yeah Well, I just I've just I've heard you say several times that your trip over there You know like turns you against the war, but I would never like heard you really like say what specifically it was celebrating the death of a mother Yeah, and then getting mad at me because I don't I'm not gonna celebrate the death of a mother What about her children and her husband? Like this is disgusting and it's it's so dark and horrible That we dress it up with ideology The thing that's almost like that makes it eligible right well the thing that's almost more dark and horrible Then just that is when you add on the fact that this was a small group of people who wanted this war going back Into the 90s and that they used 911 as the excuse To you know what I mean be like oh yeah now you can go get our bonus war. Oh Look at this right now We've got a blank check from the American people which they did that you tell us you say the word terrorist and point And we will support you bombing the crap and I knew it was bullshit even at the time and I I went over to the White House for something to see bush or Chaney Or somebody I think I was seeing chaney whatever I was on the White House because really warm guy crick I It's why I Was there and it was like maybe the fall of 2002 and They've been talking about sin vader rock stuff But I didn't take it seriously because I thought it was so crazy. It was like a non sequitur was like It was just not connected in any sense to 911 Obviously and guys like lot you know paid liars like Steve Hayes or somewhere like these books like I'll kind of did it And I work with Steve Hayes and I always so embarrassed by that It's like he's dumb so he didn't know but I just felt I was like this whole thing was like so nuts So I never thought we were gonna invade Iraq. I never thought that and I show up and I'm whatever Having a cigarette on the lawn outside where all the all the sticks are all the stand-up guys TV cameras are and I run into Mike Allen An old friend of mine from Washington Post reporter now runs Axios and really nice person And has this like clarity of vision that I don't have because he hasn't caught the weeds on shit And I said we're not really gonna invade Iraq. He goes of course we are And I said well how do you know that he goes well because it's all the machines Moving in that direction like if it's gonna happen. I was like that can't really happen. He was gonna happen He wasn't endorsing it. Yeah, he could just see that like if everyone starts talking about something like They will convince themselves that it's true and it will happen Like we should remember that. Yeah, don't overthink things if something really obvious is happening It's happening. Yeah, sometimes Sometimes it's almost too hard to accept Intellectuals people like you and to some extent me have a lot of trouble seeing that Because we're like well actually No, no the obvious is real. Yeah, and it's almost like if you just if you like You know Remove yourself like if you transcend the moment. It's like it's so obvious exactly Of course this is happening and there's you know What's unbelievable to me that really like what what what woken me up about the warfare state is You know like how much it's all based on lies and that you see that There's only like a few and I you call me an intellect I'm really not an intellectual, you know like I'm a comedian who likes to read No, but you think about why things have short short But I just mean that I'm not an expert in any of this stuff But you know I just know enough To know that the supposed experts are completely full of shit like all all I have to know is these four like narrative Shattering things and so like like just a few of them are like look You could read and anyone can go read this you find it's called a clean break a new strategy for securing the realm It was a letter written by Richard Pearl and David Worms are and a few other Remember they came very powerful in the George a W Bush I knew all those guys. This was written in 1996 and it was not written to Bill Clinton It was not written to Bob Dole who was running for president that year It was written to Benjamin Netanyahu Who had just become the prime minister of Israel and the clean break the strategy was a break From this whole peace process nonsense that Yitsak Rabin and them had had agreed to and basically it was like well Look it was the beginning laying down of what the net in Yahoo doctrine was ultimately to be which is culminated in a wild success as you know And so basically the idea was like well look forget all of this like this peace process where you focus on land Exchanges and whose land belongs to who that's all kind of lame And so what really you should do is reach out to the broader Arab world Kind of make arrangements with them so you don't have to go through this this peace process and that's right With overthrowing Saddam Hussein and like that's our first step here and then there's several other steps But it's outlined why we want Saddam Hussein overthrown and so then this was for Israel's interests we wanted this this war in 1996 now by the way, there's other things. I'm not like saying like Israel is 100% pulling the strings of the American government I think a big part of the reason why the war ended up happening was also because George W. Bush had a personal beef against Saddam Hussein tried to have his father Killed but these neo conservatives then who get into go as soon as 9-11 and in the project for a new American Century when they talked about how they wanted to fight wars on multiple fronts They explicitly said they probably wouldn't be able to do that unless there was like a new another pearl Harbor type event where there'd be enough popular support to now the 9-11 truthers Alex Jones guys for a while they would hang on that as Evidence that you know whatever Cheney did 9-11 or something like that or something elements within our government I think they're overplaying their hand there. I don't actually think that but it certainly is evidence that they recognize what it was once it happened What do you think that now I should say what you already know which is We don't really know that much about 9-11 because so many documents remain classified Yeah, 23 years later and why would that be there's no excuse for that They should every one of them should be released this afternoon. They won't be So we can only speculate to some extent, but like what should we be suspicious of the official explanation for 9-11? I think you should always be suspicious of any government Information for any firm. I mean like that should always be your starting point like I'm saying you should jump to a conclusion about what happened But and I think this is by the way, this is my worldview that has served me very well over the leg I kind of like I basically My podcast kind of took off and a big part of well big part of that is like Joe Rogan and stuff like that But I've just kind of been consistently right on the biggest issues. I have a good track record now Like I was in real time like calling out how obviously Trump was not a Russian agent and and real time I was saying the Hunter Biden laptop was real and in real time I was against lockdowns from the very beginning and I was again and it's all because I just I operate from a worldview of Recognizing the government as essentially a criminal gang There's basically the mafia who won and now they just rule you know what I mean and like so having taken out the real and much less benign And that's part of the reason why they don't like them off your cuz we're competing gang You're not allowed to be the gang. They are where the gang and so when you look at things through that frame Yes, they're all a bunch of liars and they're their power brokers and so yeah, I don't trust anything They say I try to just go off what I know So we don't know exactly what happened on 9 11 We do know at this point that there was pretty high-level Saudi involvement and that the Saudis have That the government knew that and had no interest in punishing those people and in fact still wanted to continue doing business with them We do know that we were comfortable enough Fighting on the same side as al Qaeda in Libya in Syria and in Yemen So it didn't seem like al Qaeda fighting al Qaeda wasn't really the motivating force and like I said we we know that These this group of neo-cons who hijacked the federal government wanted these wars and after 9 11 Used that opportunity to get them they use that opportunity But anyways at the point I was thinking about not being an expert but being able to shatter this narrative It's like wait, so do you just to be clear though? Do you think it's possible that people within the US government were aware this was going to happen before sure? Absolutely, that's possible. Yeah. I mean, you know, I wouldn't put that past them It's kind of listen these are people who are and I think this is one of the things that people have been waking up to a lot more Recently and this has led to some wild conspiracies Some of which are not true some of which might be true But people have been waking up more and more to Recognizing like who are these people? You know what I mean like these people who have like real power in our government like who are these people? I mean, you know you take someone like Hillary Clinton So it's like okay, so your husband is a Rapist I mean he's been accused of rape by multiple women clearly a sexual predator You know, I mean a man who even just the stuff we know confirmed This was a man who at when he was a married president was like Fucking a 20 year old intern in the White House like a sexual predator of so you know what I mean I'm and okay your best friend Her husband also is a sexual predator who's sending naked pictures to underage girls like hey That's weird It is how many people do you know who are married to a sexual predator whose best friends also married to a sexual predator like I you know like I'm not even go No, you're like I'm not drawing anymore Like fair who are these people and these are people who are like you know Bohemian Grove is real They're doing really weird stuff there that Jeffrey Epstein was real There was a like pedophile ring that a lot of most powerful people were connected to at least knew about and didn't Feel like blowing the whistle on it These are people who are comfortable making decisions where babies will die You know like mass slaughter will happen and they can sleep at night and like I'm not saying like a situation where Either our babies are gonna die or their babies are gonna die and there's a horrible I understand to make this a decision where like no we're choosing this to happen and they're kind of okay with that and You kind of wake up to like so when you say like is it possible that they'd kill Americans or be complicit in that like yeah Of course, of course, that's possible I don't have enough evidence to like prove that that's the case But I can prove that they wanted these wars and then when the opportunity to get them came they lied through their fucking teeth in order to sell the wars Look general Wesley Clark He said as I'm sure you've seen is democracy now interview where he said that he saw the plans in late 2001 That it wasn't just that we were going into a rock but that we were also gonna have regime change in Syria and several other countries But then when they go to start the regime change in Syria 2013 or whatever they started in 2012 But then they go oh we have to overthrow Assad because you know he's killing all of his own people It's like no, no, no, no, no you wanted to overthrow Assad over a decade ago Don't give me this bullshit that this is some new plan now So I do know that they will lie through their teeth to the American people like this I know for certain that they will lie through their teeth to the American people to get enough public support for mass slaughter Campaigns because they want those campaigns for completely different reasons and I'm again like I said before This isn't speculation that they wrote this in their own words one of the reasons They wanted to remake them at least in this way is because they thought it was in Israel's interest and that to me is like just Totally unacceptable as an American that you're first of your lying to the people of this country And you're doing something with a foreign countries interest in mind That's just like so appalling But I think people should be like publicly hung for it. It's after a trial after a trial It's a people I mean it's not America first. I would say that it's kind of hard What's interesting is it so many people who talk about America first or whatever They're fully on board with this they attack anyone who's not I don't thoroughly bizarre experience the other day And maybe you can shed light of what it means because I don't fully understand it, but I was doing Rogan's podcast At your urging that's a thank you for that. I had a great time. I love the podcast. Yeah, it was super super fun But it knows very long It was like three hours long So and I can't stop talking so I'm not another thing and I'm going on whatever you know and at one point I just boarded out for like 15 seconds something I've thought about recently Which is the use of the nuclear bombs went on they have been used in August of 1945 against Hiroshima and then Nagasaki Complex topic a lot of it's not publicly well known Okay, but just the bottom line fact that we dropped this particularly by Monogasaki Which is the Christian capital of Japan by the way that bomb was dropped on a church and killed You know three quarters of the Christians in the city Which bothers me as a Christian, but leaving even that aside It killed civilians. It wasn't dropped on a military base. It was killed killed civilians and like I got what people did it or maybe I don't get it But I think eight years later we can say Not something to brag about in generating civilians. I don't care what the context is that's evil. That's all basically all I said Holy shit Did I get attacked from the right and I thought and I don't even follow the attacks of me ever But I kept getting texts from people. I can't believe you said that or people were mad at you for saying that and I thought of all the dumb cruel untrue things I have said over 30 years of just talking in public a Lot of which I regret and I hope I apologize for every bad thing I've said but I've said a lot of really things are impossible to defend That's what they attacked me on. Yeah What is that well and just the fact like even as you're saying like again if you want to attack you on something like hey you supported the war in Iraq Like there's a thing like I really got this wrong and it was how is what a like twisted society Mitt Romney when he ran out I mean but guys all of the people who got all of these wars wrong Don't receive as much outrage as you for saying after the war was won and by the way If you know anything about where five star general Dwight Eisenhower was against the new I'm aware of where I wear they were ready to negotiate a surrender. We didn't need to do this But also there's just no, but I didn't even get into the details of the Then exactly I was just the principle of using nuclear weapons against the civilian population You could construct in your mind a scenario where you could justify it I guess But it's still sort of in the cold light of day hard to defend incinerating civilians by the way within sin Your bombs to or conventional bombs as a dress or it's just bad Why would that make people on the right so mad? What is that so this is my kind of theory on it is that if you you'll kind of notice World War II There's a long time ago at this point. Yeah generates this in norm You know you said the thing I love when you said that about how you could tell there's an infection because you touch it Yes, yes, yes, you tell some things infected there right yes And I could sit here all day long and talk about how we shouldn't have fought World War one and Which we shouldn't have fought That's a just generate no controversy. I could say this all day long and go through how Woodrow Wilson was completely wrong to get us involved in Yes, and this You know, I was bullshit. Yeah. Yeah. Nobody cares. This will not I will not hear anything on Twitter tomorrow I've that saying this I could talk about how Vietnam was a complete disaster or also lied into that war And how many people died in it Korea Iraq all the world war two is the one that is What's so weird about that is clearly the most important that we talked about so I sent there most important thing in your life is your marriage in your children Yes, so if I said to you Dave Smith. I think you have a shitty marriage You would be like Don't actually have a nice marriage. Yeah, that wouldn't like you wouldn't be mad about that You'd be like I don't think you really know I cuz you're not hiding anything right so like Well, so here's right well here's what it is right and like I want to be very clear just when I say this I'm If you're like trying to read between the lines here I'm not saying that the Holocaust didn't happen or something like that it did happen and Yes, those people are dead my family was involved in it was one of the worst things that's ever happened I agree but look World War two is the origin story of the American Empire That's when we really became the world empire and it's the justification for the entire empire It's why every single neo-con every single hawk goes back to World War two Anytime there's a war because that's what's used to justify every other war we stopped Hitler Okay, we'd all be speaking German if it wasn't for the American military so how dare you question the next thing This is why stom Hussein was Hitler Malose of which was Hitler Putin's Hitler. They're all Hitler. I can't tell you how many people I've heard And I've debated some of these people who defending Israel's attack on Gaza by going well We kill a lot of civilians in World War two You know so just like that as if Hamas are the Nazis and he's anything comparable But the thing is that So when you talk about World War two you're only allowed to have the official narrative on it and here it is We all know what it is right who are you Neville Chamberlain? You mean you don't want to go to war you want to appease as that's the only lesson of history that you're allowed to learn Is that a Peasement doesn't work presumably we should have started the war earlier? I guess is the story but every by the way you can never learn the lesson of history that sometimes like preemptive wars don't work Sometimes you know like ruthless power doesn't work maybe sometimes a Peasement would be better than that You know it's like there's only one you know and so that's the lesson by the way Same thing with Putin everybody who if you didn't support the war I know you got called this I watched you get called this you were never Chamberlain for not wanting to back you crane immediately in the war Right it's the only lesson in history now you can't look at World War two and say hey Maybe Danzig was the lesson maybe maybe war guarantee is where the lesson I'm not even saying they ought maybe not but Objectively speaking if we want to be honest about World War two World War two is the worst thing that ever happened in the history of the world. Yes by definition thing that ever happened more people killed the Holocaust happened in the middle of it tens of millions of people died and European conflict brutal conflict on all sides destroyed the greatest continent. Yes now the right exactly now Okay if you want you know they say winners of war's right the history and Man did the Nazis and Imperial Japan make it really easy because they were so evil They were like they were like caricatures of exactly you know and they really were now It's a little more complicated than that because Stalin's army wasn't like high-fiving everybody on the way in to J raped every woman in Germany right I mean it's like it there's a lot of you but any sane person if you look back at World War two and you recognize the worst thing that ever happened You would try to say how could we have avoided this exactly what could we have done to not make this happen? The lesson should be like oh my god We imposed Versailles on the Germans and insisted on humiliating them internationally and look at the backlash of this and then you know Whatever there's all this a lot of it comes down to entering World War one and World War two was a really Extension of that right but it's like the only lesson you're allowed to take away is this but you know I really liked the way you put it on Rogan and it was just kind of a quick aside But look it's just so evil on its face that I know human beings are amazing at doing mental gymnastics to justify anything I've been doing a lot of debates on the topic of Israel and I've been watching this firsthand You know it's like you could watch a videos every day on Twitter of babies You know like suffocating to death under building under rubble and like someone will justify that Someone will say well actually we need to do this because whatever all of Hamas must be destroyed Why exactly like why is it absolutely necessary? You're telling me Israel the fortress of the world can't just not drop the ball again You know what I mean like there's not some other answer other than this and of course America must fund it for reasons But it's like no actually that is just evil and and and the oldest is Un you to exhaust every single other option before doing it. It's just interesting It's like I've done a lot of evil things in my life And I really regretted I think all of us are capable of evil have never committed genocide or anything But I mean I've been pointlessly cruel or deceptive and you know and I'm ashamed of it So I'm not judging even Harry Truman for this, but it's like why can't why is That so offensive and the other question I haven't maybe you've got insight into this I don't know that month. I've read a lot about World War II. I'm not an expert but like the this worship of Churchill I Think is very odd. There's a lot about Churchill. I think that was impressive. It's a very gay fluid writer Had a kind of style that I like used tobacco which I love. I mean there's a lot about Churchill right that isn't a pro It's cool for sure but here the facts like he sold his country on a war Using the idea that we must defend the territorial integrity of Poland or other reason that was the main reason right Poland Okay, maybe that's a reason Then four years later he hands Poland to the Soviets After a bloodbath yes this country that we went to Four years later, he hands Poland to the Soviets. After a bloodbath. Yes, this country that we went to war on behalf of, I'm handing it to a worse master, a more totalitarian master, or at least as bad. Yeah, I mean, the only other one who, or one of the only other two who rival. Right, exactly. That's right. I guess you could say if Hitler had won the war, could he have then killed more people than stuff? I guess we'll never know. But yeah, still up there. Okay, so that's a huge problem. That's a huge problem. That's a huge problem. It's exactly debate. But clearly you don't care about Poland. If you just handed it to Stalin or clearly it didn't work, or something, there's a massive disconnect. That's the first fact. The second fact is he was rejected by his own voters right after the war. So they actually weren't still impressed by his leadership. And the third fact is that war destroyed Britain. And that country is a depressing husk right now. I go there a lot. Unfortunately, I don't want to go there. It's the most depressing place I can imagine. It's totally defeated in some deep spiritual sense. And it's embarrassing to go there. So you destroy your country on behalf of Poland. And then you hand it to Stalin. I don't, those are the bottom line facts about Churchill or a lot of other things to say about him, but those are the salient points. How could anybody think that's good? Well, you know, in a in Papi-cannon. Seriously, like you know, what I'm just saying, you know, Papi-cannon's book, Churchill Hitler and the unnecessary war, the unnecessary war is in quotes. Because that's not Papi-cannon saying it. It's a Churchill quote that Churchill after the war said it was the most avoidable unnecessary war afterward. He took Britain from being the most powerful nation in the world to being totally defeated. They lost that war as much as anybody else. But look at it now. By the way, there's so many like ripple effects of this too because they also, you know, the whole situation with Israel Palestine. This is also a result of the British Empire. Of course, right. And being driven out. And so there's so much to this. But why defend it? That's the way, look, I'm not even judging Churchill. I may have made similar decisions. Right. I've made so many bad decisions in my life. I'm not even judging. I'm just saying 80 years later when we can see clearly the aftermath. How could you possibly defend that? And why would you want to? And also I just, you know, like there's a reason, I mean, there's lots of reasons why America was so successful as a country. But part of the reason really was the brilliance of our founding fathers and the system that they created. I mean, that's a huge part of it. And there's like, you know, it's like when they George Washington's farewell address where he warns about entangling alliances. Yes. And there was something really profound that they saw there. And this, this idea and this is a real problem with like it's like, why would we even want Ukraine and NATO? Why do we want to make war guarantees for countries that we have neither the resources nor the political will to actually defend in the case of a war? But look, I mean, like first off, we're broke. We're $34 trillion in debt. We can't afford our own wars, let alone everybody else's. We're literally, it's so cartoonish. We're borrowing money to the, you know, it's like if you were like, if I was given my sister money and my cousin's money and all of them, but I'm putting it on a credit card. You know what I mean? Like I'm just, I don't have the money, but I'm such a great guy. I'm helping my whole family. Like no, you're not in a position to do this. But they're not even our family. Right? Right? I'm not even a family. I'm just helping some random guy. Literally some junkie you met at safety. Yes. Yes. That's a better analogy for Ukraine than my sister. Yes. And so like it's just totally absurd, but then also at the same time, like look, war's horrible. There's always some type of conflict going on in the world and it's awful, but like the question is like would you be willing or would you be willing to send your kids to go fight and die over between, you know, to determine whether, you know, the Don Bask region is ruled by Kiev or Moscow. Like was that important enough to you? Because to me is a very easy answer. Just no. I would not be. But would it be worth killing a million new crannians? Yeah. Right. Yes. But I'll put a flag in my bio and support my politicians printing money to send over them or I should say printing money to then buy from weapons, companies, weapons to then send over to them, a mix of weapons and cash or whatever. But yeah, I mean like so to me, it's like you mind though not referring to them as weapons companies, but defense manufacturers. I'm sorry. That's right. The defense department, the defense manufacturer, the intelligence community. That's my favorite one, the inside the community. They're all just like gardening with each other and stuff, you know. So you described yourself as a comic who likes to read. Yeah. But so I love. I asked you about comedy. So went and had dinner with Rogan last month and was not my world. I had no idea that Austin, Texas had become like the world capital of comedy. Yeah. He made it the world capital. So you described him as the Johnny, the modern Johnny Carson. 100%. So how does it work the system now? It's like, well, I mean, Rogan, so he was doing the podcast in LA for many years. When I first met him, he was living out in LA and he left, I think during the lockdown slash riots, you know, when Californians, you know, very well is falling apart. It's one of the great tragedies. It really is. Yeah, it's awful. And so if he decided to take it down to Austin where they had kind of like opened up and it was flourishing and Austin is, it's like, it's one of the last like great liberal cities in this country, you know, which is an end like I know a lot of people on the right who kind of have this attitude of like, well, screw them. They voted in these policies and all that. But I just think that is wrong. That is the wrong attitude to have you need liberal cities and to have a healthy country. You kind of need that. Yeah. As much as you need beautiful country, you know, liberal cities are all that we have. Well, of course, but functioning liberal cities. That's what I mean. Yeah, you need them to not be hellholes, which many of them have turned into. But so Rogan, it just started because there was something about, you know, just like the stars aligning, you know, in a very similar way to I heard you talk about, I think you were talking to me about how, look, there's something to the fact that say you get fired from Fox News. And it happens to be at this point where Elon Musk bought Twitter and everybody. And everyone's there and you're protected there. They're not going to ban you. And you know, when Bill O'Reilly got fired from Fox News, there was nothing like that. No, that's totally right. You go to a relevance that Rogan happened to kind of like come up as this internet world was exploding. And he's just such an interesting guy, such a genuine guy that his podcast just took off. And he became kind of like in this situation where he, anybody who kind of comes on, or if you come on and you do well, you know, it's just like the biggest opportunity. And he's such a genuinely like generous person that I think he loves that. I think that's his favorite thing of all of that. Out of owning the comedy club, the podcast, like everything he does, I see it in him. What he really loves, what really makes him happy is that he gets to kind of bring all of his guys with him. And you know, I know a lot of friends who Joe has changed their lives, you know, like he's been, it's the Johnny Carson thing. I remember Jerry Seinfeld hearing him. I don't know him, but hearing him described doing Carson. Oh, yeah. He said it was, he said it was an experience like having kids where you go in one person and come out another person. You know what I mean, which is really is the experience of that. Particularly that first kid because you literally like, it's like you and your wife go to a hospital as a couple. And then you leave that hospital as like, wow, we're mommy and dad. And it's really weird feeling. You don't get so pissed on your wife and you come out obsessed with the baby. Yeah. And then your wife's like hobbling in the background. And you're like, yeah, I'm kidding. But anyway, but it's, but it's this amazing, you know, it's like, you know, it's like you're on drugs basically like you're high when you first come out with a new baby. You kind of can't believe it. And you also, you don't know what you're doing with the first one, you know, and you figure it out. But anyway, he said Carson was like that, like you go in a nobody. And then you come out and you're a somebody and it's kind of like that with Rogan, like it's just, and it's, there's all these similar dynamics like he'll kind of go, you know, like he'll go like two hours and 15 minutes with some people. And then he'll go like three and a half hours sometimes if you really likes the conversation. And you never know. As you know, when you're in there, you have no idea how long you actually went or whatever. But it's, um, and that like my experience with him was he heard me on a mutual friend of ours, Ari Shafir's podcast. I love also hilarious. That guy's telling it. He's so funny. He's like, and also just a great person and an insane person. But one of the best people I've ever known, um, and so I was on his podcast and Rogan heard it. And he goes, I think this guy's awesome. I want to have him on. And it was just like that. Like he loved what I was saying. So he's like, oh, I want to make this guy like successful. And it's just like amazing. And what happened to your life? Well, I started making money. So that was, that was pretty nice. So it was that, it was kind of that simple. It was, I mean, it was like, it wasn't exactly just that, but immediately the, like I was already doing my podcast. And then immediately as soon as the first one with Rogan was out, my numbers like shot up, like all of a sudden I had a big audience. I went from having a tiny little audience like having a big audience. And then every, you know, I've done it a lot of times. Every time you do it, your numbers shoot up, your numbers shoot up. And so like, that's just unbelievable. And you know, one of the things about Rogan is, um, and I, I gotta say, I never really mean this. I think you have this quality too. And I kind of knew this about you. Like I've watched you for many years at this point. I watched you. I mean a little bit when you were on Crossfire, but I watched you're so, you're showing MSNBC a lot. And then I always watched you. You're the only one. The MSNBC one that I've been trying to be sure is not truly Fox. That's not true at all for Fox, but you might be right about MSNBC. First was me. I was, I had MSNBC NBC on all day long, um, for whatever reason. I kind of just like pissed me off for most of the time, but also getting off on a tangent. MSNBC was a very different thing back there. It was so that it's so night and day today. I mean, you just can't even, it was so much smarter and more thoughtful. There was still a lot of propaganda to it. There was still a lot of bullshit. Um, I think you've gotten better over the years. Yeah. But as a network, they got so much worse. I mean, like, but morning Joe used to be like, um, like you and Pat Buchanan and Rachel Matt, uh, Dylan Radigan even who was kind of like, I kind of liked him. Yeah. Well, had something to say sometimes that you like, okay, that's kind of, and I mean, it's become, but it like every single host has the same opinions as the last hour. For size, but there's not one error. No, occasionally they'll be the guy like, um, what's his name? I'm blanking on his name. We just got count because he was pro Palestinian. Oh, exactly. So occasionally you'll have one guy who has a different opinion and then, oh, he's out pretty quickly. favorite part of MSNBC is all the black people on the air have exactly the same opinions. Yeah. Yeah. It's the point of diversity of everyone went to Princeton and is a neoliberal. Well, there's nothing, there's nothing more, they could get some rappers on MSNBC. Well, they would never be allowed. Right. Right. Cause, but there's something about, um, like, being ideologically possessed. That's very unpleasant. You know what I mean? And there's something, one of the things that was great about your show on Fox News is that like, you would on many key issues of completely different opinion than everybody else at Fox News. Oh, yeah. And it'd be kind of crazy to watch the whole news day, not that I watch the whole news day, but I knew what their guys take. And everybody is like, yeah, we got to go attack, uh, you know, Assad, cause he just gassed his own people. So, and then like, you would like, come on at eight p.m. and by the way, I remember, cause I was doing this show with SE Cup at the time. I worked for CNN very briefly as like a contributor. And I remember having, it was the first week after the gas attack. Yeah. Yeah. This was poison casket's his own people. But now this is before the OPCW whistleblower has come out and said, so I didn't like have any like, evidence that this didn't have. Well, I mean, you just look at it and you go, okay, so you're telling me that this is we're in 2018 out to 2017, 2018. Assad has been fighting a civil war since 2012 fighting for his survival, fighting to not go out like Gaddafi, like to not get sodomized to death. Donald Trump announces that we're pulling it, he announces that you won. You're going to live. You're not going to be sodomized to death by a mile, right? Okay. And then Assad decides a week and a half later, I'm going to do the one thing that would turn international opinion around to keep me at risk of being sodomized. It's like right away on the face of it. Like no, I don't think so. And like the illnesses on you, but anyway, but everyone else at Fox News the whole day would be saying that and then you'd have something different to say. Yeah. There's something incredibly boring about someone. You just tell me, don't even tell me the name, but it's an MSNBC host, someone who hosts the show that you could pick the name in your head. And I'll tell you their opinion on everything. Climate change. It's an existential crisis. And we have to go, you know, racism, well, we have to confront systemic racism. We have to, we have to conversation about race. Really, like real conversation. I would say, I'd love to. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. I don't think you want that. And it's just so boring. So boring. Anyway, where I was getting. Can I just also say soul destroying? Yeah. What you were saying earlier, I thought was so right on about repeating lies is such an an offense against you. Like where's your self-respect? Have you no dignity? Like are you just like an animal who can be hit with a shock collar and forced to perform tricks? Like, well, and there's something, dude, there's something. It's like a universal law where you kind of like the way I think Jordan Peterson said it was like, you get to choose your suffering. You don't get to choose no suffering. Exactly. You get to choose your suffering. And this is true across everything. Like, you could sit down and have a fat piece of cheesecake or you could jump on the treadmill. The cheesecake feels awesome. The treadmill fucking sucks. Yes, you know what I mean? Yes. But you're paying a price. You're just kind of choosing. And by not saying you should never sit back and have cheesecake. Like sometimes you got to do that. But it's like you're choosing your suffering. Yeah. And there's this choice where I'm going to choose to suffer up front now so that I have some benefit later. And it's always kind of that dynamic. And when you lie to yourself, it's like, okay, you're choosing this kind of short term. Yeah. You know, this lie will have whatever positive effects that will happen. This person might believe I'm a little bit cooler than I really am or whatever. But there's a long term. There's never not a cost. You can never get away from that without paying some type of price. So degrading. And that's the price. So degrading. Like how could and it's interesting and all the people with self-respect have are gone. They've been purged. Yeah. But then there's also, okay, so part of that price too. And this is what I was getting at, which the thing that you and Rogan have in common is that so many of those hosts. And I don't know all of them. You know, I've done a lot of shows at Fox News, met a lot of people over there. And I did a lot of shows at CNN when I was working there. And so I met a lot of those guys. I've never, I was one time in the MSNBC studios and just met a few of the people there. But they're like, so many of them are totally phony. Like they're just not. I mean, I've had things where like I've gone and grabbed beers with people after like a show at Fox News, like after doing Kennedy or doing God's World or something like that. At one time there was a Green Beret, I won't name him, but he was a Green Beret who served a couple tours in Afghanistan. And he was on, when we were on the show, he was talking about, you know, how supporting the surge, I think I can't remember those years ago. I think it was Trump's first surge. And he was like, and then we go out for beers afterward. And he was just, he was like, listen, there is no army over there that we've been building up. There's nothing. They'll fold in a day. And he goes, let me tell you, I need to tell me about like the, you know, he goes, we would, we would give them, you know, like some machine guns. We'd go out on a mission, come back. They used them to rob everybody in the village. There's no Afghan army that we're building up. The Taliban will run right through them. And they're like, oh, well, why didn't you just tell everybody that? You know what I mean? Like why did you totally lie when we were on TV? And it's just, there's a lot of people who do that. And you can smell that. You can smell that on them though. Like even if you don't know that over time, people kind of know. Like, oh, these guys are, and there is something having watched you for a long time. And now having met you. And this is Joe Rogan too. You are exactly the same person off camera that you are. I hope so. And there's no, now with both of you, there might be something you'd say off camera that you wouldn't say on camera. But there's nothing you're saying, there's nothing you're saying on camera that you don't believe. I would never do that. And so that's like, I think that is, you don't have to say everything you think you cannot lie. Right. Right. Exactly. I think you should actually. Because I have a lot of dumb opinions too. Or that just rooted in meanness or irritation or mocking people's appearances, which I have a weakness for. Don't you don't do that if I know. I'm going to keep doing that. I get your point, but I'm not having no intention of stopping that. But there is something that I think is part of what I love so much about Joe. And I think part of why he has blown up and been so successful is that, you know, because people ask me all the time, be like, what's Joe Rogan like? Are we like, you already know? You already know what he's like. And you know this because you went in hung out. Yeah, exactly that guy. Totally. Exactly the same guy. You know what I like. I love that that works. I love I'm thrilled by his success and yes, the money too. Not that interested in money, but I understand that like unless something is a real business that won't continue. And so I love how successful he's been because it means it's just inspiration to everyone else. Yes. If you're an honest person, you can actually make a good living being an honest person. How great is that? Yeah. Well, that's, that's awesome. No, that's right. And that is the, and I don't like, I'm not the biggest fan, but that is the stuff where I am round was really correct about that. Oh, I agree. The idea that like, no, like kind of there is this connection between like, which she would call selfishness, which I don't think is the right word for. No, but like, but there is something between like like success and the humans are weird psychological creatures. Sometimes you can have the desire to not succeed to not outshine somebody else. Exactly. And, but actually you're doing a much better thing if you like succeed, if you're great at something and then you're like an inspiration to others to be. Well, sure. It all gets rich because he's brave and honest. How is that bad? Yeah. No, I mean, you see all these other people getting rich because they're craving and dishonest. And that's very demoralizing actually. And also, I mean, there's so, there's so many things to be down about in our country, particularly right now. Like our country is not in a very good place. Oh, it's like, I, you know, I'm like, I got a wife and two little kids and I put on a very strong face for them. Like in front of them, I'm never like worried about anything. No matter what it is. And that's just the way it's like, I don't buy gold in front of your wife. Yeah. That's secret. She sees the bars. But the point is that, but I'm there, but that, you know, the truth is like between me and you and the millions of people on the internet, like I'm terrified about the future of our country. I'm very, very concerned about it. And there's a lot of like, you know, look, I mean, obviously like we're in, we're in $34 trillion of debt. We can never stop fighting these wars. We've turned world opinion completely against us. We have the worst political and social and racial divides of my lifetime. Yeah. The culture is more insane than any time in my lifetime. I mean, the fact that we're debating over whether five year old boys can transition to be girl. The fact that that's even a real thing. And it's not a joke that wouldn't work because everyone goes, that's too absurd to be funny. You know what I mean? Like, I mean, that's just like a sign in itself. But there is also something else going on. And it's much bigger than me. And I don't understand it. I don't pretend to understand it. But we are living through some type of major paradigm shift and where lies are being exposed, people are being exposed more than ever. And honesty and integrity are being rewarded in certain ways. And that's like I kind of have to cling on to that because there's so much to be, you know, to feel despair over. But there's something really positive about that. I couldn't agree more. Propaganda is not working the same way it was. Do you find, I just, I've had this conversation. I just, I ask everyone I have done with this question, which is do you find in the midst of all of this sadness and chaos and decline, rapid decline that your personal relationships are deeper and more fulfilling? Oh, yeah, totally. I mean, for me, you do feel that. Oh, yeah. I mean, there's no question about it for me. I mean, I've like, I have little kids. I've, my oldest is five. So I've just in the last few years, you know, started like having kids. So yes, and I have great friends. And through this weird internet world where we are, I've kind of cultivated like a really great audience of a lot of really cool people. Yes. And yeah, I think that there's, you know, so you think you're relating to people in a deeper way than you did say five or six, 10 years ago. I think 100%. Yes. It's been, it's been a big period for me kind of growing up. You know, I had a very like prolonged adolescence kind of. I was a stand up comedian. Yes. Living a degenerate life for many years. And then I settled down and got married and had kids. So that's just aside from the craziness of the world. I think whenever you go through that, you're just living in a better way. How blessed are you though? Very, very, very, very. Because that's like your, I mean, that's your fortress against in that protection for everything else. Exactly. Because it's, well, it's, and it's just, you know, it's, it's whatever your, you know, this is the thing that was kind of, I know you sent me when I tweeted something about this, but where like when you don't have God, whatever is next highest in line becomes in fact, you're God. And there is something about, um, I did not have God or family, my own family, you know, I had family members who I love, but I know my own family. And my whole life, I kind of like, I was like a 90s kid. I grew up in, I was born in 1983. I grew up in the 90s. None of us, nobody I knew was religious. Yes. And we did not have, um, you know, like all of the traditions that many previous generations grew up with, whether like God, country, shivol, these things, you wear this uncomfortable outfit here, because that's what's expected. You know, around other people when you go to church, you know, you strap on these boots. It was like, no, we just grew up in blue jeans and sneakers. And the point of life was kind of like to get through school, to go play, you know what I mean? When you were, when I was a teenager, it was like to like smoke pot or, you know, like try to get laid or something. You know what I mean? Like it was all just kind of like revolved around what's fun. And it wasn't until I got married. And when we had my first kid and I found God, also at that same time, that I'd been living a totally different life where my life is kind of centered around this purpose, that there's meaning to it. And it's not really about me. And whether I'm having fun, like I still like to have fun sometimes. But it's like, what that's really not that important. Like what's really important is that like, I'm being a great husband to my wife. I'm being a great father to my kids. And ironically, some degree, you just find much deeper happiness when you're not living just for having been living. No, we were talking about this off camera. I really wish this had been on camera because it was so interesting when you were saying but you didn't grow up in a conventional, transparent household. No, right. No, my parents got divorced when I was three. That's young. Yeah. She grew up in a single parent household. But you seem to have kind of figured out the formula so well. And I said, well, how did you know that? How did you? Well, I mean, it's a mix of a few things. My mother was a really great mother. So we only had one parent, but I did have a really good parent. And she did instill a lot of like good values in me. And I don't mean if that kind of contradicts what I just said before. Like she did instill good values in me. You know, we didn't have kind of like, you know, God or anything like that. And it was something that was just instinctually in me when I first had kids that I just wanted to give them that. And the other major factor there is that my wife is just like the best person I've ever met. And she was, I got very lucky again and just met a really great girl. And that is, there is nothing better than being in a great marriage. And I would imagine I've never experienced it, but nothing worse than being in our real family. Being to death. Yeah. The people I know who's like, I've known people like that. And like to the really crazy check. They can't even think straight because they're an agony all the time. Yeah. You know, but it's just, it's just interesting. I think maybe I'm very distressed by the number of kids growing up in single parent households. I grew up in a single parent household when I was a kid. So I'm not judging anybody. Yeah. But it's in retrospect, I think, well, maybe if you grew up that way as you did and I did, you don't take things for granted. And you're more, you're more intentional in the way you structure your own family. Because you said to me, off air, you're like, I wanted this. Yeah. And I also just have the attitude that like, well, I think that, and I blame the baby boomers for almost all of our problems. I do too. And I don't, I don't obviously when you speak about a group that big, I'm painting with a broad record of exceptions to this role. And I, you know, I love my mother very much and she's a good person. But as a generation, they just ruined everything. They're totally selfish, completely. So Jeff Diced who I love this guy is so brilliant. But he, he said he gave a speech about it and he was going through the things of, like, all of the slogans of the baby boomers and how self-serving they all were. Like it was like, don't trust anyone over 30 until they got into their 30s. Or you know, and then it was like, and then like you watch it all the way through, like, COVID. It's like, we got to do everything we can to protect the, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, you know, just like, yes, I went for don't trust anyone over 30, it's being like screw your childhood. I don't want to get this. Oh, keep your hands off my Medicare, by the way. You know, like, all everything is just, and um, but one of the major things that they changed about the culture was like normalizing casual divorce. Yeah. As if that should just kind of be an option. Like, I'm just not feeling it anymore. So like, we can get divorced. And like, there's no sense of like, no, no, no, no. Like look, I'm there are, except there are cases where there's no time back. or something like that. But generally speaking, they're like, you took an oath before God, and everyone came up, and then they brought children into this world. That is your obligation. I know. And that's like my attitude toward marriage, is that it's like, listen, me and my wife, we've faced some hurdles in our marriage, things in the outside world that have happened. Of course. And I think we've done a very good job of them. We've had serious issue. Like we have major health concerns with one of our kids. And got through that. We've had been through lockdowns and been through, you know, we've got, and there's more ahead. There's a lot more ahead. But one thing that is for certain is that that's it. Yeah. It's us for the rest of this. Like this is we're living this life together now. And to me, that's what being married is. Well, if you're not that, you're not really married. If you're trapped, you'll make do, by the way. That sounds grim and it's not grim. I've never, I mean, I have the same kind of marriage. I've had a happy marriage for 33 years. One of the reasons is that this is what we're doing. Yeah. That's right. I grew up with divorce. I remember as a child, my brother, my only brother feels that we would talk about this where our kids like, fuck adults, like fuck them. Having kids and then getting divorced, you can go find yourself in France. Fuck you. I knew, and I knew people in my, I listened in my parents generation. There were so many people like that. So many people I know. Yeah. And totally fucked up the kids and did it. Cause like, right. Like I gotta be happy as if somehow that's a noble thing of like I gotta be happy. But they'd never turned out happy. No, cause you have, cause, cause the key to real happiness, I mean, there's different ways to measure happiness or like whatever. Again, like, you know, there's someone training for a marathon and there's someone sitting having a bag of potato chips. And in the moment, the guy having the bag of potato chips might be happier than the guy training for the marathon. But like, ultimately, who's gonna feel better about themselves is gonna be, you know what I mean? So like, there's, but you have all the time. You have all the time. You have obligations and responsibilities. And if you don't fulfill those, you're not gonna find a long time. You also take the long view. Like the name of hood I grew up in had all kinds of rich divorced moms and every one of them was crazy and unhappy, every single one of them. And you wonder where that I thought in the year of sunset, where are they now? You know what I mean? Living in some condo and Scottsdale with Parkinson's Unvisited by their kids. Like it, you'd get old and die in the end. And when you do, I'm really hope I'm surrounded by all my girls and my son and like, oh, he was such a good guy. Yeah, that's all that matters. That's how I feel about it. You know what I mean? And they like talk about you a dinner when you're gone. Oh, I miss him. You don't want people, I've seen people die who mistreated their children. I've lived it actually. It's like, pfft, fuck that person. You know what I mean? I don't want that. And also look, I mean, that kind of, the absence of having that feeling or the baby boomers kind of not feeling that way. It's kind of like, I mean, look what it's, what it's led to. I mean, you know what I mean? It's very easy for, you know, say popular conservative pundits to kind of dunk on college kids and stuff like that. Which is like fun. I've enjoyed videos of where, you know, like Ben Shapiro is like destroying 19 year old and some college campus. And you know, it's like, you know, she's like, enjoyed videos of where you know like Ben Shapiro is like destroying 19 year old in some college campus and you know it's like a you know he's she's like you know some some trans kid or something like that and is like well I'm you know I was born a boy but why can't I live as a woman and he's like why can't you live as a cat and it's like ah it's like oh the intellectual prowess of destroying this and like yes okay that is stupid that kid wasn't idiot but you also kind of like peel a little bit deeper and you're like so what was this kid's situation really because you're talking to a 19 year old you know what I mean and let me guess came from a broken home I'm trying not to pass in the table here yeah I agree with you so strongly was medicated I bet you know like as a young girl the barrel of a grim life yes has no conceivable path toward like independence and thought what you have what you grew up with which is that's all that really you're in charge of the society by the way you're in charge of the study of influence in the society you're in the privileged class there's no shame in that by the way yes but it does carry with it the obligation to see that the next generation as a decent shot and you haven't done that you've wasted it all in foreign adventurism and your stupid economic ideas and this is the result and you will take no responsibility for this old stupid kids no your job is to create another generation of smart kids and then they wise kids and they mock them they're like oh maybe maybe if you don't have your avocado toast and your latte is then you'd be able to buy a house or something and you're like look okay it is true they're making me mad I totally agree it's it's true that this generation is in many ways softer and more privileged and part of that's because they they grew up with technological wealth that previous generations never had it's also partly because their parents never instilled like values in them to care about kind of more than just avocado toast but the fact is that baby boomers could go to college and get a summer job and pay for their college okay and then if they didn't go to college they could go to high school and then go wait online and get a job where you could support a wife and kids off of that job this might you know like and that was the way of the world previously that my grandfather worked in factories his whole life and his wife didn't work and that was that and he owned a house he sent kids to college he had two cars like they had a nice life and these kids today come out with six figures of debt and are getting a job at you know Starbucks and houses are going for like 600 grand for you know what I mean for that same humble house that my my grandfather had and and the baby boomers all got rich by the value of their house just going on in green and never and it seems like not a one of them ever went hey but aren't we kind of like pulling up the ladder on the helicopter here like if my house is like skyrocketing in value that's nice for me I got a he lock and I got like some money coming in now that I can invest in the market that's going up and make this income coming in but what about the next generation how are they ever going to buy a house they don't care like no one seemed to care about they don't care and I I I'm trying not to interrupt your wonderful description with amends and hosanna's but I just I so strongly agree with what you're saying and I have a bunch of kids they're all actually thriving I would say inside they're all good people clear thinking they love each other most important but I'm around a lot of college age kids like a lot like way more than most people my age I'm 54 and I don't think they're soft at all I'm not sucking my kids I mean their friends or you know I'm around it a lot they're hard edge actually right they know how I mean they're they may be wrong they may be confused but they're they're actually pretty tough in a way and they're pretty angry and they sort of get what's going on and I have deep sympathy for them deep deep deep they've been completely screwed over by the people and they don't any power even if you're a 19-year-old Columbia kid like I may not agree with your slogans or down with white people whatever I want of course I hate that I'm my person but I do sort of like think whose fault is that it's the people who run everything it's your your stupid boomer parents yeah it's the administrators at the school it's our politicians I mean I'm sort of blame society for the crimes of young people but actually society does deserve the blame and the leaders of the society deserve the blame yeah 100% that's not a liberal perspective that's a conservative perspective I care about the next generation that's a if you don't care about how your grandchildren are gonna live here how are you conservative what are you conserving you're not at all you're just a freaking grifter shut up right and like what has and this is why you know when uh we when you were on my podcast we set the uh the internet on fire by uh because I trashed Bill Buckley I mean like I completely agree you're not allowed to have that I said he was one of the great villains of the 20th century that he was a gatekeeper well sure I mean people sorry they were like well to that stolid and now say tongue and I'm like okay fine he was third but the point I have to say the point is okay there were the who are like five ahead of them okay fine but he was but I think part of this is that you know a lot of the kind of um conservatism ink people who who criticized uh us for saying that and they're kind of like well how would you you know this was the guy who was the most prominent member of the conservative movement and it's like okay and so like what exactly was conserved in his movement what like just expect was it the constitution was it what classical liberal values was it religion was it tradition was it the definition of a woman like what exactly was the big conservative in here I mean like like I'll give you something we still we still have some gun rights okay you know like I don't know but like you lost everything you lost the United States of America and part of the reason a major reason why is because the whole national review um like takeover of the conservative movement was to drive out all of the all of the non-interventionists I watch the news racist every whole time happened and then weird yeah I don't even have I'm holding back um no it's like I will you know I was adjacent to that world my entire life and I and I watched it um happen and you know I knew Bill Buckley and he was perfectly nice to me you know did hate him or anything but very charming and very smart I guess playing the wasp you know it was all opposed it was completely fake and the only people who sort of bought it or people didn't know any better and that was like upper class or some fake accent weird homo rotic stuff and it was like all just kind of sad actually I thought I thought that was always my view of it because it was he was posing um but you know I think you had good qualities I love sailing so I kind of you know I'm with them on that um but in the end you judge the tree by its fruits and the fruits are just absolutely rotten and so I think it's important to be honest about that well I think the fruits were a transformation of the right wing in America from being the old right um which was really I mean they were fairly isolationist um but certainly non-interventionist I mean like you know Robert Taft was the one who didn't want us to be a NATO I mean this was like the old and they were big on like um immigration controls sound money and not getting involved in wars these were the people who opposed were one in world war two they didn't want American involvement in these wars right and this the the effect of Bill Buckley was to transform what became the conservative movement into being cold warriors that what we do is we go everywhere around the world looking for a war to fight so in other words the people who really loved America not the idea but the physical reality of America and her people the people who actually live here and their homes and their little towns and their dumb little jobs and all this stuff that makes up a civilization at scale the people who cared about that somehow became anti-American and the people who would lecture about how America is an idea and it doesn't really matter who lives here what those people are for America I mean it's like a complete inversion of reality actually and so again it's nothing personally against Bill Buckley who I you know played a mean harpsichord but um sorry not to be kidding but uh you know but like that's a lie yeah the people who care about actual America are the people who side I'm on and I care about actual America not because I'm a good person I'm really not especially good person because I got a lot of children who live here yeah that's what I care about yeah and like because it's look at this this was a really great country and I mean there are still a lot of great things about it but it's deteriorating and why you know why should we before that and you know one of the crazy things about America is that there is kind of this uh this idea that we are the United States of America and have been this whole time whereas there's really been like several revolutions in the country and and you know what look I mean I think the George W. Bush years the war on terrorism was a revolution of sorts in the country that's we are I grew up a kid in the 90s we are not the same country as we were in the 1990s in the pre war on terror there what before the Patriot Act and the Department of Homeland Security and the TSA I mean the experience at an airport is a different thing we are a different country than we were before that I think covid has changed everything you know that but even before that I mean you know as you've talked about a lot like the in the wake of world war to the creation of the CIA this was a revolution in the country where it's it changed who's running the government and we think of the position of president of the United States of America being the same position that like you know that would draw Wilson occupied or something like that and it's not it's a totally different position Donald Trump did not have the same job FDR had there were very very different you know and so there is when people say oh you love America it's like yes I love this country I don't like the direction the government's going on I don't care who you agree and the bush thing I have to say I could feel it at the very beginning I knew him before he became president I did not want to vote for him and didn't I just didn't vote I did vote for the second time because you always get caught up in the other guy and I knew Kerry and I just thought Kerry was not impressive but also I voted for for Bush but I see Bush still I had a meal with him not that long ago and talk about a defeated sad guy actually bitter insecure you know given to lecturing everyone around him about what a great president he was and I thought you know that really is no but that's the fruit of the tree right of right if you've had a successful successful life if you've done the things that you you know if you've fulfilled your obligation and done the right thing you're not lecturing people about what a great person you are right at all are you no I don't know that's failure and like I mean just he knows I mean you know to try to spin the George W Bush years as anything other than like an absolute failure I mean you know dude you celebrated mission accomplished and then we stayed in the war for 20 years you know just a disaster and left the country well and I mean look though not only was it all completely unnecessary I mean like we had like the special ops response to al Qaeda cells in Afghanistan and late 2001 totally justified that we had an opportunity to trap also I've been logging in to our board late 2001 and they I believe intentionally let him go so they could continue these wars but fighting the decision do you think do you think that's what happened yeah yeah and there's a highly recommend to any but a Scott Horton wrote a book called Enough Already Which is like a masterpiece history of all the terror wars and it seems seems overwhelmingly likely that they already had their eye on Iraq and that they knew that if they captured Osama bin Laden it'd be very difficult to sell another war because we got the guy if that's really true I mean that's that's unspeakably evil yeah well look it was a it was you know you can read like through the details of it but there were a bunch of they knew he was in Torah and they were requesting a record and they were and they didn't give it to him you know like it's it certainly seems to be what it looks like and then it was a decision that we're going to Kabul then it was a decision that we're gonna overthrow the Taliban and fight a regime change war there and then go fight the regime change war in Iraq and the I mean look the like you said judge them by their fruit I mean the the results of George W. Bush's wars were there were trillions of dollars wasted hundreds of thousands of people in these countries died and our bravest young men blowing their brains out by the tens of thousands those are the tangible results of what happened and it's not even like we sacrificed that so that these countries are much better places to live they're actually worse than they were much worse yeah so there you go you know so great administration okay so let me end on this question because that's so depressing what you just said because it's true yeah it is true and no one was ever punished for it and in fact rewarded they were all rewarded for it name the three things that give you hope outside of your own family in America right now okay so well the first one was kind of what I was touching on before that there is this there is like a seismic shift in the way people are being exposed the part of the reason and I know you've you've talked about this a lot and I think explained it very well but what you're seeing out of the establishment what what you see out of MSNBC when they talk about Donald Trump or when they talk about you for that matter is not a ruling class that is confident that they have power no they are they are like you know a cockroach that's trapped you know what I mean that's better yeah yeah you know like and there's a reason for that and there's a reason why they're so hysterical and it's because for the first time in certainly in my lifetime and wait well beyond that the um the monopoly over the control of information has truly been broken and that you watch this during covid where I mean like you and Joe Rogan had a huge impact on the nation during covid because you were like the two biggest people with the biggest audiences completely exposing how insane the whole narrative was and how insane all of the the covid restrictions were and eventually it got to a point where people just weren't taking it anymore they weren't listening to fauci like we never had anything like that before we never had like someone like Joe Rogan or someone like you doing this show where you know like in the run up to say in 2002 the run up to the war in Iraq there was just no one like that who was like blowing the whistle with tens of millions of people listening to them and explaining how this is all lies we have that now and they're freaking out about that and this is really why all the attempts at tech censorship happened since 2016 because they recognize that like oh oh Donald Trump can tweet his way to the white house he doesn't have to go through us as we better control twitter and you know youtube and facebook and all of these at google and all of this and even in their attempts to control it it's net they've never been as good as they were at controlling when there were just three network that's right a few big newspapers and now i think Elon Musk really threw a wrench in their plans by buying twitter and so that so i'm very encouraged about that i'm very encouraged about the fact that you know their people are kind of have access to the truth in a way that they never did before i think that i think ideas are powerful and i think that all governments rely on propaganda that doesn't work without that and there's something in that that's really encouraging in a way it's like oh they have to convince us huge before they can just do it you know like every okay there's two things that are seemingly contradictory but they're not number one democracy is an illusion it doesn't really exist yes you don't really ever have democracy is you know oh we get to vote presidential election like even assuming all the votes are counted in the right way or something like that it's like yeah you get to vote when these two parties these private entities decide who the candidate is and then you can pick between the two of them you know what i mean that's not really democracy but in another sense there's always democracy and every nation no matter how whether they have free and fair elections or not there's always like that there has to at least be tacit acceptance by the people of course and if there's not you know if there's five hundred thousand people out in the streets screaming at a dictator about how they want policy x that dictator is like you know i've been considering it and we will be implementing policy x you know what i mean like it's because at the end of the day there's way more of you than there are totally right and so when you can spread ideas we have a fighting shot i think um so that's very encouraging to me i think there's also been um a huge move away from u.s. hegemony internationally which is both very scary um but is also i think necessary i think that the american america spiraling is a country i think started with us getting off of the gold standard once government could print as much money as they want to they make people rich for just trading in paper being politically connected and you're not earning anything to become rich and it's devastating yes and then i think the unipolar moment was the worst thing that ever happened i totally agree right you need counterbalance winning is often losing right and so you need there it i don't i want to see it happen in the best way possible um i think it it it's very bad in some ways for our country if we're not the world reserve currency anymore but it's ultimately the solution like it's no good of us being the the fact that we can just export paper and then maintain our standard of living isn't the right way i hope it's a smooth transition but like i do think there's something positive in the fact that that's all changing um so i i think all of those things make me have i don't know did i hit three yeah you did and let me just just as you fall up on one losing our privilege our unique privilege as the holder of the world's reserve currency i mean i it's going to happen of course it's a progress the crane war accelerated it yes but i haven't looked at the upside of that at all and i think it's inevitable so it would be nice to know what the upside is well i mean if you think about look all the stuff that so we we got this privilege after world war two yeah right with a bread and wood agreement um and a lot of the stuff where you talk about our soul as a country being destroyed it happened in large part as a result of that yes because we didn't have to earn our place in the world anymore we could just export paper right and of course we immediately started cheating and this is why nixon took us off the gold standard it's not that you know nixon went off the gold standard it's that the French called as bluff we were saying will exchange dollars for thirty five dollars and now it's they went okay we'll take our gold and we're like oh wait i'm sorry what was that and they were like no no i just saw you did this whole like you you had this whole space program and you fought a war in vietnam and you just started all these entitlement programs you know it doesn't seem like you've been printing a lot of money i think we'll take our gold and then nixon was like let's just want to talk our guns the US dollar it's like we're giving me we had a contract that they were like live up to your end of the contract it's a but once we were once there was no more pretense then we could just print money like crazy yeah then you have everybody in wall street getting rich in the eighties you have the tech boom in the nine yeah this is all and so i'm just saying i think that i don't know that it's been great for our country to be the world is our currency i think it's been great for the military industrial complex i think it's been great for wall street i don't think it's been good for our soul and so if i handed you a billion dollars on earn do you think it would improve your life no i think it would probably destroy my life or you know because you actually start thinking that through so then i go like okay so all right fine so initially okay i could buy a bunch of cool stuff that's great we all know that's not really what matters anyway no they don't for a moment you know feel really no distract you for sure right and then it's like okay so what am i going to do for my family now like my obviously my my kids my wife are my responsibility but then like okay what i got a brother i got a sister i guess i got a hand them a bunch of money too you know my brother's like just coming out of grad school it's like i'm gonna hand him a huge and just take away all of his drive to like go make it on his own now am i gonna give him nothing and be a brother who has a billion dollars and gives him nothing i mean that's not an option either i don't know this thing is get like way more complicated very quickly where you're like no actually that's not the right answer and also it's not as if i have like the respect from my family now like oh my god you're taking care of all of us you were handed a billion dollars you didn't earn anything you didn't create anything it's like no that's not no longer the man in your house yeah you don't actually want that i want to have a nice house because i work to get my family a nice house you know so yeah no i wouldn't want that i don't know how i don't know you're one of the rare people i just share with all the same instincts so yeah i don't know how that happened but um thank you that was i love that dude thank you so much i really really enjoyed being out here i mean to Dave Smith thanks they like worship power they grew up wanting to be part of the club and the only effect you know Teddy Roosevelt right there he he was like an actual populace because he grew up in that world and he's like actually you all kind of suck and there's nothing that you have that i want you know what i mean right i'd rather be in north Dakota hunting and uh that was his superbar and i have to say Trump has some of that