The Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast my night All day! How did you get started with all this? I didn't come into this world the way everybody else does I don't think I used to think that everybody had the similar experience but Like if I asked you what was your first memory in life What was your... I don't think I know My first memory was almost like when you're dreaming and you're falling And you hit the bottom and you wake up That was my first memory but I didn't wake up here I was inside my mother's womb And I was about maybe six months inside the womb And I'm like, okay, don't forget I'm here, okay, okay Don't forget, don't forget, don't forget, don't forget You go to sleep, wake up again Now something's moving in front of you And you're like, oh, that's my friend But I had a different name for it I didn't know it was my hand But I knew I had a title for it Go back to sleep, all of those things Then ultimately you get ready to come out I remember all of that You remember coming out? Remember being compressed, you know, and there's... You want a panic but there's... you have flooded with Like some serotonin and dopamine to where you feel relaxed You go right back to sleep, you remember being born I remember being circumcised, I remember The whole nine and the proof of it was when my wife, Mira, that she just met When she was six months pregnant with my son, Karen I wanted to prove to her what I was talking about So I put a light on her stomach every day at six o'clock at night And I would move that light back and forth I put a song on, for a week straight On Saturday, after a week, I didn't put the light there And I didn't do the music And he pushed up on her stomach And then when I put the light there, he started following the light And for the next two months, we did this every night And he would go all the way around her belly Back and forth, always pushing on it You know, I didn't understand at the time That maybe I've interfered with the development process And maybe he's wrapped the cord around his neck I shouldn't have done all of this, but he came out wonderful and fine And this little boy, first thing he wanted to do is see light He loved lights from that early stage And I can ask him the square root of two, the square root of five The square root of five, the square root of five, the square and he will run it off Running off, but he's just like, his personality is like Forrest Gump And to where he's just loving and wants everybody to be around him And care, but for me, that's where it started in there And then when I was about five years old, I had another dream And the room filled up with like this fluid, a dark fluid And I could see the ripples of it moving around And there was a being there And I remember being walked through that fluid with him And I was trying to look up at him And I couldn't turn my head to look at him And he had his hand straight I knew his voice But I did not know who it was, but I felt confident and comfortable And as we moved along this dark blue fluid path With like chartreuse covering When you look until pool and you see the ripples And if you're at the bottom of the pool, you'll see the ripples overlapping That's what it looked like And then when we got to the end of it, he said to me, if you could have anything in the world What would it be? Now we were really poor My dad had just gotten out of prison You know, for manslaughter, I didn't have much But I said to him, I want to know how everything works And at that moment, he used his left hand and he opened up the door And there was this mansion, big brown doors And inside of it was this crystalline flowers Big crystalline flowers, like a giant like five feet across And every time I tried to see his face, he would reach in and hand me another shape And I was so fascinated with the shapes because they didn't look like the platonic solids They didn't look like anything I'd ever seen before And he would hand me these shapes And each shape was different and amazing I woke up from that dream But after that moment, anytime something strange would happen in a dream, I had the powers of inception And anytime something I would be naked at school, I would say, I'm not naked I must be dreaming and immediately I would run out of the school or run out of wherever I was And I would find that mansion again And I had access to all the knowledge The proof of it is the 97 patents that I have now The proof of it is the industries that I've innovated It's like having a dream that you have a diamond in your hand And out of nowhere, you wake up and you're hoping you're holding it And you try and hold it and it's gone when you wake up But the proof is all the stuff that I've been able to do now So all these thoughts, these thoughts are from the time you were a baby These are not things that you've learned These are things that you had in your mind from the time you were born From before that time because I remembered that I had been someplace else before Now it's interesting, that voice that I heard, that's my voice now So it was like my greater self was leading me through And periodically would show up again in other dreams And I went off and became an actor because my mother wanted My little brother to be an actor and I thought if I became an actor, you know I would give my mother's affection It wasn't until my mother was dying And I'm talking to her And she told me the reason that she was babying in Tonyal Was because he had asthma And my father always questioned whether it was his son or not Because he looked so much like her family And didn't look so much like him And I realized my God, if I had followed my proper course I could have saved my mother And not like that, I had the grand unified field equation I had already put that together And at 7-8, I was working with these things And then I went through all of the hell that I had to go through Being accused of domestic violence, all of those things And I thought it was a curse at the time But it was really removing me from advancing down the wrong path And during that period of time, I started waking up in my dreams again And I'd start going back into that palace And I remembered all of these things and I started patting them As I moved along, I got in touch with Michael Houdak He was the president of the University of Science and Philosophy Because I was studying a guy named John Keelie You know, who had worked with frequency Back in 1870s had built the first What did they call it? Self-sustaining engine Back in 1872, but he wouldn't tell people how he built it And I was watching a program with Dale Ponds And somebody in the audience said Doesn't John Keelie's work remind you a lot of Walter Russell And a bell winner And so I got in touch with the University of Science and Philosophy After watching some stuff about Walter Russell And Michael Houdak took me under his wing And started talking to me, but he was more into the philosophy And the love that Walter was talking about But my intention was to rebuild the periodic table You know, build a new periodic table Because the stuff I had learned in college I went to school for chemical engineering the first year of regret And they at the time I think it was like 108 elements And I'd ask, I'd told the teacher, the professor about The relationship between hydrogen on the spectrometer And carbon and silicon and cobalt And it was like it's the same exact color Same tone, just doubled in each octave And he was like, no, each element is the same element And it will always be that element Like you don't see the relationship, so I left school And I was going to spend 40 years rebuilding a periodic table And I found out that Walter Russell had already did that And he did it based upon the natural curvature of everything And when you say rebuild the periodic table, what do you mean specifically? Well, the way the periodic table is laid out The periodic table they have now It looks like a box It looks like a straight box And they don't show the relationship that between every element There's between every, there's two notes Here's a periodic table You'll see hydrogen sitting all the way over there by itself But they don't show that hydrogen has the same tone as carbon What do you mean by tone? Same tone, same key of E Same key of E 40.5 Hertz, the next one would be like 81 Hertz You go to Silicon, it would double up and would be 162 Hertz You'll go to Cobalt and it'll be 324 Hertz In that base, if you were to take the angles of incident Or the tones that they create, you know, their color Like you can turn color back into sound based upon It's the same wavelength, it's just twice as long Or much longer So all you have to do is keep dividing light by two You keep dividing light by two And you'll ultimately get back to the audible sound of it Because there was a relationship between light and color Sound and tone, matter and shape I've put, I sent over Walter Russell's I'm trying to get to that, that's what... Yeah, it's Walter Russell's periodic table that he put together Now you will compare that to what we... Minileof, Minileof's periodic table You'll compare Walter Russell's to it And you'll see something completely different It's unwinding Whoa, it's unwinding And you see there's a relationship that hydrogen So you had figured this out at a young age I had already seen this, this was all inside of This was all inside of that palace I had access to it And I knew the relationship... See, I saw this in dreams I saw it as a circle, everything was a full circle laid out And each area was just expanding Like wrapping a rag around your hand The first wrap, you know, it's so tight The very first wrap is so tight, that's the first one I Walter Russell did, yeah But go back to the wiggly one This is how I saw it more so, but as a vortex But you'll see there's a relationship between hydrogen, carbon, silicon, cobalt, rhodium They're all bonded, they're all sit as the middle point between two noble gases So those things don't really exist, it's only one substance Now the problem is, the first thing that we're able to perceive Is hydrogen That's the first visible element Because before it is too dense for us to perceive it You understand what I'm saying? But as you reach into the next octave, the carbon octave And they call that the bisexual tone Because the carbon has two tones to it It has a negative side and a positive side The part where lithium behaves, lithium is a... is contractive Barillium is contractive Boron is contractive, but the moment you get to carbon You balance it out, it gets to a perfect balance of plus and minus four So it's a double tone Then nitrogen is minus three one Minus three, oxygen is minus two Florin is minus one, now the balance of this, all of those are mates Florin and lithium naturally mate If you have lithium bonded with any other element, the moment that Florin is introduced, it will break all bonds violently So it can bond with Florin Same thing with barillium and oxygen, that's why it's it And what they've tried to keep from us If you want to break water into its component parts of hydrogen and oxygen All you have to do is introduce barillium Or the sound of barillium And oxygen will violently break away from any other thing, even hydrogen To bond with that barillium And now you can have... Just with the frequency of it And since the hydrogen is smaller, hydrogen will... That waveform, you can send that up into one two The oxygen into another two Without using electrolysis, without using heat It was just through frequency and the proof of it, if you go back up just a little bit higher We know the relationship between sodium and chlorine They're equal and opposite mates, if you get out of the pool and you got chlorine and your itch in from the chlorine All you have to do is get some reels soft and rub that on your skin and it'll turn right into an oil It naturally neutralizes each other So everything has an equal and opposite mate The lithium becomes sodium in the next octave Doubles the same exact tone, just doubled and wider The sodium becomes potassium in the next octave Why it ends up the reason that arsenic kills us is because our DNA has nitrogen And it has phosphorus in it Because the nitrogen unwinds into the next octave right after silicon And becomes phosphorus, our DNA has both of those in there But it's going by tone, so the moment arsenic, which sits as a minus three On the next octave, the moment arsenic is introduced The body thinks that, oh, this is my thing that I need And it tries to wrap itself around the arsenic, but it causes the DNA to unravel Because it's four times as large as that nitrogen was And those other little elements, titanium, vanadium, chromium, magnetinase, magnesan, and iron All of those aren't true elements, those are isotopes Those things, those first three are the full tones, they make full spheres But now it becomes elliptical with titanium, vanadium, and chromium And on the other side, it's like one, like I said, if you wrap the rag around your hand The first wrap, really tight, you can't get much out of it Second wrap, damn there can't see the difference of it Third one, you start seeing hydrogen The fourth wrap, you see carbon I need a piece of paper or a rag, and I can show you That twist, but in between each one of them, by the time you get nature doesn't allow us In the silicone octave, for there to expand out But there is the same titanium, vanadium, chromium, magnetinase, and iron That exists between aluminum and silico But nature doesn't allow us to unravel that, but now with the wave conjugations, we can We couldn't do that before, because we didn't know the angles of incidents That were necessary to open these things up And you couldn't do that with the platonic solids, because the platonic solids were averages and approximations They, like I've said a number of times You show me a real straight line in nature If everything in nature, if everything in the universe, everything is expressed in motion Our motion expressed in waves, always recurved Every action has an equal and opposite reaction, so the greater the action, the greater the reaction, the greater the reaction The greater the resistance, the greater the resistance, the greater the curvature Because the universe is based off of equanimity, which Einstein left out in his theory of relativity The balancing side of the gravity, gravity was caused by electric force Electricity is always seeking a higher pressure condition It spins northeast, as trying to get to the center of an area, the center of a cone But the next electric wave is coming, so it gets pushed out and as it's pushed out, it gets to the vortices And that's on those pieces, those vortices Now instead of it spinning north, easternly, it's intripetally It's forced to spin centrifugally, and it spins south, westernly And it expands itself out, it decays, it keeps decaying, until you get four magnetic waves That hit each other at 120 degree angles At that point, they reconvert back into the electric field And then they make their way back to their source again, whether it's the star, whatever star it came into What happens when we get older? We expand that our equator, right? We get shorter at the top, why? Because the electric force is pushing in and condensing And the magnetism expands out at the equator The electron field, the electrons, that's just discharged electricity, divided the electricity Coming from the sun, coming from the earth, it's the waste product from it But it hits our magnetic field, and then it gets pulled right back in and gets compressed again And now it becomes electricity for the earth, and then it pushes itself right back out again The equator is five miles wider than the poles Electricity, Einstein left that out of his equation Because he coupled electricity and magnetism together And didn't realize that electricity was the equal and opposite of magnetism Electricity being the contractive field, you breathe in, that's a contractive thing You breathe out, that's a magnetic thing, a radiative thing But they use the term magnet as an attractor But to magnify something means to what? Make it larger, increase the space That's the work of radiation, that's what Walter Russell was talking about all those years That's the work of radiation, it's the electricity between the things that pull them together The coulomb force that supposedly opposites attract and push each other away That was true, then hot air and cold air would seek each other out They're the same substance, but just under a different state One is they move in opposite directions from each other Hot water and cold water move in opposite directions from each other The reason two magnets seem like the North Pole is attracted to the South Pole Because if you had two rivers or two holes, two hoses with water coming out of them They're going to be pushing against each other But they align to where the male enters the female and is able to come out So they've been fooled by their senses They've been fooled by their eyes and have missed the whole picture of it Are you familiar with Khalil Gebran? Yes, he wrote a book, he wrote the prophet in 1923 But he wrote another book called Sand and Thong In that book he told a story of a man who had been away from his family for four months working And he was excited to come home and as he was coming home He knew that the mountain when he saw the mountain that he would be able to, he was close to home So his five senses started having a conversation And his eye says, I see a mountain, I see a mountain, I see a mountain And so the ears perked out and said, I don't hear a mountain The nose sniffed and said, I don't smell a knot, the mountain is the tongue tasted the air I don't taste a mountain And the other four senses started speaking among themselves And they came to the conclusion that there must be something no matter with the eye Because they couldn't perceive it All of these things we've been misled just because we've been fooled by our senses, our eyes see point Zero five percent of the entire electromagnetic wave We're blind cosmically, but we judge everything by what we see And they've done that with science for so many years, you look at equals MC squared That talks about expansion, it doesn't show how it's divided You've never breathed in twice without breathing out You breathe in and you breathe out, you charge and you discharge So how is it that the breathing in? They're acting as if the universe is just expanding out, expanding out, breathing out, breathing out And it's going to dissipate out and they never include the contractive side of it breathing in Because they were misled by Newton, who said everything moves in a straight line Unless affected by something else And we know that not to be true, but they built the entire two-dimensional plane The Euclidean space that we live on, that we work on, that we try and define curved nature By two-dimensional space, and we never include the curvature The breathing in like Alan Watts said No one would be attracted to a Euclidean woman Because she would just be straight, all straight lines It's the wiggliness, it's the curvature that brings the balance Everything has to have the balance You know, the electric side and the magnetic side I can talk about it, but I can show you even better If you can, can I just talk to you there? The concept of the periodic table, the way the periodic table conventionally is addressed Do they address these things as being isolated or intertwined? They interact, but they feel that carbon will always be carbon And it will have its half-life and its... And keep breaking down, but it'll still be carbon They don't understand that it unwind and becomes nitrogen Nitrogen unwind and becomes oxygen So this, the periodic table, the conventional use of the periodic table And what is this of the gentleman's name again? Walter Russell. Walter Russell's version of the periodic table How is Walter Russell's version of the periodic table perceived by people who study this? Well, now everyone wants to use it. If you can go to my... In my book there's a picture of Einstein reading Walter Russell's first book, second book, The Universal One Because when Walter wrote this in 1926 he sent it out to 300 different universities and physicists And one of the quotes that Walter Russell said that Einstein says on his death bed I should have spent more time reading Walter Russell's work That's how and now they're taking it under their wing But remember the Michelson Morley experiment from 1877 They were trying to prove whether there was an ether or an effect of an ether Or the quintessence that everything came from that used to be called the fifth element That everything from antiquity everyone understood that nothing just something doesn't come out of nothing It's like when you look at the air, it looks clear But you change the pressure condition, the balance of the change of pressure condition, we call that condensation It creates clouds and you change the motion conditions Whether it's moving quickly or slowly, it's going to become snow, it's going to become rain, it's going to become hell So everything comes down to just one of two forces Either you're breathing in and filling up something or you pouring it out But the scientists, they ignored Walter Russell's work because he didn't include any equations inside of it He talked philosophically regarding how things behave in comparison to laying down and following some Newtonian or calculus writing He said he based things based on let's explore them naturally And that's what I did with my book once what Walter Russell was missing, he didn't have the wave conjugations He didn't have the mirror shapes, the all shapes And that was because of a mistake that was made 6,000 years ago maybe They took the flower of life which was that symbol If you could go to my book TCOTLC.com There's an example that I put in there on page 64 And I show the element, the fundamentals If you could possibly pull that up Jamie TCOTLC.com You'll see in there the mistake that they may because they believed in straight lines Because the church was promoting the idea of straight lines And you can see the right side of the page Right below there, download, just go to the center of the page And right above that And you see initial public draft, just tap on it And if you go to page 64 on the right side of the page right there On the left side of the page, you'll see the five platonic solids Now these, all of our axioms, all of our postulates Have been built off of these things, this is what Euclid went down to To each up and pulled these things together Pythagoras worked on them And these were the undisputed fundamentals of God that he used to build If you tap onto the flower of life, platonic solids things, it's going to take you to a video Turn it to the e-mail, don't have to try it But it'll show you the flower of life That they took this from, but you'll see that instead of following the natural curvature Of these 64 circles overlapping, they averaged the space where they were They met, and they invented straight lines Hmm, they wanted to do that Because they believed that the world was flat They believed the world was flat at the time And the church promoted Pythagorean Theorem comes off of this cube A square plus b square equals c, so they wanted to use all of these inner twining circles And create straight lines Because that's how they thought everything came down to straight lines They thought the world was flat, and I was like, oh on in circles and create straight lines because that's how they thought everything came down to straight lines. They thought the world was flat and I was like oh my goodness they didn't open the flower properly so the next one would be there. I cast a hegron. Now the flower of life it's very very old the concept is very old. What was the origin of the concept? It's the oldest symbol known to mankind. I believe that it was Anki the brother of in Leo if you go by the Imro-Samanian text. Yeah the Samarian text that was the one that created mankind because if you look at mankind and there's a point I want to make with it. I want you to stay on the book go back to page go to 134 on the book and this is what that other gentleman being told me to do is say why don't you just take the pieces that make up the flower and put them together based on universal ratios. So if you once you are able to pull it out page 134 1 34 in the book. So this is the juxtapose of the mistake they made. You have to just tap right onto that. Yep just tap on it. Now this was made by David Johnson one of our programmers Argos fuel. So if you go to the far left and tap on that this is I took four of those triangles and wow and you can scroll around this is what happens when four bubbles meet. This is the negative space where they can't touch each other. This is hydrogen and as I was saying electricity is always trying to get to the center of that triangle but it gets pushed out and now you see it has four contractive poles which is the electric poles to just go around it from like a horizontally yeah it has four contractive poles because electricity is seeking a higher pressure condition and forcing it in where magnetism is seeking a lower pressure condition and spun out. So the vortices those tips that's the magnetic field that's where they begin but it has an equal attractor and an equal amount of repulsion. So if you go to what happens when eight bubbles meet they gave me the patterns to that I caught that detestrian. This is so this is the negative space between eight bubbles. This is the negative space where eight bubbles meet and you can scroll around. And this is ignored when they're concentrating on straight lines completely because this if you look from the top I haven't violated anything it fits perfectly inside of there but this is the negative space where eight bubbles meet but you'll notice it has eight contractive poles but it only has six magnetic poles six vortices so it has a greater electrical potential than a repulsion. So maybe this is the strong nuclear force and the previous one was the weak nuclear force. So I was like okay I caught this the hunting and after my son so I was like what happens when six bubbles meet if you'll go to the one right in the center. Now you see that there has these huge bubbles fast moving but there's six strong spheres that's going around this but the greater attractor has grabbed the two weaker attractors and this looks just like a photon and guess what it has 30 poles what is the speed of light 299, 299 million, 752,400 something they rounded off to 300, 300 million kilometers per second square but if you look at it from the top you'll see that I haven't violated anything. This looks like what happens in nature so I was like okay so they gave me the patents to this but you'll see that there's six unaccounted electrical poles to it so I was like what happens when 12 bubbles meet if you go to the one right next to it. Another stable structure that we basically see in nature but there's four unaccounted electrical poles to it. Four spin around it you can count those four you'll see one at the bottom and three on those sides. This is the basis of crystallization, laws of crystallization that formed and you can go to the last one I was like what happens when 24 bubbles meet. This is the negative space if you pull to a horizontal on it this is the negative space where 24 bubbles meet. This is where you cannot distinguish this from the background because all of the electrical potential has been accounted for. This would be the Boz Einstein condensate where something becomes indistinguishable from the fabric of space itself the final state of matter something and the proof of this the platonic solids they have a thing called discrete symmetry. You can put the cubes together maybe you can put the dodecahedron together but you can't put all of them together but you can take the wave conjugations right here and they form super symmetrical systems where everything align so there's a site that James sent over to you and this will be the final thing and then I'll be quiet for a second but because this is the final this right here now these are sculpt other sculptures I've built there's a video and you'll see that flower you'll if you'll pop it up from Terry's linch pens that he sent you you'll see and that this was one of four super symmetrical systems that I patented and the reason I patented it was because when Walter Russell put his stuff up you just go down a little bit and we're going to get to grab not that one we're going to get to gravity in a second not that one we're not even there yet there tetra terrarian wave conjugations now these are all of those systems put together this is the where 12 bubbles meet the arbrians and then I put five of them together and they make these natural starfish but then when I put ten of them together they lay themselves out and they predict all distribution of matter within the electric field and you can see where six bubbles meet on the as you get to a higher point on it those where six bubbles are meeting still fitting perfectly where the 12 bubbles are meeting and where this where the four and where the eight that's a super symmetrical system I put 12 if I put 20 of those where six bubbles meet the Antonians they make a natural dodecahedron that's naturally curved if I take where the 12 bubbles meet that's where I made the linch pen from ultimately from some of those pieces you got right there that all shape of it so that was one of the first things but when Walter Russell came out with his book and he introduced his periodic table he watched as different people went up and collected Nobel prizes for deuterium for tritium for all these things that he had discovered and I was like okay let me wait until the patterns are granted before I'll talk about it so that they won't be able to stop it but what makes more sense where they invented straight lines and opening the flower or where you actually take the individual pieces of the flower and put it together based on universal ratios which one do you think is how the givers of that knowledge intend it for us to use it well it makes sense because you're accounting for the negative space and the straight lines are not bingo yeah that it must be something and so and then these these are all physical representations that you've created yeah there are all of those things same things that's they are brilliant right there how is this received like when you talk to people about this oh man they they first because I didn't show them I hadn't shown them I introduced it with let's talk about our fundamentals are a little bit off there are no straight lines right so I reached out to Neil deGrasse Tyson Neil deGrasse Tyson I'd saw him at an event up front you know at Fox and he was like hey man yeah I'd love for you to come on my show do my radio do my TV thing I would love that I was like yeah but let me I've got something I want to introduce to you and it was only 36 pages it was a treatise and I told him it controversial I sent him over that the 36 page thing that had the wave conjugations in it but I started it off with one times one equaling two and he went in on my treaties wrote writ lined everything you attacked that I had immediate that I talked about Walter Russell and Victor Shawberger and John Keeley as and Tesla as the people that I looked up to he attacked them but then he started attacking you know the one times one equaling two how did he attack them oh he was he was because I asked them I said I said under what conditions it said it's illogical where the square root of number of a number added to itself would equal more than that number squared but that's what happens with the square root of two that's what happens with most of numbers I was like how is it that multiplication if it means to make more an increase in number how is one times one equaling one part of the multiplication table now I understand it if you're seeing it one time right but we call that once but the moment that you had that at the times in there that multiplicative indicator that means there is more than one so now each equation is supposed to be balanced you know that equal sign it's supposed to show that there's a balance between these two numbers over here in a balance on this one over here what happened to the other one in this equation it does not it didn't equate and then I took the square root of that number I took the square root of two because all this started in third grade I was arguing with my teacher because we're talking about the square root of a hundred oh my god so you fall yeah that's my detox thing I'm supposed to detox right now I have detox on a time where what do you do there's my wife got me these things you know because supposed to take this what is that and pure body extract and there's another one daily cellular detox what's in this and this too what's in this stuff just things to counteract the natural met the metals that we have in our bodies that that wear us out and you just take these periods throughout the day on time I gotta do it now I gotta do it okay I take a dropper part of that dropper and then four sprays and it removes the parasites from your system like oil of oregano like using oil of oregano instead of using antibiotics and have you felt an effect yes yeah what do you feel when you well I used to have really thick dark circles under my eyes that's gone away in the last six months I've been using that my skin I'm 55 years old I'm 55 years old and I smoke do I look like I'm you know you're great and do you think that's because of this I think well I'm gonna show you a picture of what I used to look like when my wife met me and I don't know if you could she made it but through this up like she she's she's she's a beautiful one but this is what I looked like when my wife met me I was 256 pounds well you eating differently I was well now I'm intermittent fasting I follow her routine but she turned me from that into this is like she shined up yeah you look about 15 years younger now yeah and that's because of her I still smoke my cigarettes what do you do that I'm a cracky it I don't know everybody has to have some vice like Ellen watch you you got to have some some balance of beneficence and and rationality to you we have a fan in here by the way if you want to smoke more than welcome to I don't trust people you're not at walk around oh I'm just people get so offended by gurus a lot of times and yogis because they think they're these calm and passive people when they get angry they're like oh that that was that was a directed anger that was that was a purposeful anger to wake you up to something they and then they find out they have a girlfriend they find out that they smoke and they're like oh this is a lie right but that's the real person that's what I loved about Ellen Watts he had a wife and he had and he had his mistresses ended up dying with it one of his his girlfriend and his wife you know often in his little place but he spoke the truth he was honest life is about the give and take there's a balance in there you know to be human is to be flawed there's to be beautiful yeah it's part of the beauty of us and it's part of the create why we create I don't think you create from a perfect place of enlightenment the part of the chaos of being a human being is the beauty of the creation it's why why we create the most fucked up people the best artists are some of the most fucked up people my favorite musicians my favorite comedians my favorite actors yet almost all of them are fucked up yeah my uncle used to call it he said if you you don't get any flour to grow unless you throw some shit on it so back to Neil deGrasse Tyson and this critique of stuff he threw shit on on he was like well Tesla Tesla stuff worked but Tesla was never really respected and out there and he wanted I guess he wanted me to support bore or shringer or or fine men or any of those people and I'm looking at the fine men diagrams I'm like you made all these things up you got you're basically doing the mr. Spock thing if you want to find the answer to something then you cancel out all the possibilities all other possibilities and you root it down to one thing so that means going through the whole universe to answer one question and that's the problem with probability that's the problem with with the highs and burger uncertainties uncertainty that's the problem with shrode anger all of those which is these probabilities because they had taken the ether out they forgot the electromagnetic wave mm-hmm it had to have a medium in which it followed on it had to have something in which it was moving on it doesn't exist in isolation no they do not and it cannot be the cause of its own action an effect can never be the cause of the action that the chicken cannot come be the egg cannot come before the chicken the chicken has to be there first in order to lay it it has to mate and what Einstein left out was the equal and opposite of magnetism so when he back to Neil deGrasse when he wrote his response to my paper and he said if you have any other questions you're gonna have to see somebody else and he wouldn't take my calls in it while I was like okay so I wrote the book based off of those responses and now reached out to another guy um dr. David tong so he very very interesting that that would be his take as a public educator that he wouldn't want to talk to you anymore the reason I wanted to talk to him was because of his show the cosmos that he's doing after after that incredible guy you know Carl Sagan mm-hmm the very first episode he had was talking about um geodorno Bruno mm-hmm and he said that geodorno Bruno was looking for that grand unified field equation and maybe one day somebody is going to do it and when they do it it's going to change the world and I'm like dude I've done it I've I've got it here he attacked it so with such a bitro that I I was like okay maybe I need to walk away from this dr. David tong from Cambridge a professor at Cambridge did a video on on on physics of the world and he said it's all alive and he explained that there was these 16 fields you know that they everything that they had taught was this and they gave the best understanding and interpretation that they had of it but it was all alive because they didn't understand how it worked why because the michausson morally experiment from 1887 where they were trying to define the ether or the earth in this etheric space problem was they kept with Newtonian law so they thought the ether didn't move they thought it was still but there was another guy larmore that did it in early 1800s and he went off of Thomas Young who influenced the for now lens came you know influence for now came up with the for now lens but he talked about us a moving ether that had opposing vortices so I didn't learn all of this stuff until I was getting ready to have conversations with people because I was looking where has this work been done but if you look at at geodorno Bruno's work it looks a lot like my stuff but he still had straight lines and I think he put those straight lines in there to appease the church so that he wouldn't get killed oh my god and they still killed him they hung him upside down in 1600 the Catholic Church 1599 hung him upside down and it's stake and set him on fire because he refused to recant that the god that they were talking about was not the true god of the universe it was much larger than that their story went back six thousand years and there's other traditions and tribes around the world where their stories go back 200,000 years and they made a lot more sense so how have we limited ourselves you take Noah having three sons Jim Jeffeth and and Ham and one was black one was Asian and one was white does that make sense to you but we as we we subscribe to that we subscribe to that dogma and everybody's entitled to whatever opinion they want to have I don't think that opinion is right we're going off in so many different directions but I do want to get to this because I would love to know your what you believe happened but the Neil deGrasse Tyson thing is so confusing to me that he so he was critical of Tesla he was critical of Tesla he was critical of Walter Russell and he was critical of John Keeley I think there's thought this is not his field of study though right no he's astrophysic he's an astrophysicist but Walter Russell talked about that the earth Walter Russell talked about the fact that the sun gave birth to the earth that it didn't coalesce from some field and the proof of this do you guys know that the earth is drifting away from the Sun yeah absolutely at this is the mistake I made it at the Oxford they because they wouldn't allow me to bring my notes or anything so I said the drift with the drift with six inches a year it's 0.6 inches a year so if you add up how long it would take the earth to move because and all of the planets in every solar system is drifting away from their primary at the same exact rate like 1.5 centimeters so this is a universal expansion that's happening with everything moving away so them saying and the web telescope have proven that those galaxies couldn't have formed 13 14 billion years ago but if you would just add up linearly how long it would take the earth to go from the Sun to 93 million miles away it's 9 trillion Hoda let's go I I put it I did all of the little calculations these are not little calculations don't know don't love that expression but little well man don't turn my phone off don't do that every time I get ready well because I know they're watching me right now and they're mad at me whose day um the people that want that our entire world economy is based off of the politicians and the authorities that give their politicians their accreditation and those authorities those universities are all based their entire curriculum is based off the platonic solids and our world economy is based off of one times one equaling well you think they fuck with your phone oh I'm sure of it because now I couldn't even I have to turn it off or do you have to drop your phone drop your phone I've dropped my phone a number of times but you ever think that that might be what's going on your phone and then I buy another phone and the same thing happens I'm five mininers I used to within my wife would think I was cheating so I was like no I don't need that I don't need that I made that mistake way too early you know in our relationship and it cost me eight years of of toil and pain but I ultimately made it back and I'm so glad that um you know we produce 1500 sperm per heartbeat women are born with 200 to 500,000 eggs in each of their ovaries they don't get anymore the amount of buildup the need to reproduce for melds is great and we're 98.7% identical to to simians to chimpanzees what do they have they have a harem by nature there's only a 1.3% differentiation between us and them and that 1.3% is supposed to dominate over the 98 I'm just glad I'm 55 now and sperm production is slowed down um you know you could always always get a phone that you don't use as anything other than contact a couple people yeah but this that that would work but I'm like if they're gonna hear they're gonna hear yeah well that is an issue so so this is the map this is a map so it would so five five thousand five thousand two hundred eighty feet in a mile 12 inches in a foot therefore um it's sixty three one mile equals sixty three thousand three hundred and sixty inches so the number of years that it would take for the earth to move one mile is a hundred and five thousand six hundred years so in order for the earth to reach where we are at ninety three million miles it would take nine trillion eight hundred and twenty billion eight hundred million years for the earth to get here likewise Mars at 147 million miles away from the sun it would take 15 trillion 780 billion 480 million years for Mars to get where it was so at a given point Mars was here in the gody log zone and now Venus is going to inherit the gody log zone next the sun will give mercury is under a high oppression because they're still under the mist and mist mistake thinking that there's a void in space so they forget that mercury is under the highest pressure possible so it can expand it's like hydrogen it's like those octaves before hydrogen so the atmosphere the iron isn't able to release any oxygen in the oxides but when you get to 67 million miles away from the sun the pressure is a little less but it's still so much higher than the pressure than the pressure um on earth it's like going deep into the very belly of the earth that pressure is so very high and so now the clouds that there's a great deal of sulfur there's a great deal of of of ammonia and all of those things in it but once earth moves to where Mars is Venus is going to slowly move and will be right here you know and maybe five or six trillion years Venus will be right here and humanoids will appear again and unwind the same way and that asteroid belt that we have right now between Mars and Jupiter that used to be a planet and I believe they had humanoids that developed on there the same way that everything that's the periodic table they call it the periodic table because these things happen according to periodicity they happen under regular events you change the motion in pressure conditions the the crystallization changes we call it a different element but it's the same substance like my hand is one substance but if I do it like this and do it like this and do it like this it looks like a whole different thing and they can call it a different element but it's the same element under different motion and pressure conditions I believe that serious serious used to be a planet when it was here and the humanoids on there didn't recognize that we don't have a solid core everything expands as a sphere no sphere in our universe no bubble has a solid core we're perceiving it as a solid core but there is not a solid core there there's just a bubble and at certain that hydro encollider that particle accelerator I believe they did the same thing and they popped their planet and it became that asteroid belt really just take it if you add up all of the weight of the mass of those of the asteroids in the asteroid belt it will probably equal the same mass as that of Mars I thought the concept of the asteroid belt was well first of all there's the concepts of earth one and earth two right so earth one was a planet that was hit by a planet and that's how our moon was when have we seen that happen in nature well we haven't seen it yet right but these things take a long-ass time we don't have a whole lot of ability to see things our ability to see things even with the James Webb telescope is fairly limited right which is one of the reasons why they were able to find these galaxies that should not have been able to be formed in such a short period of time to the extent that they have which confuses them if they're looking at this 13.7 billion year old universe these things should be much older right in order to be this size in order to be in the position where they're at so you believe that the sun is the origin of these planets of all the planets every solar every solar with an solar system gives birth to all of these other planets this is what Walter Russell had talked about this is what Neil deGrasse and they attacked him for because he talked about the drift this natural drift and that wasn't it more didn't make more sense and they didn't have the idea of dark matter and dark energy there right they didn't even come up with that and now we understand 4% of the universe is visible and 75% of it 74% something 74% of it is dark energy and 20 something percent of it is dark matter unperceivable things and they say that's because they needed to figure out how would they get the spin and create and have the the the galaxies why do they hold the galaxy right well what my team did Chris Elie who's my he's he's my Scotty we we use a What my team did, Chrisili, who's my, um, he's, he's my Scotty. We, we use the same simulator that they use at Princeton. And we took lunch pens and we haven't even introduced lunch pens yet, but it would be a great introduction for it. We took lunch pens, this configuration of where, um, where six pentagons meet. And we put them in particular order. There, at the, there's a link for that right inside of the thing that, that James, James Pellegrini sent over to, to you if you have pulled that up. And we rebuilt the planet Saturn without gravity. And it has the rings with no animation. As the rings and the hexagon that's observed at the very top of it without dark matter, without dark energy, without gravity showing that it's an outward inward, outward force, pushing down that creates the planet. If you can pull that up and he explains it out, it's like three minutes long. And where does the matter come from? He used, well, the matter, remember, that's condensation. If you were to picture before we watched it, yeah, before we watched it, let me explain something. If you were to picture the waves at the ocean, you know, the darker the waves, the deeper the water, you can't see it distinguishing fact between them until they crash into each other. That splatter, that, that little foam that comes out, it lasts for a couple seconds. And then it settles back on there and it's just the balance between this force and this force. Mm hmm. That's the physical universe. There's a few seconds that it takes that matter, that more dense water and the foam to recollect and get balanced again with the surrounding environment. That's the entire time that our universe or all these universes have worked together. But if you play this, this is at the very beginning of my book. That's why I went on that, that, at the enemies and I was like, look, I've got a whole, got something else to do. I've been able to rebuild Saturn without gravity with no animation and then they cloned it. Of course they did. Well, this is not something that you could say in a sound bite, which is one of the reasons why I wanted to talk to you. This is not something like your explanation of these things and your description of the very nature of reality itself is not something that should be taken lightly. No, it's something that like, thank you for saying that. It needs to be laid out and it needs to be slowly examined and every, because you've obviously spent a lot of time working on this, this thing here. So play this, do you want it? And this is us, Timmy. Yeah, and turn it out. Hold on, hold on. Yeah, you're different videos. One's long, one's short. No, this is going to be the short one. Okay. You're just reset itself too because it files freaked it out. The government, man. I was going to head on the grass Tyson. He knows where you're going to be. That video would be the first one. This one, Greg. Gravity is an effect. It's an effect of electricity. So turn it up so because Chris does a full narration of it. I'm still hold on my computer still. And he was talking to my wife and explaining to her what he had worked on. And it just, it was, this is seven years, six years ago. I think, maybe five years ago. But as soon as it allows you to, it's, let's see. The center. Yeah, rewind it just a little bit. Yeah. Okay, here we go. It's just three minutes off. Two groups of vortexes, which are just like tornadoes. Tornadoes, spinning tornadoes that are pointing towards the center. I thought I liked this object here. You see it, like go online. Right. So there's, there's a bunch of those in there. There's actually 16 in the whole highlight. Oh, hold on. It's not doing anything. No, it's about to happen. No, nothing's happening. My computer just froze again as well. I'm trying to say something freaked out by my computer. I might have to just try to, you want to reboot? I mean, I think it already did but try to get any more. We have to pause. Okay. No worries. Yeah, that's what it should be doing. But it's going to basically, you'll see. Oh, wait. That's weird. What's, what's my? What I can see on that screen is not what I can see on my computer screen. I can't even see it. It's the fucking government, man. You think it's not? I think it is sometimes I assume they listen to everything I say. They do. I'm sure they do. You used to have a boring shit. You took a boat stand. No years ago when the governments were trying to poison their citizens. You took a very boat stand and nobody else took. That's what I was like. Wow. I appreciate you because I lost three, four jobs because I refuse to take it. I refuse to. But you feel better about it now. And especially when you know all these people that have health problems because of it. Cancer has increased 300%. Yeah. All caused mortality up 40% in some age groups. Pulmonary embolisms almost up like 500%. Yeah. Do you want to cause that? Where is spike proteins that's being built and collected within the system? We can go into, I have a, I can walk you through what the spike protein did to the VRCA 1 gene. That's that gene inside of our DNA that tells us that there's a damage. There's damage that's happening almost like the crews that work that go along the highway and they immediately put up cones every time there is a problem. Well the spike protein which is never, no protein has ever been able to enter into the nucleus of a cell. Not only do it, there's a go to the ribosomes and say, hey, you know what? I don't want you to produce whatever protein like it was a skin, skin cell. I'm not going to produce keratin anymore. You're just going to produce these spike proteins. That spike protein went into the DNA and it tells the VRCA 1 gene, turn off. And that's the gene that says, hey, there's a mutation here. Let's scrap that thing. And so now the cancers are building up. The spike proteins weren't shedding from the body. They collected in the ovaries. They collected in the lymph nodes. They collected in the bone marrow. So now we have all of these diseases that's showing themselves because the body is overwhelmed trying to deal with the spike protein that's attaching itself to the ACE2 and the endothelial cells in our vascular system for everybody out. And the more boosters you get, boom, the worse you're off of your system off. You're turning it off. Your body cannot defend itself and it's just collecting. It's just collecting. But it also showed me the bizarre state of human psychology that people, if you're presented with what could be a potential solution, you want to believe in it so bad that you're willing to defend these companies that have been the most deceptive companies proven, deceptive, not just deceptive, but deceptive in the way that they are allowed to distribute information. They're allowed to not be transparent about their studies. They could have multiple studies that show a negative cause or a negative effect and they don't have to, they don't have to release those studies. Why? Because they're bought and sold. Because I think it's an agenda to it. Do you think so? I think it's an agenda attached to it because they restricted any natural thing like Ivermectin. Ivermectin means like it calls Ivermectin, the Latin of it. It was worms and it was anti-worms. What the Ivermectin did is it causes the worms to have paralysis or parasites to have paralysis because it stops their information from passing. There's these things called the nodes of Ron VA between each neuron. There's an axiom and there's the axiom and oh my god, I just forgot the leg that comes off of dendrites. Those dendrites and the axions have these things called nodes of Ron VA where they're not allowed to touch each other and it transfers potassium and chlorine back and forth to each other. Potassium, chlorine, chloride and hydrogen back and forth. So in the worm, the Ivermectin stops that to where the worms become paralyzed. So it was an immediate defense against the pathogen but they immediately shut that down and we're not allowed to use it. They showed that it stops viral replication. Completely. In vitro. They know that there's a mechanism involved and they try to pretend. And then they also try to pretend it's dangerous which is insane and they even got rolling stone magazine on board with it where they printed an article where they were showing these people that were waiting in line for gunshot victims because so many people were overdosing on horse dewormer. Yeah, well that was propaganda. It was a full on lie. Not only that, they were so stupid and clumsy about it that the image that they used. This is Oklahoma. The image that they used was like in the summer in Oklahoma and yet everybody's dressed in winter coats. It was retarded. The whole thing was so stupid but so obviously coordinated. It was confusing to me how many people were willing to go along with it and how many people were angry at people who didn't go along with it regardless of what they were saying. Even if what they were saying was reasonable, even if what they were saying, especially if you're talking about like J. Bata-Chara and you know these people that were professors at esteemed universities and they were being silenced and there was a coordinated effort to remove their posts from Twitter. This is wild shit. Unprecedented wild shit and the population was just going along with it. For me what was fascinating was psychologically. Like do you guys not know about deception? Do you not know about profit motive? Do you not know about the history of pharmaceutical drug companies in this country and what they've been able to get away with with how many people they've paid? The Tuskegee experiment. Oh my God. I don't understand how black people or people of color were running and trusting the government after what happened to them with the Tuskegee experiment and for people that don't know what the Tuskegee experiment was in the early 1920s. A group of government officials came down doctors and they went through the black community and they said there's a sickness in all of you guys and we're going to cure it free of charge and they inject it the black population with syphilis. and left it untreated for 60 years and just watched how it ravaged the body. For 60 years it wasn't stopped until like 1970s, late 70s that they stopped the experiment and I don't even know if they've paid reparations. So the government has been using all of these chemical warfare or biological warfare against its own citizen. There's so many instances of it. So that's what I think. There's so many instances of it documented instances of it and that's the Tuskegee experience one of the most horrific and the fact that it went on until the 70s is just fucking terrifying. But this is just the nature of having that much secrecy and control and profit motive and being able to enforce power on people and it's a thing that human beings have always done. Human beings have gotten into position with a ruling over others. They are callous and evil almost always, almost universally. There's not one instance of this amazing benign beautiful leader that transformed their society into this incredible utopia. It doesn't exist in history. No. Animals and insects, you know, not one of them are responsible for the eradication of any species on this planet. Not one single creature from history, but mankind is responsible for the death, for the extinction of millions. Even when animals are responsible for the extinction, it's because human beings introduce those animals into places where they didn't belong like cats in Australia. All the birds. Yeah, they killed everything. So this is man's interference and it's based upon their lack of understanding because they don't know how the universe truly works. Because their math has been off for so long, because their fundamentals are wrong. Now everything has this expiration and there's a loss to everything. When the universe is perfectly balanced, when you utilize it properly and that's why I wanted to introduce the wave conjugations and the mirror shapes and all of these defining the electric field, defining the magnetic field and the constitution between them being the lynchpin. Because the lynchpin, as you'll see in a second, this is, it has that same center as that tetra in space. The magnetic field, the feminine side, all of this is circular. That's the full expansion. This is the common factor or the constitution between the micro and the macro. That's what the lynchpin was. And that's what we're about to see in the video. Was it able to come up, Jamie? All right, here we go. This is rebuilding the planet's Saturn. Go ahead. The sound was coming through your speakers over the ones time for a new laptop. Do you know what's going on? Government may not want to. I'm we're about to kill gravity. We're about to kill their God gravity and they don't want that. It was. Here we go from the beginning. I have two groups of vortexes, which are just like tornadoes, tornadoes, spinning tornadoes that are pointing towards the center. I thought I like this object here. You see it, that yellow line. Right? So there's there's a bunch of those in there. There's actually 16 of them, and I'll highlight them all there. Kind of see them a bit better. So that's so they're all pointed towards the center, but they're arranged in what we call a bunch of pin configuration, one of the 10 that you never heard of that. So there's one on the top and then three in groups of three around that are spaced at 120 degrees apart. And the tilt of these ones on the bottom here is 109.5 degrees in relationship to the top ones that are creating this flat space on the top and the bottom. And they're spaced at 120 degrees radially. And then inside the model is three groups. Jamie, this two sounds playing simultaneously. Oh, that's my wife talking. We're in the kitchen and he's just explaining itself. It's got this guy. This is always guy. I was confused. Go ahead. Up to a thousand pounds from 2.2 pounds to a thousand pounds. And there's no gravity whatsoever in this model. There's no center tractor. So it's just four Texas and two magnetic fields, a north and a south flirty and one harmonic resonance, which is emanating the vibration in the field. In this region here, where these vortexes are pointed, so it kind of just oscillates to give it a little bit of randomness and motion. So with the particles, we'll kind of interact and bounce around like smoke or water waves and water. And then when I hit play, it does it all by itself using physics simulation. So there's no animations at all in this model. And when I play it, this is what pops out. Holy fuck. And then when I look down to top, it makes the actual hexagon that NASA has observed on the top of Saturn without any gravity. And you'll see that you had a surface of the sphere on the inside with the heavier particles. So the colors are you basically saying, is this saying that you guys can recreate planets? Yes, this is a particle simulation of the physics involved in making up the planet Saturn. Like all the, so the heavier particles are creating the red and the green. Can I pause this for a second? Yeah. So is he saying that just by doing these calculations, he created the exact form of Saturn, including the rings? Just the exact form of the calculation. Just with the calculation, change the angles of incidence that these lynch transcos remember, each one of these are opposing vortices. So there's 12 vortices to this that are opposing. So once the angles of incidence change, you can, you change the motion and pressure conditions, you can now change the condition or the crystallization. It all, so I was saying with the periodic table, now because we have the angles of incidence, and the period of engineering can now separate the space between carbon and nitrogen or carbon and boron, and have the same elements of titanium, vanadium, chromium, magnetase, and iron or nickel, cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc, gallium, or germanium. In those higher octaves, we can do that between silicon and phosphorus or silicon and aluminum. The transparent aluminum now becomes possible because we can now control the pressure and change the pressure and motion conditions, where we couldn't do that before, because they were going by Cartesian space at 90 degrees and 45 degrees straight lines, the Euclidean space that they've made up this orthogonal or church-like space that they've generated, because they wanted to promote that cross. That was the basis of all of that. Now we open ourselves up. This is what happens when four bubbles meet. This is the negative space from when four bubbles are meeting. That's hydrogen. That's why when I went to Uganda I was like, look, look, we have an entirely new system of hydrogen that I've got a patent where we were able to, you won't need projectiles in the guns anymore. If you pull up my patent for projectile before we do that though, should we finish this? Oh yeah, finish this video. And then Jamie and it's on the shelf. I want to see a photo of that hexagon on the top of the Saturn. So let's put this just another minute. I feel like we could do an 80 hour podcast. So we haven't even got... We're just introducing a image band. Which is another super-symmetrical system. I'm barely hanging on. No, you're not. Oh no. Yes, every time I'm shrinking in this video, it just doesn't like to do this. Huh. Oh, that's going on. Is it the codec? I have no control of the computer. Altab does nothing. Escape does nothing. D-oh. The base part does nothing. Maybe you dropped your computer. Maybe you dropped your computer, Jamie. I'm not trying to write it right. But Jamie, the burner computer. Yeah, they don't want their God killed. Gravity has been the thing they've been holding on to from the beginning. And it's just an effective electricity. It's the draft left over by electricity. Is it working, no, Jamie? It's just like another false reset. So let me get my stuff back together here. But we've seen that portion of it. So what I'm saying, the... Yeah, right there. Yeah. Alright, we'll try. This is kind of funny. Has this ever happened to you up before? No, no. Fascinating. Yeah, if you want to be paranoid. I'm not paranoid. I am. I'm a bit of a skeptic. I'm a real-less. If it's an A is equal to B and B is equal to C, then A is equal to C. If this has never happened before, and it's always happening to me, maybe I'm just bad luck. And my bad luck. No, here we go. Okay. Without any graphic. And you'll see that you had a surface of the sphere on the inside with the heavier particles. So the colors of... I just love you, Carl. Are you basically saying, is this saying that you guys can recreate planets? Yes. This is a particle simulation of the physics involved in making the physics. Wow. Like all the... Yeah. So the heavier particles are creating the red and the green, the hexagon is. And those are the heavier ones creating the shell of a planet. And then the outside are lighter particles that are fluid. It's creating the counter rotation of the atmosphere from Saturn. Like we observe scientifically. And the red ones in the middle here are worth a magnetic field is strongly polarized at the north and south poles, which keeps you overboard. Yeah. I have a question. Now does this mean that you would be able to control what kind of atmosphere the planet has as well? Like you can change that? Because you can create it. I mean, you can change it. We now have a system by which you can get a range of the atmosphere in any conditioner. So you can have human-like characters which is not. If you were able to change in all of these external fields and that understand, like at least this would give us a method of studying it in such a way that we now understand that it's external pressures being applied from the outside end, not the standard model where you have internal vision reaction and if we were in a planet with magnetic fields from iron cores, etc. I hope that's all that's all kind of ego based at the center. This is pretty solid evidence that everything we're observing is from the outside coming in. So the entire universe is actually creating these planets from the outside end, from space itself. The pressure is running great. You can stop it. Now what so? Go to that image. Like if you picture dropping a pebble into a pond or a pool, everything expands in these longitudinal waves, perfect spheres unless there's something else in there. But when it hits the edge, it all starts bouncing its way back and when it meets, when these returning waves meet expanding waves, that's when we get our first geometry. So this is the proof that the universe is not infinite but finite because you could not have shape without the returning waves and the waves would not return unless it was bouncing off of the edge of something. Look how strange that is. Bingo. Look how strange that hexagon on the top of the of Saturn is. Or yeah, that's Saturn. Yep. And then we don't even end. That is so crazy. This explains exactly how he built it, all the angles of incidents, all the pressure systems that he used, all of that is so it can be a repeated experiment. But they've ignored this. This is in the beginning of my book. You go to my book. That's the first page on there. Before you even open it up, I've got this and we rebuilt the Milky Way galaxy the same way and it predicts the star arrangement better than NASA does. And this is without dark matter. This is without dark energy. This is without the standard model. So it's dark matter or dark energy. Are they primarily theoretical? That's all theoretical. They've never witnessed it. And we couldn't prove that Michael said morally experiment that they did in 1887 which said that there was no effect because they tried to move a table around and change the angle of incidence for light to see if the light changed when you move the table. The experiment is like this. The mental experiment is like this. If you're going to experiment, you have an A structure and you have an idea of how A behaves and you have a thought that if you put A in a particular situation, it's going to turn into B. So let's picture it hypothetically like you have a bar that's maybe six inches long of iron. And you say, okay, well, I think if it goes into the freezer that it's going to get shorter. So you're supposed to have two exact bar six inches out and leave one outside of the refrigerator. Freezer and put one in the freezer. And then you compare them after you see it. So A over x is equal to B over x. R is the result or the change between them. B is the change that occurs. R is what faction or the x that you use in order to get back to A or to convert it to B. What they did with the Michaelson Morley experiment because they could not get out of the ether. They couldn't step outside of the ether because it's everything around us. So they couldn't tell a difference whether they saw no result, no change. So they assumed there was a void that there was no ether there. And that's when particle physics took off. Lorentz and Lorentz, a great physicist that everybody loved, entered a paper in 1904 where he was continually explaining the ether. The same way that Maxwell, all of his theories came off of there being an ether, but he was still limited by Newtonian laws and the column force of opposite to tracking when it's the positive. The things that are like that attract, but he believed that the ether was still in space was flat. And so space time or Einstein relativity came as a result of them taking the ether away. And for 100 years we've walked down this particle physics, physics world. That's all theoretical. And here I've patented these wave conjugations that is the ether, is the contraction of the ether, and the expansion of it. And on top of that, the proof of it was I've been able to build new industries from it. If you'll go to, I want to introduce the linchpin if I can. With all of the talk. Before we do that, do you tell me how a planet is formed under this theory? So you have a sun, and how does the sun give birth to these planets? The same way we defecate and have gas, like Jupiter's that red spot on Jupiter, that's spinning on it. That's going to become a moon. It may take a billion or two billion years. That will ultimately become a moon off of Jupiter. Where is it? Right at the equator. Where do we discharge it? Right at our equator. And then it will roll, take its way around and slowly be pushed out by the solar wind of, well, by Jupiter. So like coronal mass ejections. Coronal mass ejections. So some kind of ejection of matter leaves the sun, and over billions and billions of years, enough of it collects. And there's enough of a force. To where ultimately that coalescing idea that they have, those are, that's where it happens. It's not from materials that's just been left over from the big bang. You know, like Rupert Schilberg, Selt Sheldrig says, you know, that's physicists of today as far. You give us one miracle. And you know, show us how everything came from nothing and we'll explain everything else. And they can't explain everything else. They can't just explain the morphic resonance that's happening between things like right now because I've discovered these wave conjugations. Every person. explain the morphic resonance that's happening between things like right now because I've discovered these wave conjugations. Every person on the planet that's been thinking about it will now have ideas concerning but not just us but all humanoids throughout the entire universe will now get that same resonance and be able to apply it like the experiments with the rats. You teach a rat something here in London and then in New York you find the rats are doing the same thing. Right. spontaneously because of the morphic resonance because we are all connected on this ether in that waveform is that's the consciousness. We are all just one great being. Yeah. You know that's what they forget. We're not separate. We're all the universe is probably one cell inside of some super organism. Right. And we're just little, little, who, you know, who is like like Horton years of who and trying to make sense of it. And it's a beautiful thing that we're making sense of it. But everything is just one great being. We're all God. That's what Jesus was talking about. That's what, that's what, you know, Buddha was talking about. It's, it's recognizing that if anything you, what I did as a child, I said I'm going to. Instead of waiting for the Messiah to show up. What if everybody picked up their torture stake and behaved and did the things that they had expected the Messiah to do? What if everybody just for one day walked around and behaved as if they were God himself and did the things that they would expect to create or and we know God can't just be a male because no man can produce a child without a female. Everything in the universe as above so below like Bill of Carson always talks about you can't. Everything has an equal and opposite. It has to mate. Mating is a big part of what we do. The car, the, the, the boron mates with nitrogen and that's how the carbon happens. Everything inside of us all ourselves. They're mating. There's a relationship going on in it. Everything's alive. There is no death but that the Bible talked about a mechanistic world. God took dirt and blew into it the breath of life and it came to life. But if you look at the Brownian effect, what is breathing going from positive to negative and they see all it's even the plastic that makes these things up are still going from. It's still, it's still carbon polarizing from positive to negative breathing in breathing out. It's just under a different state of matter but there is no death. There's no death. We're all everything's eternal and once we forget once we get rid of the idea, okay, you're going to die and disappear. You know, then they don't have any graphs over you anymore and to be free. The truth will set you free. You know, that's why I was like, okay, well if I have to, if this truth caused me this lifetime, then wonderful, I have accomplished what I needed to do because I think in the previous lifetime I was supposed to do these things and I didn't. And that's why it's been so hard for me and that's why I pushed so hard to get these things out because you felt like that from the womb. I had to get this felt like you had these things that you didn't get out in a previous lifetime and now you feel like an unstoppable urge. I have to. I have to at all costs. So can I go, I would love to talk more about this but I don't want to lose this thought. So if I want to go back to the formation of planets. So under this theory, these stars eject matter and over time this matter will achieve a certain amount of distance from the Sun. Short distance. Look at Mercury. Mercury isn't that far from it. Right. It kind of makes sense. And then over time it'll eventually get further and further out. The Sun will continue to make more and more planets over an imperceptible amount of time. We won't be able to measure it. In our world we'll see it. It's a pure static. Just like plants appear static. Yes. But if you ever watch a one of those most. Secret capture of plants. Yeah. Plants are moving and touching each other and they're just doing it at a pace that our brain can't handle. A different in poor old dimension. Yes. So the Sun is creating planets but it's doing so at a pace that our mind can't really wrap around. So we want to think there's just matter that it's in its flying through space. And it's in an immense collects via gravity and the more mass the more gravity. It's supposed to but look at the take a balloon. Another thing that kills gravity. Gravity is supposed to be the greater the mass is the greater the attractor. You take a balloon. You rub it on your leg. You put it over the ground. Watch the dust particles jump off the ground. Off this big mass called the earth and jump onto that balloon because why electricity is 137 times stronger than the pool of gravity or the effects of the so called gravity. It's the electric force. That's the attractive force. It's the electric force that tightens everything together as the masculine. And then the dividing force is the radiative force, the magnetic field. It oblates and pushes everything out. And then they collect together again. But where are these things meet? At the proper angles of incidence. Like the Birkeland Currents talked about. Those plasma currents talked about. Those angles of incidence is at 120 degrees. When it converts it back into electricity and it will keep collecting and coming and making it. It doesn't come in and making life. The planet isn't a dead thing. It didn't just happen to come together. That's just the process by which it was given life. It's alive. And it's screaming. It thought we were going to be beneficial to it. And now it's trying to kill us. It's now it's it needs to scratch itself and get rid of us because we are too dangerous because we are using antiquated fundamentals. Like people say, what business do you have coming in here talking about science and all that you are an actor? You want to know what my first patent was. The entire AR-VR world was built off of my first patent that was abandoned because I paid $260,000 for the worldwide patent. But then my agents kept not my lawyer kept sending me these maintenance fees and annuities. And I'm like these folks are just trying to shake me down. I'm not going to pay this. Well, a year later, if you would pull up my world of Windows patent, I think it's one of the first patents up there. I want you to see where your AR-VR world came from. And you look at the list of companies that has cited and didn't just cite it. They built the entire AR-VR world off of my world of Windows patent. Can you pull that up, Jamie? If the computer. Yeah, it's the very, not that one, not that one, not that one. Yeah, that's the propulsion patent. No, no, no. That's all you have, huh? Really. If you can go to Terry's Linchpin, I'll show you in here. This is what we put together for. Is that online? This is online. Text me that link and I'll just answer that. Yeah. You got it? You got it. Okay. So merging virtual reality, it says merging virtual reality with reality. Go down patents and files that they're first on the top of that. So you're going to look over to, you will see my name, inventor, parents to show on Howard. Worldwide application, and let's just read the abstract just so they are done. System and method for merging virtual reality and reality. Scroll it, so I can see it. To provide an enhanced sensor experience. A system and method of merging virtual reality, sensory detail from a remote site into a room environment at a local site. The system preferably includes at least one image server, a plurality of image collection devices, a display system, compromising display devices, a control unit, digital processor, and a viewer position detector. The control unit preferably receives the viewer position information and transmits instructions to the digital processor. The digital processor preferably processes source data representing an aggregated flow, aggregated field of view from the image capturing devices in accordance with the instruction to receive from the control unit and outputs the refined data representing a desired display view to be displayed on one or more display devices. We're in the viewer position detector dynamically determines the position of the viewer in the room environment and changes the desired display view corresponding to position changes of the viewer. Now you see this is all you. Look at the inventor, go back, go up to the slide-o-says, Terence, to show on Howard. Worldwide patent 2010, it was abandoned. Now go to side-ed by. You see that 131 side-ed by tap on there? It's right under where it says abandoned. Yep, patent, patent, I keep. Side-ed by 31. Side-ed by 31. It's to the right, yep, right there. Tap on there and look at all the companies. If you look at the patent, these companies have all earned, they have multi-billion dollar companies they've built off of my patents. Just roll through. Sony Microsoft, Fazon, Hewlett Packer. Keep going, keep going, keep going. I believe. And it's still making money. This patent has earned over $7 trillion. And you didn't get a piece. And I haven't gotten a penny of it. When they did all of the Black Lives Matter and like, let Raytheon company. And IBM, IBM, if you're crazy. There's, and it still has another nine years. Another eight years in which I would be making money off of it, but what they didn't know is they didn't understand how it was really supposed to work. So they've just been taking this gun and been using it as a bat. And if they wanted to know I could show them how it really, really works. But this is proof that my stuff is legit. So let me ask you this before we stray away from this too much. The concept of gravity. So if it's all electricity that's causing these forces and it's all outside in, when the Saturn-fire rocket is escaping Earth's atmosphere, what is it fighting against? What that's fighting against is the rotation. Remember, there's a citripetal spin that's taking place with the Earth. And there's an electrical field that's generated from that. That's that's centripetal spin that holds things inside. That's what it's fighting against. That's that electric field. And we're calling it gravity. We're calling it gravity. But gravity is just the effect of the electric field and the electric field is balanced by them. The radiative field. And the more mass something has, the more it gets pulled. Greater electric potential it has. You know, the tighter the way the heavier it is, the more it is. The way it's our tighter. Electricity can now, it doesn't have to jump over anything. And as I showed you with some of the pieces, as long as they're close together, then you don't have the magnetic field that forms that discharge because they're able to stay south, north or easternly in their direction. They're not forced to go south, westernly and spin out. Either you're spinning to the right or spinning to the left. That's it does only two directions in the universe. Spinning to the right is northeastern. That's it. That's electric. spinning to the left. It's magnetic and it's expanding out. It's contracts in fifths and expands in sixes. And so now what I would love to do is invite Neil deGrasse and David Tong or any astrophysicists, any chemist, anyone in any field of science to sit down with me and examine these patents, examine the supersymmetrical systems that I've developed. But I want to show you Lynchpin now. Here I've been bent here, now Oscar nominated actor, that has known all around the world, face recognition, vocal recognition, all around the world. I've invented a new form of flight, tangential flight, the ability to fly around your own center of mass, something they've never been able to do. And you don't hear anything about it. And it's unlimited bonding. If you can go to what Jonathan Davis sent over, he's one of the other programmers that work with us. Explain what it does. Explain what you said, flight? What do you mean? Tangential flight. What do you mean by that? It means right now, fix wing aircraft, you can go in four degrees of direction and go up, down. You know, some can go forwards and backwards and right to left. But this is able to spin around its own center of mass. Completely spin around its own center of mass, something they've never, people are able to do it by falling. But this is a sustained system that's able to go around. I sent that other video to you. But their ability, because this is the geometry of hydrogen, any bond that hydrogen can make. Lynchpin can make it what they're basically doing is building a periodic table. In front of you, if you play four of them coming together, it's for like 30 second videos. You know, I'll explain it out. But you'll see how these things align themselves. Well, this is this form. And they're all following this queen as a colony. And they'll do everything that she's doing. There's go to the very first video. There's four in a row on it. Oh, that's how it came up to you. Well, let's see which one it says. This is four of them that's going to come together to pick up a barrel. And what's powering them? Right now, we're going to use hydrogen fuel cells. But I have another system that I was going to talk about in a second. But it's an unlimited source of power. So hydrogen fuel cells or you can use lithium batteries. And they're. So how are they moving? Like what is that like of those like propellers? Yeah, those are props. But okay. But that right there, what we have right there is it's a pitch. The, the, the, the, the, the. Wow. Collective pitch. So instead of the props having to turn themselves around. And instead of all the props having to turn themselves around to stop and turn the opposite direction. They just switch the direction. They just, they just, so it's a collective pitch. And it changes. And so now instead of going up, you're going down, but now five of them will come together. And watch what the five does with. So this is the end of cranes. Oh. This is the, and how many is necessary. And they can, since this is the, this is the fractal. They can be as small as, as a nanoparticle or they can be as large as the universe. Because the entire universe comes down to this. So I was trying to reach out to Elon Musk. I was trying to reach out to Jeff Bezos. I was trying, because my main goal was I was building these to clean up the upper atmosphere. All of that debris that's up there. And ultimately the mind, the, the, the asteroid belt. Because you can't go out there. They keep talking about going out there. That's like, you try and go that far away. That's like, that's like taking a starfish from the bottom of the ocean and bringing up to where we are. Everything expands. The nitrogen expands too much. That animal dies. You take us outside where Mars is. Nitrogen has expanded so much more. The hydrogen has expanded so much more that you will never be able to. You won't even have a spaceship or a, a suit on that's strong enough to keep your body together. And you will never be able to come back to 93 million miles away from the sun. Because everything will have expanded and you will expand to the point of the security. And explode out. So trying to send a man out to Mars is like trying to send a man to live on Venus. The pressure is too tight near Venus. We will get crushed in a second. It's like being pushed to the bottom of the ocean immediately. You will get crushed immediately. The pressure conditions change as we move from the sun. But science have neglected that because they've said it's a void there. And they don't account for that higher pressure condition. But they found that radioactive decay is quicker closer to the sun near Venus. Why? Because the pressure condition that electric field and those magnetic fields are pushing on each other, causing it to turn back into an electric force in comparison to further away when the sun, when the earth is closer to the sun, they found that radioactive decay is quicker than when it's further away from the sun. Is that by accident? Or is it just because of the change of pressure condition? So us talking about going out with my wife said on the thing, are we going to be able to put people on Saturn? No. It's too nebulous. It's expanded out too far. Our pressure, we would have to have a suit so strong and powerful in order for us to do that. But Lynchpin is able to make it out there because we have another propulsion system that we've put together. We're unable to take water and put it into a small change. And this patent has been granted. It's the propulsion projectile. And we patented it as a gun because I didn't want anybody else to be able to use it like a gun. But it's basically lightning in the bottle. We take water and we put it inside of a small chamber based on the wave conjugations that I have. And the angles of incidence. And we run an electric charge through a small amount of water. The water is not able to expand into gas like it wants to because it's locked into the pressure condition. So immediately it converts into plasma. And it converts the gas dimension into a power dimension. So it's lightning out of the barrel. Just from water. And there's no in like which. It's a real lightning gun like this. Yes. Yes. So, and the patent's been granted. Typically, you're limited to how much charge you can put inside of a cartridge. And you know, you have to get more and more charged or explosive in there to get something out. But with electricity, you can send a thousand votes or a million votes through the same aperture. And that water is uncompressible. And so it's just going to react. And immediately it converts into a plasma. And so it's we can project anything into space. All of that has been accomplished. And it's ignored. So it can access the propulsion system for rockets to rocket anything and in space. And that's the whole point for it to because there's just nothing but moisture and that collective ice in there. So you can now the linchpins can go all the way past Mars, attached themselves to whatever asteroid. Mine that asteroid bring it back and have in one of the librarians areas. So for the audience out there, Lagrange areas are those areas where two or multiple magnetic fields meet. And there's no wait to something. Another death blow to gravity was the fact that it's not a constant. It could not be a constant because things weigh heavier on the poles of the earth than it does on the surface of the earth. It does on the surface of the poles than it does at the equator. They're heavier at the poles than they are at the equator. And the further away from the earth you go, the less it goes. So there's no consistency about gravity. It is not a constant. It is a coefficient. And it's more so just an effect. And it's the same thing with the Planck scale. You look at the Planck scale or the Planck length or the Planck weight. All of those things are based upon gravity. And they're supposed to occur at 10 to the 15, 10 to the minus 15, the Planck scale. But at 10 to the minus 35 is where the proton and all of that behaves. They have gravity inside of there as if it's affecting it. But they've already said that at a small molecular level, gravity has no effect. So how is that part of a Planck scale? There's a guy flimming that talks a lot about this. But you take that, you look at the speed of light. Is that a constant? In 1928, they saw that there was different fluctuations between 1928 and 1948 between the speed of light. And then out of nowhere, and Rupert Schildrich talks about this, out of nowhere, they began to be a constant again, where there were fluctuations before, and he asked one of the professors about it. And he said, oh, it's a thing that we call intellectual phase locking, where when they get different measurements for the speed of light, all of the scientists around the world will average it out to one thing, instead of showing the fluctuations in it. Oh, wow. It's called intellectual phase locking. It's not possible to see the crude methods of measurement that they have available. No, they could. They've been able to measure light. The speed of light, since Galileo was measuring Io, going around Jupiter. And that's how they came up with the speed of light, was how he watched Io going around Jupiter and saw that there was a difference in how the light behaved. And they've been able to get very close measurements to what they thought was the speed of light. But it's never been a constant because it changes depending upon the medium it's going through. So there's no constant there, but they have that as part of the playing scale. But the lynch pin, the wave conjugations, the tetrian, it's the end of it's the end of plump. It's the end of Schrodinger's equation. It's the end of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. And I'm ready to have the debate at any university, anytime they want to. But they have no comeback for it because I have four super-symmetrical systems. And that's the thing about geometry. Geometry is its own proof. Super symmetry is its own proof. Whereas equations, anybody can have an equation. And only certain people can try and understand it. And it can be fudge with renormalization, where anytime they have an infinity, they renormalize it. That's why Dyson left the whole group back in 1940s when they were talking about quantum electrodynamics. And Feynman said it himself, with this renormalization. Is that real physics? Is this real math? All of them recognize that this is fudging because they went the wrong direction by taking the ether out of the equation. And now I have proof of the ether and how it behaves. Wow. I wish I could really truly understand exactly what you're saying. Because I'm kind of getting it and you're doing a great job explaining it. But if you're right, that really changes everything. Everything. And it accounts for why physics kind of hits a stalling point. They've been going in the wrong direction. 96% of physics is unknown matter. That they've had to make up to account for it. And we were able to build Saturn without that. We were able to show the extent that it also has a hexagon. It's very bizarre. The age of the universe, you can wind up all of the satellites, all of the planets in every solar system, and can wind up and get back to the real age of our universe would be gazillion gazillion gazillions of years based upon this drift if you walk away from that big bang or special relativity. Because that was the cause of all that. Black holes came from the thought of gravity going crazy. When gravity goes crazy, you know, light won't even be able to escape from it because light was thought as moving as a particular ground state. We've just killed that. What do you think a black hole is? It doesn't exist. There aren't black holes. There's no spot where the energy goes in and never comes back out. There's no place in the universe where the information paradox occurs where there is an imbalance. Something gets contracted and never comes out. That's not how the universe behaves. It comes in and it goes out. When Newton said that gravity pulls down, if it's at wood that apple, yes, the apple was attracted to light conditions on the earth. It was attracted to light conditions. If he had spent another week or two weeks watching that apple, he would have watched the gases go right back up to where they were equalized. Everything, if it comes this way, it has to go this way. Breathe in and breathe out. It's filling in or pouring out. So what do you think they're detecting when they're detecting black holes? What that shift that they're talking about, that's the tornado. Remember, there's a vortices. There's all these huge vortices. Everything is spinning around a vortices. So a collection of large vortices is going to have the same thing. That's happening at the center of the galaxy is happening in a center of a hurricane. It's happening in your toilet still. Which is why the galaxy is a circular disk in the first place. Everything, all motion is expressed in waves, all waves are expressed in curves. It always makes virus. So because of the concept of gravity, and because of the concept of this event horizon, this superpoint of gravity, this infinite point that light can't even escape, that this exists because of the very gravity. And their math, remember, they have a thing called zero. They go from one to zero to negative one. There is no zero to even think zero. So do you think that zero is a concept that came along with currency? It should be attached to currency in that regard, because in physics, there is, it's either nothing remains steel. There's nothing steel in the universe. There's nothing that doesn't have motion because everything is connected. So if one thing is steel, everything that's connected to it has to be steel. There can never be one thing steel. So as electricity tries to get to its balance state, right when it gets there, magnetism takes over, it pushes over. So there's this pendulum. And as soon as it gets to this state, it bounces off that other noble gas, and it makes its way all the way back over here, and it's about to have equanimity, and then it gets pulled back into the other direction. And that's the breathing, and the breathing out, and the pendulum effect that we've all observed in natural phenomena in the universe. And that's a part of everything. Everything behaves that way. Every one of ourselves, comes down to our cells are made up of water, mostly water, 80%, 90% water, somewhere. Water is hydrogen. Hydrogen has 12 vertices. That's behaving with it. 12 opposing vertices. So what in your model, what happens to these suns when they supernova? Everything gets old and die. Everything gets old and die. And does everything recompress? Cast it. And you breathe out what happens to that air, another plant breathes that area. So would this be the universe itself? Would it be galaxies? Would it be everything? Everything is the same way. So as the sun expands and projects and it jacks particles, they expand. They go further and further from the sun at a certain point. They come back. Well, at a certain point, what did they hit? There's other expanding stars and... And... Expand they go further and further from the sun at a certain point they come back well at a certain point what did they hit there's other expanding stars and and and and So like waves colliding yes in return the other from the other from the other star systems They have an expanding. What is the the? Think up the solar wind they have expanding solar wind so when they meet our our plant our star meets a Solar wind from another star at that end of that spot now there's two pressure conditions So you have another Lagrange spot that's happening there. That's when those waves start coming back, but they get hit and they If they hit at 120 degrees because that's how the universe is arranged Now these things become electric so they instead of coming from the planar side and expanding out at the quader They now come back up from the northern and southern parts So does this account for stellar nurseries? Yes all of these things are just pressure conditions hitting each other and They're causing that that's where the Birkland currents are running through those higher electrical fields But everything in the universe is just electricity and we call it magnetism when it's revitalized, but it's still electricity We call the the radiate of side It's the feminine side and the the contractive side is the positive masculine side There it's a balance and it's never been it's never been anything but that balance and we've complicated it With a lie if you're right so many people are wrong Everyone's wrong over the universe the universe backs me up And I have the proof of it you you have all these physicists that saying something different But none of them have 97 patents none of them have introduced a new form of flight With unlimited midair bonding none of them have discovered four super symmetrical systems This is what we've done. This is what the collective is able to do When you put yourself into the divine space Because that spirit is waiting is just like okay, are you gonna make yourself available for it? So let me ask you this if you fire the magic wand and I allowed you to Not just show this but allowed all of these people that have these opposing ideas You you debate them you do get out you emerge victorious Okay with this magic wand and now people just listen to turns What do we do well then once we now we write new new asked new axioms and new postulates based off the real wave conjugations now we adjust our understanding of our physics to fit natural phenomena and Then we are in balance with it and we have to let go of the idea of this currency with the only creatures in the known Universe that uses currency The uses an indirect form of payment instead of a direct exchange We have to get past that point and that's the hard thing Because this entire world is run on that and that's where the one times one equaling to Came into it into its real birth. Well think about currencies. It's connected to technological innovation because of this Unlimited potential for growth and when you have an unlimited potential for growth You have people that are extremely motivated to make massive amounts of money and they innovate in a very high way And then they also implement that innovation in the form of technology But their technology is is antiquated compared to mine There's no government on this planet that has the technology that I have or can outdo what I have because you can't outdo the fractal How many people have you I know you spoke at Oxford about this, but you didn't speak Yeah, they didn't know they didn't Oxford did something that that broke my heart Five minutes before the presentation They wouldn't allow me to have a screen and show And show my proof why No, the computer was down and I was like well you use my computer No, we have sensitive things attached to it. You know, I just need to protect there I don't need anything else because they just they didn't want me to go and talk about this And that's why I went out there and said hey pull out your calculator I talked about acting for a couple minutes for 20 minutes and I was like pull out your calculator And I want you to enter the square root of two in there and I let's walk through this loop That is the square root of two. I was like let's walk through this where the square root of two cubed is the same value as The square root of two times two and then when you divide it by two and cube it again you get back to the You take the square root of two 1.424 to 135 623 730 95 You cube it. It's 2.828 427 121 74 61 90 divided by two it get back to 1.414 Cube it again is back to 2.828 divided by two back to 1.414. Here we're making here We're taking one two three big steps We're dividing it by two and we get back to the same value as we had in the very beginning That's a loop that's x cube being equal to 2x which is equal to x plus x That's an unnatural equation and every quantum equator quantum mechanics and quantum physics equation has that square root of two in there We've been living in this lie this fostered lie for so long Because in what's the solution to that the solution is learning how to multiply volume matrically How the universe multiplies and I've already produced all of these things Could you explain that though to the to the layperson? How does the universe? Multiply volume matrically as opposed to the way it does not move does it linearly? It does not walk on all of our math is based upon a two-dimensional projection What they do in calculus they will reduce one act if the action of all things They'll keep trying to reduce it down to one moment because they believe Newton's first law that everything is Moves in a straight line or everything is steel until acted upon They'd forget that everything is in motion and that concert of motion is a necessity They have to include all the other forces involved in order to have equanimity in their equations and so how in a practical sense is this effect mathematics? Well once we let go of Cartesian space in the 90 degree angles. We'll picture this let's take it Another practical place look at a computer chip It has all of these 90 degree turns on it typically where they run electricity Can you imagine running at 186,624 miles a second in One direction and you hit a 90 you hit a wall and you've got to stop Bounce off of that wall and then you pick up your speed and you bounce off the next wall And you bounce off the next and next and the next and the next how much heat are you building up? How much friction is being built up from the interference in comparison to if it was just spherical? Just going around it would build up no heat and They feel allowed to be spiral which my patent was talking about that first patent was talking about You're able to utilize all that energy so you don't need the cooling systems You don't need all this loss or entropy None of that occurs when you go by universal standards That's all they have to do is follow what the universe does we have the the contractive side patented Ready and available we have the expanded side Patent it worked out already ready and available and we've got the Constitution between the two of them But right, but how does that affect in a practical use? If you're using math on a calculator, what is wrong with what the calculator is saying? The calculator right now is still saying that we're on a linear path and It's just multiplying things in a core in a compartmentalized space So by reductionist viewpoint by breaking things down to simple numbers that you really can't just do that You can you can try to do it, but it's like the piano Remember the piano the earlier pianos they had before they compartmentalized and Everything was like remember that everything in the universe expands as a sphere everything Even music expands as a sphere, but what they did with the piano is they took all the 12 notes And then they just start them all over again Instead of accounting for the expansion that space so you would never if you're looking at the periodic table You would never get to the titanium or to the rubidium or to the seasium because they would all keep it with just the seven tones They don't allow for the necessary expansion so you don't have all of these other isotopes to use Because they keep things here. You don't allow your child. Nope. Nope. Nope. You're not gonna get taller I need you to stay just at at at four feet. That's the height That's how high you can go you will now be allowed to grow further and we naturally keep growing and expanding out So they have to allow that but their math doesn't allow it because it believes in a two-dimensional space and remember There are no two-dimensional spaces because in order for anything to be perceived It has to be measurable and measurable needs three dimensions But it actually needs four and needs your perspective You are the fourth dimension and that's what Walter Russell also talked about that it was four things coming together And that's what woke me back up and I was like four bubbles meeting But he still believed in the idea of straight lines. He was still him then by it And he's right there becomes a cube sphere There comes a point where everything comes together But even how do I'm gonna try and pull up This is because we can create straight lines that we can create it because even when you look at it under Lecture on microscope. You'll see all the little curved dots that make it up There are no straight lines like if you look right in the box if you look at this you'll say oh that's a square right there Right in the middle sure you'll see that square happening right there But if you look at it from the side From its real perspective you see that it's not the straight lines are an illusion Again, we are being fooled by our senses because there is no motion in the straight line So all these homes that they're building And they keep wondering why did they keep blowing over? Why don't you make the homes look like a mushroom Follow the curvature of nature and you won't have to worry about rebuilding them in hurricane zones or in Intornado zones. It'll go right over it. They don't make airplanes. That's just a straight box They've allowed it to be aerodynamic and curved They moved away from the straight lines in that that aspect in boats They don't have a you know the Noah's Ark moving across like To that like I said, no man would be attracted to a Cartesian woman to a Euclidean woman something just straight like this We we need the curvature like the Allewein said we need the wiggles We live we like the wiggles attached to it. Yeah, that makes sense about homes Why do they why did they keep making them flat when And they keep getting blown around over the fussy easy to make they're easy to make but it's easier to make the curved ones It would be much simpler to do it, but all of our technology is built on These bricks of the platonic solid so now we have new building materials with what I've introduced Entirely new building materials that we can use that have proven and it's super symmetrical That you don't have to just stay with the with the rectangle. Yeah You can do anything you want and you can produce energy. Well, you I want to show the magnetic field We've talked about the electric field. Well, you show the video for It's a light column. Let me pause real quick. I gotta take a leak. Let's pause and we'll come back to that so Pick it up with magnetic field We'll know where to Okay, where were we Magnetic what There it is. Yes, so okay. This is This is me taking this is the feminine side and me taking four of them and stacking them on each other We have my wife ran one string of lights down the middle of it, but watch as this spins What is this that I'm looking at I called it light sculpture. It's my transcendental lighting Wow A new form of lighting This is insane. This looks like a psychedelic experience But this is this is repeating this is rebuilding and predicting the way field the entire way field of how it behaves That's what the magnetic field show that again That's why I call it transcendental lighting because you could sit up there sober and Get taken into an entirely new place and I just spent it. I have it on a little string at the top and I just turned it Yeah, if you just make one of these and have it rotating on some sort of Engine people would just trip balls stare at that and nobody is You know, it's like I can completely change the lighting industry And that's just one of the conjugations inside of there the gift that I gave you you'll see How the magnetic field bonds it interacts with itself? How they overlap if you take those all different ones Yeah, take those off of it. That's the electric field what you have right there all those are defined the electric field and you see they're contractive But inside of there You'll see That the magnetic field. How did you make these? I'll take acetate and They might think it's I take acid I take acetate You know and Draw out the flower on it. I take the pieces of the flower and then I use a soldering soldering You know, so you make all these my hands build all those by hand. So what this is crazy That right there is the light if you take that's That right there what you're holding in your hand if you no no take Where six bubbles me that that is the decay? This is electric and this is the magnetic side of it. This is that at its decay This is when the light is expanded out. This is the decay of the light field When it becomes a magnetic thing a magnetic expression light is blue electricity is blue Light comes out in in yellow and red And how is this concept of taking these forces and Converting them or representing them as these shapes. How is this received? Nobody has has responded to it. They won't the the universities. I went to Morgan state because of a really really beautiful brother Brought me up there to Morgan state because he saw these things. Yeah, no, I'm good He saw these things and he we set up an entire presentation at Morgan state Dr. Bargill even though I've written we've got three papers that's been peer reviewed You know the geometry of the proton and the tetrian That's been peer reviewed. He said there's no way this guy knows any of this stuff and so he Knows any of the things inside of here. So no one from the science department showed up so they bust in children from from different schools and I talked to them and I showed them how the universe working and they brought like 20 PhDs from outside That came in and I showed them how the universe really behaves You know, but none of them spoke on and out because what happens? What happened to Rupert? Shelter when you speak against the established norm you get pushed outside You don't get funding anymore. I think part of the problem is also that when someone defines someone as One particular occupation and for you It's you're a very talented actor. So people you're very talented actor My opinion And so people think of you in that way and so there's no way he's awesome at something else too Yeah, well a lot of that happened like you said the guided interview to interview you for rolling stone Yeah Eric Eric. I invited him into my home for two days And I walked him through all of these things, but he had an agenda at Rolling Stone They didn't say Terrence Howard has discovered this any of this it Terrence Howard a very dangerous mind So you put that kind of did they mean that in a complimentary way? I didn't read the article so it wasn't taken in the complimentary name So it's all you were crazy. They took it as crazy. Right and he tells you That I had something serious But to everyone else. I want to take you guys to something where Remember Nikola Tesla say it may say that mankind understood the magnificence of the numbers three six and nine He would have the keys to the secrets of the universe. If you will go to the lynch pins bonding Can I bring you back to the Rolling Stone thing though before because you kind of abandoned it? I think no I'm going to show you They had an agenda yeah because remember at the same time they were calling me a wife feeder and all of those things and then I put out the video showing what that same woman That had Painted in a black eye those pictures weren't made at the police station or at the hospital She took those pictures herself and she was was blackmailing me for years Because I used to I had um when we met And I was studying to be a Joe's witness. I was trying to do all those things So we you weren't having any sex or any of that stuff So we got engaged and I bring her to My home in Philly and I had this tape because I Anytime I had interactions with somebody I'd heard that um that Louis Louis Armstrong Recorded everything around him, you know it the same thing with Marlon Brando I recorded all these all his interactions with people So I was recording things and if I had phone sex with some girl I was recording that if we were having sex. I recorded that because I wanted to make sure it was proof of You know if anything happened right. I also recorded my mother The last two weeks before she died and I had that on a dictaphone and I didn't play with computers at the time and um She was like oh uh Why you get this on on the dictaphone? I can put it into the computer I was like oh great and we could keep it forever wonderful. You're so wonderful I go downstairs. I'm cooking some greens Two hours later I come upstairs all of my dictaphones From the last 15 years She has downloaded into her computer And then she's like I was like no, no, those are my private things. I don't Oh, no, it's okay. I can just hit delete And so I was like okay great and then three months later when I tried to break up with her because we had no sexual You know there was no Chemistry chemistry She was like you think I erased those things. I kept those And I know what you've done and and she started With the blackmail and all I really wanted back was my mother's tape You know where she told me. I know you're gonna be okay Terry I always knew you were gonna be okay. I just wanted my mother's voice back I paid her whatever money she wanted. She destroyed that She destroyed my name But I like I said, I thought that was uh death blow But that's what took me back when I had nothing That's what took me back to this and that Greater being started showing up again And you think if that had not happened you probably done further in front of the job of the vaccine The root of abandoned us. Oh my goodness. I had You know, I was doing iron man. Yeah, I don't know where you know That gets taken away. We did a three-picture deal With with Marvel a three-picture deal four and a half million for the first one Seven and a half to eight million for the second one 12 million for the third we signed it They come back to me the week that my mother dies my my and they caught my agent Charles King over at his at William Morris at the time and they said um yeah, we want Terrence But we we want to come back for a million dollars instead of the eight million that we had agreed to And my agent had an emotional reaction to a business decision and he said f you and hung up the phone will immediately they go to Don Chito And but instead of just doing that they had to spin. Oh, he was terrible on set and all Of these things and went through all this stuff and I'm calling Robert down in junior I'm calling him because when I was doing the brave one with with Jody Foster Susan Downey was a producer with Joe Silver I'm She comes over to my my my my trailer and she's like wow it's so amazing Congratulations on iron men. It's the first time they've hired The second lead before they've hired the first but Robert wants to go in there and they were talking about Clive Davis and all of that and I was like okay great You know, I'm just moving along doing my thing and it's just like but Robert really wants to go in But they won't see him and I was like I was like I love Robert I love what he does. I loved him in in in weird science I loved him who did they want him did they want to Clive Davis to play Play it because remember in the series War machine was supposed to take over right And I'm like well if Robert wants to come in that's why I called Avi a rod immediately He was the producer on it and I'm like Avi Here Robert wants to come in but you guys won't even let him audition is like no we came bond him I'm like instead of the four and a half you want to give me why don't you take a million dollars for the bond for him if he get if If and let him audition, you know, and so he gets the part Robert is like I love you. Thank you so much. Dada dada dada Well when this other thing happened. I'm calling Robert and he's doing Sherlock Holmes I call him 27 times and I'm like and leave a message. I'm calling his assistant I'm like I need the help I gave you I didn't hear from him until three years later. I'm bumped into him at Brian Grager's wedding And then but at that time that had Empire or whatever and I came back and he was like oh but everything worked out for you and you know that That broke me a little bit but I know how hard Robert had it Coming out of jail coming out of that jail and so if I was if I had to sacrifice myself in order for that because guess what if You could or any of them had Discovered one of the wave conjugations. They would have been happy I was given not just the one I was given the entire electric field and magnetic field and the Constitution between them So I was given so much more on my wife when she first saw the mirror all shape You know if you open it up you'll see it's the it's right here my wife looked at this the Feminine side because that's all I had really gotten to at that point She was like this is what you'll be remembered for and your acting will be just a footnote and You know, she's nursed me back to life because I was angry I was really angry and I was going to use all of the knowledge that I had and I was gonna destroy me I My god right out of Marvel. Oh, it's like yeah, I was about to but well, you didn't now It's I know I'm here to help mankind. This is You know Have the universities check out what I'm doing. It's one of the most fascinating things about this is that it's so easy to ridicule when an actor Has some thing that's outside of acting that changes everything But if you were just a person if you were just a person who went to school became fascinated with these concepts became obsessed and made it your life's work and You know, maybe you acted in college a little bit. No one would care. No But you would become successful as an actor as a bad guy Yes, and then you'd gone through all that bullshit so you going through other bullshit and now They're like no no no that guy there's no way those are threshold guardians though It's a necessary step for it. I would gladly trade whatever hundred million dollars. I would have made doing that For this right here what I've been able to do Right here like I said when Tesla said if mankind could understand the significance of three six and nine and have keys to the universe Will you play that video for me Jamie? Yeah, the linchpin bonding. It's stuff It's I think it'll be Well, there's this three of them. Yes, that one right there now before we play it If you count the struts and Watch how many struts bond as it becomes this right here. Okay, and just count it as it goes. Just let it play you'll see one two Three and we know this is a magnet magnetism because it's expanding in the center now you'll see six of these bonds and Those colors going across there is basically the periodic table five six yeah, and then the last one comes in and now you have your nine and This is Magnetism like I said magnetism expands at the center So you have your three six nine and it's back to that same fractal Again, so now what you if you will do me a favor so when Tesla said that what did he mean? He was talking about these numbers this this interaction of these three six and nine But this is all of them coming around the tetrian at 120 degrees This is how they all behave and this is the fractal because it keeps getting that to these four Vortices, but now I want to show you after let us go again so they could see it How all of this this is the grand unified field Put together now I want to show you Electricity in This space which would be the next one and you'll see five lynch pens bonding and you'll see that it collapses the dodeca hedron and that's the release of energy, but it'll still make that same tetrahedral space Watch so when I talk about materials engineering Now being able to be manipulated and you could see that the dodecahedron has been collapsed and these other Because electricity is seeking higher pressure conditions. It's more Dense and the way we're back to the and these five will keep bonding with other fives building predictable structures Not haphazard things these will four of these will come together and make a larger tetrahedron and then those will bond and make larger This is Jesus walking on water This is the proof in the pudding They don't have this for the chemical engineering programs now They don't need those models of just a ball and just that little rod anymore They now have what's necessary the carbon line is that yellow line in between it And when we put this in the solar apex and replace the sun with it it predicts every star on a galactic plane The elliptic the ecliptic plane and the celestial plane every single star Solar apex and replace the sun with it. It predicts every star on a galactic plane, the elliptic plane, and the celestial plane. Every single star it predicts and when we put groups of linchpin, it predicts entire relationships. So now that's why I say the Heisenberg uncertainty principle is out the window because now with this combined with the wave conjugations or with the mirror shapes, you can, whether it's expanding or contracting, we can now predict precisely where everything shall occur. And the linchpins have been, I've included all of that into the AI for the linchpins and the best thing about IBM and all of those other companies, Raytheon, taking my patent and making money off of it. Since I have priority, since I invented it, I can now use any innovation that they've done off of my patent and not have to pay them a licensing fee. Really? I have priority. Wow. So that's why I was like, where is Elon Musk? But they put all that, they put all that crap out there. And after that doctor did that stuff with the blood thing, they think everybody's a liar. But it's like, I'm not just an actor. One of the biggest things I've done is that patent ARBR world that we live in. Doctor, you mean that Elizabeth, whatever name was? Yes. But they think everything is a scam, and then you have the rolling stones, you have the guardian, you have all these people saying these negative things to where people wouldn't take it seriously and didn't even consider it. So I'm like, OK, and in nature, an animal isn't given horns unless it needs them. So our society as humans, we wouldn't be given this information right now unless we needed it, unless it was necessary for our continued existence and survival. We're about to destroy our planet, but with this, you don't need to. You don't need to, because now we know how to use the universe properly, where you can multiply that gun. We get more energy out of it than we put in, which physics says is impossible. And they gave me the patents to it. But nobody wants to have a conversation. When you think that the origin of hominids, that this is a naturally occurring thing that happens when a planet reaches a certain distance from its star in a Goldilocks zone with the proper materials. Of course. The pressure conditions created. Look at them. So you think this is happening everywhere, everywhere. Everywhere, because everything is alive. Look at what happens in the summer and in the northern, Portion. The island rod said, you'll see apples occurring at this time. They'll say that the tree is happening. Well, that what happens with the planet's, oh, it's peopleing. Whoa. This is just peopleing. This is what this is just what occurs at 93 million miles away from the sun. What do you think occurs after us? Well, once we get pushed out further, what happens? We need nitrogen to expand into unwanted oxygen. But since the nitrogen, since when we get pushed further out, the nitrogen is so far out, so we have to go deeper underground to have the pressure conditions that was equal to us having 93 million miles away from the sun. The deeper underground we go, the less light we have. And as a result of that, skin begins to gray. Eyes get bigger. All of those necessary things, the things that we see in aliens and all of that ends up taking place. As the animal adapts to changing environment, changing, changing pressure condition, we have to. We have to change. Why is it that why people are allergic to the sun? Because they've lived inside of a pressure condition, where it was not as much sun there. So when they get into this area where there's a lot of sun, now you have melanoma and all of those other issues. But if they're in their natural environment, they don't have any of those problems. So they have to keep recreating their natural conditions that allows them to have homogeneous nature with everything. But we're living outside of nature. Because we're acting on faulty ideas. Faulty fundamentals. We're still going with Euclidean straight lines when there are none. And we would rather think we have understanding of the universe at 4%. And keep the 96% as a mystery. And we invent all these science fictions, black holes, and dark matter, and dark energy, and all of this stuff, neutron stars that spinning so quickly. We invent all of these things. Because the math is off. Because the math is not based on equanimity. And they have normal renormalization. You know, I'm not going to go down the whole rabbit hole on it. But everything they've been doing, that's why they keep recreating and have a new theory for this now, a boson and a god particle and this. And you have the three quark model. And the gluons holding them together. And now we have the five quark model. And we have all of these extra things that they keep inventing. And they have the CERN collider smashing, living things together. Smash because these protons, their lives, everything is conscious. There's a, like, where's consciousness exist in mankind? Is it in our head and our body? What's the difference between men or mammals and plant life? Do you think a grain of rice has 54,000 genomes in it? We only have 26,000. Who is more evolved? But what's the difference between us? If you, Jamie, could pull up the, I have a picture showing hemoglobin and chlorophyll. And you're going to notice that the hemoglobin has the exact combination of carbon and hydrogen that we have, the only difference they have is the center of theirs is magnesium and the center of ours is iron. That's the only difference. You put a cephalopod up there. It would be copper. The same interaction of Kim. So where does consciousness occur? Where does the sentient being? Is it just in the iron? Or is it magnesium deals with the pressure condition like with a cephalopod? It has to have copper at its base because of the pressure condition. The same experience just under a different temporal dimension change, the pressure condition, change the motion condition. You change the organism, it adapts. But it's the same living principle. There's no difference between us and the plants when people are chopping down and ripping things off just because they can't hear them scream. It's wrong. So tclc.com, we put all the patterns inside of the center for truth-loving consciousness. That's what tclclc.com means because I knew that I have a propensity to get angry and get emotional and could misuse this stuff. So we have a board of members that dictate how these things will be licensed out and how they're used. So it's not just on me. So where do you think consciousness is coming from? Everything is alive. Everything is conscious. Everything is like if you take it from the biblical thing, what part of the universe was it made from the creator that he picks up some other if the creators you tell us? So we just don't think of them as being alive because they don't move and they don't talk to us. They don't speak their language. We don't have the sensory ability to perceive their consciousness. But we've learned, like if you look at the secret life of plants, they show that they'll take plants of the same mother and father and they'll seedlings and they'll watch the root growth and because they are siblings, they are moderate in their root growth. But then they'll take the same species of plant but use a different seed from another parent and they're more aggressive in their root growth. Wow, the cooperative. The cooperative. Yes, when they're in the family, the tree, they'll take radioactive carbon or nitrogen and put it on the leaf of a mother tree of some kind of our fir tree and they'll put isotope or radioactive identifier at its offspring and you'll see that that mother tree is through the mycelia is taking that nitrogen and giving it to its youngsters. Yes. They call out and they speak and they're interactive and they're... Their share resources. They're alive and sentient because everything is alive. But we see everything as death as dead because of what the Bible said. Because it bleeds into life. You know, and the universe is just one big, exact, big nothingness of dead. There's nothing dead in the universe. Everything is alive and everything is a piece of God. So when God... When we do good things, then God is considered God is good. When we do bad things, God works in mysterious ways. It's just how we are behaving and we can all take the conscious level and recognize, okay, somebody's got to do the right thing. And if you do the right thing, the right thing's happened. And you're going up against the stream of mankind. But I've got the entire universe behind me. I have the universal phenomenon and observable evidence and data that stands behind it. And 97 patents and trademarks and copyrights and multiple industries that I've invented. Nobody else have ever invented tangential flight and ability to fly. Or unlimited midair bonding. There's also a lot less confidence in the stream of mankind than they used to be. There's much more of an understanding that the stream of mankind is often going in the wrong direction. Because of the Michelson Morley experiment in 1887. And because special relativity took off. And that meant, oh, everything is dead. So we have no responsibility to anything. Everything has happened, Stan. We all got here by one big explosion and therefore life has no purpose. Nothing has a purpose. And so now we can kill off these things and that they haven't looked at hemoglobin and chlorophyll. They haven't looked and said, okay, wait a minute. Let's do the law of similarities of A is equal to B and B is equal to C. And A is equal to C. My view is this. If you know one thing about one thing, you know one thing about all things. Find the common factor and either multiply or divide. That common factor happens to be hydrogen. Everything in that we in the observable universe that we see is 99% hydrogen. Well, now we have the geometry of hydrogen. So now we can manipulate 99% of the universe. And there's nothing we can accomplish. But they're still trying to make that money. Yeah, that's the problem. The problems were contained and confined by this desire for constant, never ending growth in money and to control industries and to control people's ability also to express themselves. You know, which is a big factor in this strange new world that we're living in. We're almost anybody can express themselves. Yeah, things get very weird and slippery. If you have been used to being in control for the entire time and now you can't. And so on an idea like this, if you're correct, this is not just groundbreaking. It's a revolutionary revolutionary. This is never occurred where someone has completely destroyed the telemeic model of the unit of the solar system. They had 39 different creations of how the planets and all that move. And of course you're going to get ridiculed, which is always what happens. Oh, when someone comes along, especially someone like yourself who again became successful in a different field, you know, and now all of a sudden you're saying this, like again, if you were a regular person that didn't have a background wasn't famous for something else, they'd probably be looking at this very differently. But no, they still wouldn't accept it because it challenges their entire last 5,000 years of knowledge. It means that the people that give all this credit about the pyramid, if those were built by an advanced civilization and I'm not saying they weren't built by someone that used other things, but I believe those things came initially from 100, 200,000 years ago and the shape was more like this. But after people had been removed or the influences of the individuals that made them like this, they now was like, okay, we're just going to make them with straight lines. And they limited themselves to that because they opened up the flower of life incorrectly. They invented straight lines where even God can't make a straight line because of his rules, the rules, their rules of equanimity. It took about about 200,000 years ago. There's over 130 something, thousand years worth of water damage under this things itself. Where do you get that? You can look it up on it. Well, I've talked to Robert Shaw because of geologists at Boston University and he thinks that there's a lot of water damage on the temple that's things, but he doesn't think it's that old. He thinks it's thousands of years of rainfall. Thousands of years of rainfall. But that's just after the cutting of the stone. It's a disputed thing. It's not universally accepted. It's a fantastic theory. But other than that. Go back to Temple. Go back to Temple. Go back to Temple. You go back there. Those what they've done with the carbon dating on that in itself is like 13, 14,000 years old. I think it's 11. I think it's 11. It was buried 11 purposely buried, which is the fascinating aspect of it. The dating is universal through the ground, which shows that it was purposely buried 11,000 years ago. So that would put the construction time previous to that. They don't know though. But look at the at some of the maps that came out of Southern Europe. It's not Southern Europe. Southern Africa. Right. That showed Antarctica in its full. Right. And how it behaved long before they were able to do a number of things they were able to do. Right. When they didn't really even know it existed until I think it was those oral traditions go back a hundred thousand years. Yeah. Those oral traditions don't go back, you know, 6,000 or 5,000. So what do you think happened? Mankind. I mean, I'm well. Okay. Let's let's let's unpack this. If we are 98.7% identical to Simians, right? And there's only 1.3% differentiation. Who's more evolved? We're considered ourselves to be more evolved. But you look at the Simians. They have 48 chromosomes. We only have 46. Where did that change occur? Where did we get this new understanding and how did we lose to two chromosomes? Even though we're 98.7% identical in behavior just like that. There's that 1.3% differentiation whether you want to call it the anonocchiu or some other influence that acted upon us. But there's been a change within our DNA and our structure. And we were given this Meritans. The Samarians were given their number system. That's where the one times one, Ecling One came from. So I'm in their system of straight lines or the platonic solids. So my thoughts is the individuals that wanted us here to whatever work, whatever manipulation they did for us. They wanted us to have a system of measurement. But something that could not contradict, not giving us the full picture. So they gave us a limited scope where we can measure small areas. But we would never need the larger areas. We'd never need to be able to move out in space because we were engineered for a particular reason. And those stories you go right back every civilization has similar stories to Hindus. Have those same stories to Africans with the doghards, the doghards. Same story. All of these stories proliferate around the entire globe in the ancient traditions. But what did the Catholic Church do? They went through all of these areas and destroyed all of those books, destroyed all of that information. Why? Just like the Taliban blew up the Buddhist statues. Why? Why did we destroy all of their Native Americans, all of their information? What was the purpose of it? There's a dumbing down that's happening. Well, it's also a force compliance, right? Comply with the new ideology. Whoever's in control, whether it's the Catholic Church or the United States government in 1800s at Preventive Native Americans from speaking their native language. Yeah. Now, if you're correct with this concept of a son ejecting particles, which eventually over billions of years form planets, and then there's a natural occurrence that happens where intelligent life forms emerge. And that this happens everywhere through the universe. And that there are steps and that these steps that are past where we are is what we look on the iconic form of aliens with the large heads and the big eyes and the tiny, spin-ly gray bodies. If we go to other planets and we do, especially with drones, if something knows how to travel here from somewhere else and understands this process, because this process is ubiquitous throughout the entire universe. Everyone at a certain level of technological sophistication and understanding of matter itself, especially if they have already figured all this stuff out a million years ago, they would probably want to experiment or even accelerate the evolution of advancement. And it appears our advancement happens very unnaturally. I think the most biologist will agree that the biggest mystery in the entire fossil record is the doubling of the human brain size over a period of two million years. It's a very, very, very fascinating point. It's a real, it's not debatable. Does it mean that? It's a screen manipulation from an external for something. Right? Something. It screams something took place because it's an extraordinary something. And if it's the something that takes place that's responsible for this single, most bizarre animal on the planet, the one that can manipulate its environment in a way that nothing contemporary can do. Nothing alongside it lives with it in the same timeline is even close. Nothing's even remotely close. It's very, very, very different, but it's also extremely flawed for something that has such a high level of technical sophistication. Because of our fundamentals because we're still barbaric. We're still poor. Flat. We still, we know the world, the universe and the world is round, but we're still using flat principles to approach it. Right. And so if you were a super sophisticated creature from another planet and you needed some particular materials from our planet and the Anunnaki story is all about gold. Yeah, I think they need gold. Fixing up there. Yeah. The idea was that they were going to, and this is all from Zechariah Citchens work. Right. And the idea was that they were going to suspend gold particles in their atmosphere in order to protect their environment. Because they had abused. Yeah. They had abused it. And I think there was also some speculation about volcanic eruptions, that volcanic eruptions that probably ruined their atmosphere as well. But they had the ability to do something about it. And the way to do something about it is to mine gold and that they took us and they created us from the hominids. From the hominids. The, the reason why that's so interesting is because gold is fucking useless 10,000 years ago. Why do you need gold? No one needs gold. If you're surviving, if you're a hunter-gatherer, gold means jack shit to you. Why is it the number one method of currency throughout all human beings all over the world? Well, remember, they abandoned, remember for a long time like if you're in a dude speaking, if you're thinking about Italians, they talk about it's salt, the salt. Yeah. It was salt. Salt. Salt is what we used for currency in exchange for the gold. Right. So where did the gold come? Why did we have an appetite? Right. For it. If it wasn't placed into us, if it does not sustain us in any way. It's very intriguing. It's very intriguing because it doesn't do anything. If you can't make a weapon out of it, you can't make a tool out of it. It's too soft. And made it weren't just necessarily doing electrons. But silver is even more conductive. If you want it for electronics, silver is like 17 times the conductivity of gold. Well, they weren't even using it for gold. No. Right. But they did use silver as well. Silver was also used as currency. Currents. But not like gold. Gold's the king. Always has been. Gold is number one. So why do we love it? Why do we need it? Why do we trade life for it? Always. Why have people like risked their lives traveling across the sea with wooden boats filled up with it to the point where they sink? And then we find these fucking bones. These dead soldiers. Surrounded by gold coins. It's crazy. One of the greatest things about the lynchpin is it's also submersible. And so one of the main points is about to build five smaller ones. The only thing that I'm missing right now, because we've had, we have built a ton of, we've got like 20 different prototypes. So when you say submersible, you mean transmedia. No, transmedia. They can go under water. Like these UAPs. Yeah, but no, we can go under water and be able to go. No, no, no. And be able to grab, they can identify where that gold is. Oh, God. And now they can go down and pull it up themselves without even informing the government about it. I don't need any of that other stuff. It's, and I think that's why this has been suppressed. When I first took it over to Raytheon, and I had these two test pilots, you know, both colonels, you know, within, been there for 30 years. When I'd Boeing want to Raytheon, he said, let's, the people at Raytheon said, let's see if he can keep it. They didn't know I had all these other patents surrounding it that I, they had no idea, but it's usage. If they use it, the world changes in a beautiful way. If they ignore it, we cease to exist because we'll continue down this wrong path. So do you think that intelligent life in all places of the universe has figured this out already? If they're traveling here, they have because you don't use power to go from one place to another. You decouple from the electric pool. You decouple from the earth and guess what? The earth pulls away from you at its feet. You decouple from the solar system. It pulls away at its, at its speed. You decouple from the galaxy. It pulls away from you. That's all you really need to do, but they didn't know how to decouple. In two years, I won't need props anymore. I'll use molecular excitation, which is all inside of the patents that I've put in there. So one of the things about this whole back engineering thing that you keep hearing about with UAPs, the back engineering, is gravity propulsion systems, is that there's a system, this is what Bob Bazzar talked about, the system that uses a stable element, called element 115, that was just theoretical until they discovered that it actually exists in a particle collider in the 2000s. So he was talking about this in 1989. And what he's saying is that there's some sort of stable element that gets bombarded with electricity and it creates this gravity wave. That you can do that or you can just like with music. Use a discordant tone and those tones will push away. There's a particular tone that the earth is on. There's a particular tone, the key of A. It's 432 Hertz, the Schumann resonance. All you have to do is have the opposite tone to that and it will be pushed away from it. You don't, the same way of bubble at the bottom of the ocean doesn't use any energy to get to the top. But because it's completely in opposition to its environment, the environment pushes it away. That's what you do if you're an intelligent race. You can use a ore if you're trying to swim across the ocean. You can get across there. But an intelligent species like Alan Watson will use a cell and they'll tack and make their way across. You use the energy. That's what judo is. It's supposed to be the dow, the dow away, which is the woo way, which is not forcing anything. And they, the Japanese just say judo in a harsher sense. But it still means using the energy of your opponent against it without expressing unnecessary energy. So you just use the equal and opposite forces of tones. It's, you can do all of this stuff with, with tone. You don't need to use any electricity beyond creating the frequency. That's what the beatos use, not the beatos, the singer group, but those beatos that they have in the scarlet beatos. And those people that were doing those experiments with it. That's what these shapes use properly, vibrated properly. It's a levitation. And so that would be the method of propulsion. Method of propulsion and also decoupling. And it so it wouldn't show visible means of propulsion. Just like these UAPs don't show visible means of propulsion. They don't have a heat signature. No. So they'd be operating on something entirely different that's allowing it to propel. And then you could figure out how to manipulate that how. Take the frequency of the earth and find out what's the equal and opposite tone to it. Wrap your ship in there. And how fast could this thing go? You decouple from the earth. You move at, what's the earth moving at a thousand miles an hour or so. It takes 24 hours for it to get around. You know how quickly is our solar system spinning? Whatever that tone, whatever that frequency is, whatever that speed is, you decouple from the solar system. Now the solar system moves away from it. So in that sense, you could move it in same speeds and not experience G-Force. No. Nothing whatsoever. And that's what the linchpin or the angles of incidence allows because now we can decouple from these six relative positions. So when we feel about G-Force, like when you're in a, have you ever flown in a fighter jet before? Yeah. You feel those insane G-Force. What that is, is the resistance of the earth itself. Of the earth. Of the spin of the earth itself. Of our centripetal place where we are with the, remember the earth is spinning. The solar system is spinning and acting a force. The, the, the galaxy is spinning and acting on it. And that force is pushing down. So if you decouple from them, then you have no force pushing you through and you can essentially travel instantaneously to anywhere. If you have the right frequency. The right frequency. It's all frequency. It's all frequency. And now, and the right angles of incidence. You can't get there with Cartesian space or Euclidean 90 degrees 45 degree thing. frequency and now and the right angles of incidence you can't get there with Cartesian space or Euclidean 90 degrees 45 degree things you cannot get there you have to have the the truth and that's why I think I was given all of these things is like hey let's stop destroying the planet you don't need oil to do all of the things you're doing you know we can now take right now we're writing a patent I'm working with Jeffy another mathematician that we worked and me and Chris are doing another patent but we're able to take the radioactive decayed water the stuff that they're using to cool those rods and use the proper angles of incidence in the proper field and can reverse that radioactive decay to in days and not take a hundred years in order for it to do is just the change of pressure and motion conditions when I was talking to Jeffy about it was like well let's we can use neutrinos coming from the Sun and and saw that there was a different relationship like I was saying before how radioactive decay happened seems to happen quicker and around Venus or closer to the Sun and I was like is it possible that that's due to the change in the greater pressure condition that's happening and therefore the electricity is able to have a greater effect upon it you know I was like oh no no how do you know that the pressure is greater you know at Venus and I was like oh you still think that you still think there's a void you know well send the probe there and see how the pressure increases and send the probe out and see how the pressure decreases the greater closer to the the Sun or the apex or the the primary the closer to it the higher the pressure the further away the less the influence your child my child you get my child around me I've got a great deal of influence on it and he behaves the way I expect them to behave you take him outside of you know to a theme park and I'm not there they run crazy right because I'm not there to act upon them right you can use that for propulsion at the same time I feel like we could do a hundred of these podcasts but I think we should wrap this one up we just did about three hours I saw when I was looking at a lot of your stuff I was like damn maybe sitting there talking for three damn hours just what are they talking about but we didn't even we haven't even covered half of these things what's good again I would love to let's do it again but if you like I said I'm very interested to see how this is received and I'm very interested to see because I'm sure there's going to be a lot of people that want to be able to talk to me I'm leaving I'm leaving those things okay with you beautiful just so that you can and if you go into my book you can walk through and I explain this podcast about 30 times just to try to get a slippery grip on any of it but thank you I really appreciate you man I really appreciate you're a very rare person just you too man you made the challenge I was just one question I want to ask you before you go well you were on fear factor yes and you watched people making choices for that gold yeah what was your consensus about human nature in comparison to what dignity and integrity should move somebody to do in comparison for chasing that gold well I think for a lot of people first of all what happens is first the show becomes famous right so the show gets on television initially people do it because they want to be on television then the show becomes successful and people do it because they like it they watch it home and they wonder if they could do it could I do that like most people say the physical challenges like that was to be interesting to me man I can't eat bugs I can't do that that's in your head and it's it's it's like anything it's just a challenge to see if you could overcome your natural instincts and I got I ate a roach it was nothing so big deal I ate a bunch of things I would I ate a cicada I ate a sheep sheep skaters are actually good like people cook them and there's by the way you should cook them because there's a giant hatch about to go down right now and they were just showing images of these things coming out of the ground because it's like a 13 year cycle yeah and there's billions of them and you get them they're delicious so I wrote yeah the great source protein people got to get past the idea in bugs but so then people started doing the show because they wanted to see if they could do it and you know some people are in credit card that you know they're young they want to take a chance it might be fun you know yeah but it's at the end of the day there's a certain amount of self-respect that comes up to like if I'm forced to eat a slug or something of that nature if I'm on like make it in a freighted drive that's crazy but if they don't even get paid for it they go out and get these parasites and and for life yeah changes them for life and it's just for the freaking experience no that's what we put on clothes you know the clout they want to be on television people want to be on television so bad and I think being television is the worst thing that has ever happened I feel like an emotional whore and I'm because they don't appreciate that that I'm tapping into something sacred some sacred emotions and then and I'm just turning tricks for John's turning tricks and if I do a great job turning this trick then they'll they'll do a gang bang with their buddies fit literally and and and figuratively you know and that's what they want to do it they want to make all the money out of you turning your tricks being good yeah but the thing is like for the person that watches it it's entertainment and it's very valuable like wow what a great fucking movie you leave you feel inspired you want to create you know there's positive to it too I could see how you could look at it as a negative experience but particularly you the producers you have so much more to all well yeah there's always you're always going to get pimps yeah and I love to wrap in with the people and and I love the the growth of that I love when people say you help me do a really dark area because even when I play bad guys I'm like I'm trying to find I'm finding the I know that bad person is just missing something that I wanted and needed like all humans yeah just a hug just a right hug and you know and somebody understand you and I'm gonna leave with this one last thing okay I was on the plane once and I always ask the older people when that's sitting next to me what's the best advice you can give a young man you know I was 33 and this when we were going over to Germany this will take one minute we're going over to Germany and I asked this one guy that was like 70 years old and the right at moment as we were on our way he said if you look out the right side of the plane you're you'll notice the island of Ibiza and he got real quiet and then five minutes later he said have as much sex as you can now this is before the advent of Viagra whoa and then I was on coming back from the Czech Republic and a few years later and I asked this man as we got on the plane and he said next to me and he waited until we got all the way near LA and as he was reaching up for his bags he said you got it what's the best advice you can give a young man so he can be good to have the successful life he said you got to remember and every person you meet there's a little piece of God in them and that's who you talk to and I add it to that but make sure they see it in you first so that's what my life principle is about make way for life please make way for life find the piece of God and you and show it shine through it push it and and take up your your your stake you know take up your stake and and and be the Messiah for the day and two days and three days if you can and be a rascal also I did I discovered half of this stuff while I was still watching porn it's like I was in some month I'm still watching porn and I come back and do this so I was like okay it's you there's a balance that's great advice that's a great way to wrap this up let's do this again I would love that 100% I can't you out to alarm must man it's and Jeff Bezos if they want to finish I don't know John I know you on Elon I would I got his solution we can clean up the upper atmosphere in our lynchpin is real it's real it's there I can I can't wait to see the responses thank you John thank you bye everybody thank you