the general gun experience. The stuff is landing or crashing around the world and unexpected countries have had this happen. And that's why I picked that, because I thought that was an interesting case. And then of course, the, you know, Pope Pice, the 12th and the Vatican were involved back channeling it through the OSS, which became the CIA later, to FDR. And that's how the US knew something weird happened in Italy during well, right before World War II. But so this is 33. What's the first like documented? I think that is the earliest one I can talk about. Yeah, there's something that predates that. You could infer that. You could infer that. Yeah. So this 33 one, you said was in Italy. Yeah, magenta. So it's a, I'm bad at geography. I think that's like a Lombardi region. It's like northern, northwest Italy. And what's the story behind it? So basically it, it looked like a crashed, right? The original shape, most likely was like a lenticular disc like crafts, you know, with like two dinner plates. Which is lenticular. So like two dinner plates, you know, smushed together, right? Okay. And there's like a, you know, like a bubble on top. The classic classic like, like that. Like that. Like that. But it looks like when it hits, the edges broke off. So it became this like bell or acorn shaped thing. And there was nothing in it. It was like just an artifact. You know, there was no biological remnants, if you will. So it's so funny because the Italians were so confused. They actually called up the Germans. And they were like, is this one of you of Wundevaffe? Like what the hell just crashed in northern Italy? Mussolini. And this is all publicly available information because some Italian researchers found all these original documents that some people were sitting on for years in Italy. You know, they put a gag order on the press, et cetera. And yeah, Mussolini asked the Germans to come down. Of course, the Germans came down and they were like, that is not ours, but let's look at it together. So that's kind of perhaps a tertiary reason that kind of acts as power has got together. I'm not saying that's like the reason. But I think the Italians and the Germans were so intrigued with what they found from like an artifact perspective. There was at least some scientific and military collaboration during the war. The details of which I'm not sure of, but I know people that know that specific event that are currently still intel officers within this program in detail. But so was there witnesses to the crash or some sort of an understanding that something had crash landed and then they discovered it? Yeah, I forget the precise discovery. I don't know if it was like local police officers or local farmers found in the field, something like that. I don't want to misspeak. I assume some of the Italian researchers might have some fact witnesses that can orally say, oh yeah, my great-grandfather found it or something like that. But I don't remember. And what was the scale of this vehicle? He was probably like 20 feet by 10 feet, something like that. Not super huge, but kind of big. Do they think that this was a drone? Do they think that this was occupied? There was nothing in it. So if it was piloted, if you will, by some sentience, I mean, your guess is as good as mine. So what happened to that vehicle? So we knew where it was being stored at a particular location after the crash. And then the military came in and we grabbed it towards the end of the war in 1944, 1945, because like I said, Pope Pius, the 12th already kind of let FDR know. Why did the Pope get involved? Because it's literally... Well, interestingly enough, there's like a whole history of human intelligence prior to World War II and old money, the Vatican, the Italian mob, kind of the old country boys, did a lot of informal intelligence collection for the US. And there's probably some books you can read on it, but it's really interesting. Human intelligence collection wasn't really formalized until the office of strategic services, though, SS, which became the CIA in 1947. Yeah, Paul Mellon and all these other affluent guys of all these old money families that basically created the CIA. So that's probably the reason why. So this thing that was recovered, this was the first documented one that the United States had access to. I can't get into... Okay. If it was the first or not, but it was an early one. Very early. So it's almost 100 years ago. Yes. So they take this thing and then they bring it where. Yeah, I can't get into that. I can't get into that. Okay, so they bring it somewhere in the United States and was the attempt to try to back engineer this thing was the attempt to try to understand what it was. Yeah, I mean, first of it, obviously, it's understanding the situation, right? What do we have our hands on? And like I've said in some other videos and stuff, we took them in Hat and Project secrecy and overlaid it on this issue because that secrecy worked well for atomic bomb developments and whatnots. And certainly this whole program in a nutshell for like summarized that 90 plus years of history, it is a reverse engineering program to garner some kind of insight. And of course, not a lot of the things that we've learned from it are like directly ripped off the technology we found, but it has inspired other innovations that made its way into other US classified programs over the year for national defense reasons. It's a myriad of different things. The UFO folklore is that this is where fiber optics were discovered first. Yeah, I'm not gonna break the seal on anything we've discovered or anything like that. And yeah, it's like, how long are you? It's like, how long are you? How long are you and what you can discuss and what you can't discuss and why? Why do they let you discuss any of this? Yeah, so anything sensitive that I wanna say as it relates to like US government activity, whether it be intelligence stuff, military stuff, et cetera, I have to submit it through what they call Dopster, DoD Office of Pre-Publication and Security Review, that is something anybody who's been an intel officer, anybody with like a clearance has to submit that kind of stuff. Now, obviously if you're writing a book about gardening, you don't have to, but if you're gonna talk about anything military and intelligence related, you have to submit. So it's kind of a catch 22 for this office, right? They're only looking at it from a security perspective. They're not vouching for it or anything like that. And that's like any author, right? They could write a book about Navy SEALs and they're not vouching for the story. They're vouching that you didn't say any nasty code words, you didn't burn a specific ongoing classified program. And for them, I mean, I'm not in their Uddaloop, but certainly it's a catch 22 for them where if they want to redact, and they propose a redaction, they're like, hey Dave, you can't say these sentences, you can rewrite it and resubmit, you know, we can't necessarily tell you what agency said to redact it, but you're not allowed to say this. They would be basically self-certifying, there's a there there. So in my opinion, probably the policy is like, if it has to deal with the subject, we're not saying anything, we're not proposing any redactions, as long as he's not burning a conventional program, we kind of have to allow him to exercise his first amendment, right? I think it's like a catch 22 for that office is kind of the long or the short of the long answer. So this is essentially one of the very early ones, 1933. How many crashed retrieval incidents have there been? It is double digits, there's specific numbers. I do know, I can't discuss that. I know it sounds like, oh, I'm being coy or whatever, but this show, any other interviews I do write, or you know, Ford Intelligence Services are watching. And it's like, I'm not here to help Russia and China calibrate their intelligence collection. Like, oh, Dave said it's this number, we missed a couple, shit. Let's put it out for the KGB, SVR and GRU, we're now gonna hit the streets to try to figure out which ones they miss. So I'm here to protect national security, and I'm just trying to put all the general topics out there for public conversation to hold our government accountable, really. Because I'm here as a fact witness, because we have a constitutional oversight issue because this program has not been reported to Congress in the appropriate way. And I can get into a Senator I talked to that has died recently so I can explain to you why I'm so sure, besides what I read, which we can get into that, what Intel reports I read, I did get some stuff cleared. So during my investigation, I'm like, you know what, I need to talk to somebody at the highest levels, right? So and this will give you an idea of the kind of people we talk to, and this is the only one I'm gonna talk about using their name because they died two years ago. So in spring 2021, I actually flew with a couple of colleagues of mine to Las Vegas. And I met with Senator Harry Reid, about nine months before he died. And of course he's a private citizen now, and I wanted to brief him on the topic, and I wanted to get his kind of thought leadership on it because he was a gang of eight member, right? Which is the top most cleared senators in Congressman. He was the majority leader for God's sake, so the Senate. And I knew, he helped sponsor the OSAP program that I mentioned and where they looked at skin walker ranch and some other things. And I wanted to understand like, what does Harry Reid actually know? Like why did he give $21 million to DIA in Bigelow Aerospace for this? So I'm sitting there in Harry Reid's living room. Right next to him with some other witnesses that were there with me. And he straight up says, he's like, yeah, I knew we had UFO material, I was denied access for decades, I tried to get access, and then he explained some of his efforts during OSAP. And I was like, holy shit, did the former majority leader just say that he just confirmed this to me as well? I was already talking to these amazing high level people, but I have Harry Reid literally saying yes, we have material and he knew it was non-human. Did Harry Reid have personal experience with this? I don't know if he's had any personal stuff in his personal life. I mean, did he see it? Did he see it? He said, in terms of seeing the material himself, he said he was denied access for years, decades was his term, and he actually told me on behalf of me, he was going, so he had like a weekly call with President Joe Biden at the time, and he straight up said to me, he was gonna talk to President Biden about this issue, literally. And then what he was telling me about OSAP, I was like, holy shit, I have like 20 other people that told me this dude, so the real history, what fucking OSAP was, because I think there's a lot of people out there that think they were looking at ghosts, skin walker ranch, yes. They went to the ranch as a secondary, and tertiary objective, but the real reason. So like there's a document that came out a couple years ago through FOIA from the Defense Intelligence Agency, there was this special access program request, the hairy read, you might have seen this, I think like George Knapp and company, I've reported on this, that he sent to the Deputy Secretary of Defense William Lynn, and it was asking for one of the most serious SAPs you can ask for, what they call a bigoted, waived special access program. So waived means it's limited congressional reporting, that is a class of special access programs, and bigoted means it's like by name, and it's like, you can read the FOIA document, it was like, you know, hairy read, James in-off, Luella, Zondo, et cetera, and I'm like, why are you asking for the most serious SAP to be created for a program that ostensibly is looking at skin walker ranch and stuff, and doesn't make any sense. So what really happened there, and, you know, hairy read, God bless his soul, made this disclosure, a couple weeks after we met in the New Yorker, and you can look this up, I think it was like a May 2021 New Yorker story where he says, I knew for decades, and he made this disclosure not me, so I'm gonna say the name of the contractor. Here he said this, you know, we knew that Lockheed Martin had this material for decades, I tried to get access, and I was denied, and specifically with the Lockheed Martin stuff, he was talking about during the OSSAP program, and for the people who are on this program, I submitted this shit to the officer, got this cleared, so don't freak out, but I'm telling the truth here. So Lockheed Martin wanted to divest itself from this material at a specific facility, that's known to me that I provided to the Inspector General, like street address, all that shit, right? And the idea was, if they made a catcher's mitt, a security catcher's mitt, for this shit, you know, most serious SAP possible, the contractor and the other government customer, which was the Central Intelligence Agency, for that specific Lockheed material, and it was shit that they recovered from like the 50s and stuff, and it was like bits and pieces of, of, of, like haul structures, shit like that. And, so they were gonna take transferts, and the 21 or 22 million dollars was actually for big, little aerospace to build out, you know, facilities in Las Vegas, and material analysis equipment, and I've, I saw the staff meeting slides, I saw the paperwork, like there's a paperwork trail, I've seen on this shit, and I talked to the people involved in this program.