Logan, experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. And we're live. Gentlemen, here we go again. What's happening back in the room. A pleasure to see you guys as always. This is one of my favorite podcasts that we ever do. And this is very timely because first of all, the big New York Times article about the possibility of a comment hitting Los Angeles, the preparations for what they would do if a comment hit Los Angeles. And the comment known as Donald Trump, that's hit the United States. And he's even got the hair. It's just the whole thing. I mean, if the end of the world was coming, boy, it's all on the wall. The writings all there. It's kind of crazy. So what's the latest and the greatest? Well, the latest and the greatest is last year when we sat down with you, I think it was last November. Yeah, it was almost a year. Got floated in the discussion, the idea that this really important comment research that's going on, which is just changing our whole view of history and prehistory and of the future of humanity. But it would be good to make a film about this and crowd funded. I actually mentioned that to the scientists and they said what we really need is more funding for our research. And so they've inspired by basically by your shell. They have put out a crowdfunding campaign, which is linked on my website. It's the Comet Research Group. And it's a big story right now. So how can people find it really quickly? It's Indy Go Go. Well, now that research grew away. Much quicker way. Just go to my website, GrahamHankop.com. And there's a revolving banner, which is the Comet Research Group. Click on that and you're in this beautiful. OK, GrahamHankop.com. And then crowdfunding for Comet Research. And so what are they trying to put together? Well, they're wanting to... You see, the thing is, these guys have actually not had any official funding. This is a group of major highly credential scientists. So for the last decade have been investigating the extraordinary story of a massive comet series of comet impacts on the North American ice cap 12,800 years ago. That is the global cataclysm that wipes out a whole civilization from prehistory. So that's why it's of interest to me. They're not coming at it from that point of view. They're coming at it from rediscovering something that we've lost about ourselves. Something is really important to understand the role of cataclysm in the story of the Earth. And they need to do much more research. So they need to go back to Greenland and look for the nano diamonds in the Greenland ice cores. There's a nature in city, which they're not revealing the name of, which they're pretty certain was wiped out by a comet impact about four and a half thousand years ago. They want to go there and investigate that. So there's a lot of field work they need to do to drive home this hypothesis. And to frankly put down the opposition because there's been so much opposition to this idea from people with vested interest in other theories. And that's why these guys have not got funding. So the only place they're going to get funding to do this further research is from members of the general public. And that's what we're hoping that will happen. It's called the comet research group. There's a banner on my site and all the links of their crowdfunding to their website, which is full of masses of scientific information and to their Facebook page as well. It is a very unusual thing. The fact that we know that comets and all sorts of various large objects have impacted the earth, we see the craters, we know they exist. But it's so rarely discussed. It's so strange. If it wasn't for this article in The New York Times, I can't remember one last time and that it even came up. And it's such a huge issue. It's a massive issue. Both Randall and I have really given a great deal of thought to this. And I think Randall, the point is that catastrophes are the untold story of our past. We were given a little hint of it February of 2013, Chelyabinsk, Siberia. Remember the event? Yeah. Now that was just a little cosmic spec. Came in, it was about 50 feet in diameter, which is about, and it came in at a fairly low angle. A blue up nearly 18. Get that thing right in front of you. Right in front of me. Like this. Yeah. If you have flated it out, it's usually easier. Well, this is better. Yeah. All right. So it came in, I think it exploded 12 miles about 20 kilometers up in the atmosphere. But it was still enough to damage thousands of buildings and injure 1,500 people. Another thing about that one is if it had been slightly larger, if it had come in at a slightly steeper angle, a little bit higher velocity, you could have had thousands of fatalities rather than just injuries. And that would have been major headline news at that point as it was. It's already forgotten. But you do remember that over time? We may even talk. I believe we did. I think we even showed videos of it. Yeah. What's fascinating is Russia has so many of those trail, not trail cam, dash cam photos, cameras. That's right. Because they have so much insurance fraud apparently over there and people slam into each other all the time and they want to record it. And it's unfortunate enough to have so many of those videos because of that, which puts it on the record, whereas otherwise it would not be. I think people don't like to talk about cataclysm and catastrophes. And actually, no to why, nobody wants a horrible cataclysm to occur. But this is the point, which is that the prospect of a committor asteroid cataclysm on the Earth is actually much higher than has been told to us up till now. And something can be done about it. It doesn't have to be the end of the world. We don't have to say, OK, it's all over. Forget about it. Quite the contrary. This is just something that would be prudent and rational for the human species to do. And amongst many other impruent and irrational things that we focus on instead, we should be focusing on a bit on this. Well, at least just to heighten awareness of it. And also the possibility that we've been nailed a bunch of times and we've forgotten about it. And this is the big thing that you've been dealing with your entire career. This skepticism about past civilizations. I mean, I got into it with Michael Schurmer, who's a friend of mine, who's a very famous skeptic. I got into him with it yesterday because I posted that you were going to be on. And he started chirping something about civilizations 12,000 years ago, where's the evidence? I'm like, dude, you don't even know about Gobekli Tepe. So I sent him Gobekli Tepe in literally like five hours later. He wrote something claiming that, well, that was made by Hunter Gather. It was all just really to sort of suit his narrative. But he doesn't know that. No one knows that. Nobody knows that. They're so determined to keep the existing model. And when new evidence comes in, which can't be explained by the existing model, they just try to explain away the new evidence and not think maybe it's time to change our theory. You know, this is the unfortunate thing. But cataclysm, a global cataclysm, the massive event that happened 12,800 years ago, the younger dry-ass impacts, which were a series of comet impacts on the North American ice cap. This accounts for why we don't have a lot of evidence, hard evidence of a 12,000 plus-year-old civilization because it went down in that catastrophe. It was wiped out. I've been trying to amass the evidence actually that compliments what Graham is doing. And it really answers that question to Churmer brought up. And it's a legitimate question. Where's the evidence? But I'm quite sure the Churmer is not really educated in the extreme events that have really taken place on this planet in the last 10 to 20,000 years. And what that would do to any kind of evidence, and maybe while we have some time here today, I've brought a few things to try to convey some sense of how extreme some of these changes have been and how one would actually be quite shocked to find anything existing in the aftermath of these events. Well, Michael Shermer is a brilliant guy. I don't mean to shit on him, but what is disturbing to me is that his knee-jerk reaction to this without having any research at all in the subject, not knowing at all about Go Backly Tappy, which was discovered in what the 90s? Yes. So this is to me, this is something that I've looked at because of you guys in great depth. When I read your book, I was just completely enthralled with this idea of history having some sort of of rise and fall in civilization having these research. So I've been absorbed in it for a long time. But what's fascinating to me is people that consider themselves to be skeptical or, you know, I mean, he's a skeptic professional in sure, but many people who question anything that's outside of what they've been told. As soon as they hear any sort of a theory outside of what they've been told, they immediately call quackery. Absolutely. But it's a weird knee-jerk reaction to something, especially when you talk about asteroids, that is a very real part of our past. We have a ton of evidence. I mean, there's actual craters that you can look at on Earth. The moon, which has no atmosphere, is littered with them. And if we look at the moon as a model for what could possibly have happened to Earth, or at least, you know, some of them, obviously with the moon having no atmosphere, it's going to hit a lot more than we are. Sure. But still, I mean, this is a very real situation that this solar system, you know, at least as far as we know, the only solar system has to deal with this. But we know this is a real issue. I mean, we've seen impacts. Well, it's like you just said, on one hand, you have Earth scientists looking at the Earth. And what they're realizing is that the Earth is pocked marked with scars. And each of these scars represents a tremendously powerful catastrophe that's happened in the history of the Earth. Now, that's accepted by mainstream science that major catastrophes have happened in the history of the Earth. But where this thing now is about to come full circle is the recognition that these kinds of catastrophes have also influenced the rise and fall of civilization. And a lot more, a lot more extremely than has been recognized up to this point. And while geologists and Earth scientists are looking at the surface of the Earth and realizing that etched into the surface of the Earth are imprinted into the surface of the Earth, or hundreds of scars of which undoubtedly are only a small percentage of the total that exist. At the same time, astronomers are looking out into near space and discovering that we cohabit space with a lot of stuff. It's not as empty as we thought just within the last six or seven weeks. We've had two close flybys of previously undiscovered asteroids. Just the point because NASA keeps saying, well, as you know, we've counted 1,650 asteroids, and none of them are going to hit the Earth in the next tunnel. But what about all the ones they haven't counted, which are estimated to run into hundreds of thousands, and which haven't been seen yet. And what happens is we see them roughly 10 days before they pass the Earth. That is not enough time to do anything about them. But we have time if we're prepared to be rational and reasonable as a civilization to take care of this issue. Now, when you're dealing with hundreds of thousands of near Earth objects that are flying around, what are the things that could be done to protect Earth? Earth. You can paint. It's low tech, actually. You can paint one side of the asteroid, affect its arbido, so that the sun's rays push differentially on one side rather than the other. That will shift its orbit slightly. It has to be calculated. You can give it a little knock with a rocket, basically. You don't want to blow it up. You don't want to turn your one big piece of artillery shell into buckshot. You don't want to do that. You want to move it into a safer orbit. You can mount jets on it. And looking now to mining asteroids, of course our society always goes. Our civilization always goes for the weather, where the money's to be made. But if we can mine asteroids, we can move asteroids and the technology is there. And ironically, the most dangerous asteroids are going to be the ones that are the closest to the Earth, which are the most accessible. And the asteroids pretty much have unbelievable amounts of resources on them. I mean, pretty much everything that is being mined on the Earth can be found in asteroids, from the hydrocarbons to precious metals to all of these things. And we're not that far away from technologically being able to actually mount expeditions to asteroids and mine them. And that's the solution I kind of prefer because, again, these things are tremendous sources of reefs of all kinds of things that would be usable to an expanding civilization. And we could feasibly within a decade or two be mining asteroids. And again, the ones that are the easiest to access are also going to be the ones that are more dangerous, because they're the ones that are coming to closest to the Earth. So another point here is that there is one specific danger. There's one specific if you like region of the sky that really needs to be looked at. And this is the region of the sky. This is why I wrote magicians of the gods because of this discovery that there's a thing called the torrid meteor stream, which is 30 million kilometers wide, and which envelops the solar system. And the Earth on its orbit around the Sun passes through the torrid meteor stream twice a year. Turns out the torrid meteor stream is the debris of a giant comet that came into the inner solar system about 20,000 years ago. That thing was at least 100 kilometers in diameter, according to their calculations. It may have been more so. And then like other comets like Shoemaker-Levy 9, which spectacularly hit Jupiter in 1994, it began to break up into multiple fragments. And those carry on orbiting on the original path, which, as they break up more and more, they degrade and small bits and large bits break off. And it gradually fills up a kind of huge hoop of debris that the Earth is passing through twice a year. It takes us 12 days to pass through it. We do two and a half million kilometers a day on our orbital path, 12 days to get through the torrid meteor stream. And the scientists of the comet research group have made the point that a big object out of the torrid meteor stream, multiple objects, as a matter of fact, was what hit the North American ice cap 12,800 years ago. It looks like there was a second series of impacts 11,600 years ago from the same source. It looks like there were other impacts in the Bronze Age. The most recent, almost definite impact out of the torrid meteor stream was Tunguska in Siberia. Back in 1908, that hit on the 30th of June, 1908. And that's at the peak of the torrid June shower when we pass through the torrid in June and in November. And what they're saying is we really need to focus on this torrid meteor stream. Their calculations are that there are hundreds and hundreds of massive objects in that torrid meteor stream. And as a comet breaks up into bits, it becomes those bits become asteroids, and those asteroids are circling in the torrid meteor stream. And I've likened it to strapping on a blindfold and crossing an eight-lane interstate twice a year. And just hoping that we don't hit any heavy traffic, that we meet bicycles or motorcycles rather than trucks. But the trucks are out there. And what the comet research group scientists are saying is we need now to be in-depth investigating the torrid meteor stream, because it appears to be the hidden hand in human civilization. It has wiped out episodes of our history in the past, and there's no reason to expect that it won't do so again, unless we do something about it. Because the remnants of that original giant comet are still circling in the torrid meteor stream, and they are fucking dangerous. Now, how is this being received in mainstream science? I mean, is there any resistance to this? Because it seems like this is all pretty straightforward and entraceable. Mostly being ignored. Mostly being ignored. And why I think that is. By scientists who have a vested interest in other ideas, first of all, there's a vested interest in not admitting that cataclysm are important at all. This goes right back to really to the 19th century when science began to take shape in the form that we know it now, and they wanted to separate themselves off, understandably, from superstition. So I didn't want anything to do with something that sounds like the biblical flood, for example. They felt they would be contaminated by that, and they preferred to explain any cataclysmic evidence as a result of gradual processes. So you really think it's because of the reluctance to accept religion or religious ideas or to separate themselves? No, I think that's where it starts. I wanted to separate themselves off from that. Now they've gone a long way from that, and many, many scientists have got a vested interest in what is called uniformitarianism or sadulism. And they don't like to hear about cataclysms having any major impact on the story of life on Earth. So is it sort of the momentum of these initial desires to escape religious influence that have sort of led them down this path? Yes. And then there are others who have a vested interest in current accounts of global warming. Others who have a vested interest in extinctions taking place now, they want to save their ancestors were responsible for the extinction of all the mammoths and mastodons and so on and so forth. Whereas the comet research group scientists are saying, no, those huge megafauna of North America were wiped out as a result of the massive series of impacts on the North American ice cap. I'm reading a book right now by Dan Flores, a really interesting book called Coyote America. He's a wildlife historian and he is really an expert on all the different forms of wildlife in North America where they originated, where they migrated to. One of the more fascinating things about it is he's talking about all these animals that went extinct 10,000 plus years ago this mass extinction event and never once does he bring up cataclysms and there's all these different ideas and one of the big ones being that human beings with atylattols, which is like really a very weird sort of a spear throwing device and wiped out the woolly mammoths and all these other animals and to me it's a little too close. It's a lot of lunatic idea also if you have any contact with hunter gatherers today, you find that hunter gatherers people don't overkill their game. They hunt them respectfully, they take what they need and they leave the rest because it's a renewable resource for them. So I don't think hunter gatherers wiped out the mammoths in North America, the evidence is compelling, it was the comet. The evidence that you brought up when you were here the first time when you showed the images of all those mammoths that had been literally knocked over with broken legs from the impact of something, a mass burial grounds like these mass, you know, not burial grounds obviously but mass casualties more catalytic sites. More catalytic sites. More catalytic sites. Yeah, in fact, Graham, I visited one up in South Dakota called Hot Springs where there's just several dozen. Nobody knows how many are actually there but there's at least several dozen, two species, woolly mammoths and Colombian mammoths that have been entombed. And while we were there, I interestingly, you know, the guide the woman giving us the tour there was kind of giving the gradualist explanation. Well, over long periods of time these mammoths wandered into a sinkhole and were too dumb to get out and so they became entombed and I asked the question, well, what studies have been done on the sedimentary matrix in which their remains are being found because as I'm looking at this sedimentary matrix, I'm seeing a massive deposit that in other words, a deposit that was contained instantaneous. And when I brought that up, she actually got very irritated and, well, you all got dismissed my question, didn't, you know, what we've got it all worked out, you know, we know about that. Well, what is it? Well, we've got it all worked out and immediately went on with your narrative like, but yet I had an article that was actually written by one of the original scientists that worked on the site and he, his description was, well, it could have been that but also as an alternative and he was the term bloat and float that what you had was, well, the mammoths that had been caught in a flood, drowned and their bloated carcasses floated into a depression in the landscape and that's where they were entombed. And that makes a whole lot more sense to me than the fact that, you know, individually over several thousand years these, these mammoths wandered into the sinkhole and then couldn't get out. But you got to bear in mind, we're talking about, you know, at the end of the last ice age, 120 roughly species of megafauna that disappeared, which is about equivalent to the same number of megafauna species that inhabit the earth today. Well, is this short period of time with something like 65% of the North American mammals went extinct? 75%, 75%, very short period of time, very short period of time, pretty much totally coincident with that period called the younger dry ice. And so there's nothing resembling what we're capable of doing today back then. I mean, when you look at human extinction events, human cause extinction events, what's very logical and what we're doing today with pollution and the expansive civilization and weapons are super sophisticated if we wanted to, we could wipe out a lot of different species. Actually seeing is that at the end of what's called the bolling allerod, which was the gradual warming at the end of the last ice age that preceded the sudden catastrophic change at 12,800 was the clovis culture that existed for three to 500 years I think. But they suddenly were gone, right? Exactly simultaneous with the mammoths. And then there are interesting studies that coming out now showing that at least continental wide there was apparently a major human population crash, exactly coincident with the megafauna extensions. Because you had quarries that had been mined for centuries that are suddenly abandoned. You have campsites that had generations of debris and toolkits accumulating and so on debris from the fluting of the spear points and so on that are suddenly abandoned, right? So the evidence actually suggests that the human population crashed, which would certainly imply that they would have been far less capable of wiping out all of these species of megafauna. Also the studies of their diet and their life ways suggest that they were very quite diverse. They were hunter gatherers and they focus mostly on small game. They ate a lot of fish, a lot of shellfish, they gathered food. And why would they go after the biggest, most dangerous animal in the whole array of animals? And with incredible efficiency hunt them to extinction in 100 years. It doesn't make sense. No, it makes no sense. It seems pretty silly. So from that time of her, I may say, Radel mentioned the clovis culture. This is for a very long time, really until just a couple of years ago. All of the mainstream academics in the fields of archaeology and anthropology were saying there were no human beings in North America. So for, let's say, 13,000 years ago, give or take 500 years. They came across the bearing land bridge. The bearing straight at that time was above water, sea level was lower. They entered the Americas. Then they went here there before. Now in the last two to three years, there's just been a whole raft of new scientific research and no scientist today is prepared to defend the clovis model anymore. And they're not expected of course that there have been human beings in America for 50,000, 60,000 years. And there's weird genetic links like, for example, there's a trace that connects aboriginal Australians with North Americans. They had a common ancestor. It's a very peculiar thing that's going on. And so what happens is that actually these scientific models, which constrain and restrict research for so long, do get overthrown. The clovis model is being overthrown. And what the missing piece of the puzzle, I think for everybody working in this field is the cataclysm, the comet. What happened between 12,800 and 11,600 years ago, which changed everything. Is it bizarre to you guys are frustrating in any way that this is not a mainstream idea? This is very much fringe. But yet, it's not something that we don't have any evidence of. Whenever I put out a book, I immediately, there's this huge hostile reaction to it. Like the Michael Schirmer thing, like the Michael Schirmer thing. I mean, I would say magicians of the gods, which I published in 2015, which deals with this whole comet issue, is actually the most thoroughly documented, the most thoroughly referenced book that I've ever written. It's calm. It's measured. They actually don't read it. They just say, oh, Hancock's brought out another book. He's a pseudo scientist. That's what they always call me or a pseudo-archiologist. And it's obviously rubbish because it disagrees with everything that we know. Well, that's the point of the heretic in society, is to offer an alternative view and well-documented evidence. But it seems that we're dealing with such a deeply ingrained mindset, which is connected in curious ways to power structures in our society, that it's very difficult to change it. Absolutely. And like Graham mentioned earlier, it went from a religious motive, I think, in the 19th century. It's more a political motive. And again, the idea that every day you'll find something coming from various factions that were destroying the earth and the earth is never suffered. This kind of assault on it before. And we're causing the sixth great mass extinction. And we're going to cause catastrophic global warming. If we pump another 50 or 100 parts per million of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. And so what that is done is like many, I won't say many, but several of the scientists now that have been in the forefront of criticizing the younger, driest impact hypothesis are also very much involved in the global warming movement and the idea that we are now precipitating the sixth great mass extinction. Having looked now at mass extinctions and been really an obsession of mine for about 30 years now. I've looked at everything from the Cretaceous tertiary, the Department of Triassic. You know, right on down the line to the most recent one, which to me is really in some ways the most interesting because the most recent mass extinction that we're talking about is the one that took place while we humans were part of the story. And between 12,800 and 11,600 years ago, the younger dryest. Yes, the younger dryest, which is still an unexplained climate anomaly that happened. And I mentioned this, I think in previous broadcasts, you know, what you had was you had this spasm of extreme warming followed by rapid shifting into extreme cold, literally within a matter of a few years. And we're talking about climate changes that are up to 15 degrees Fahrenheit within perhaps one to five years, which utterly dwarfs anything that we've experienced in the last since the industrial revolution began. And we still don't really understand. And that's why this research is so important because now we understand that there was something cosmic that happened. And we've just left its imprint in the landscape over what four continents, five continents. Yeah, over 50 million square kilometers of the Earth surface, just a giant debris field of the stuff that is only produced by massive impacts. These things come in at 70,000 miles an hour. You know, if they have any diameter at all, if they're 100 meters or more in diameter, they are going to hit the Earth really hard. They're not going to burn up in the atmosphere. And when they do, they pack a huge amount of kinetic energy, a huge amount of heat and shock. And that creates very definite chemical products, so nano diamonds, so carbon spherules, so melt glass. That's like the trinity tight that was produced in nuclear explosions. All of these, when they're all found together in the same layer of soil. And when you can put a date on that layer of soil, and when it's all over the world, there's only one thing can explain them, a massive cosmic impact. I don't understand why this is controversial. I really don't. I mean, I do. I understand it because I know that once people start teaching things, once people start doing lectures and giving speeches, they want to stick to their guns. And they want to somehow or another avoid anything that's going to contradict what they've been disposing for. It's a game changer. This information changes everything. It changes the way we've looked at our past. It changes the whole story of archaeology and it changes the way we're going to look at the future. I think that people in academia are reluctant to embrace that change. And they're afraid of being called pseudoscientists. Because there's a whole lobby of skeptics who use this word pseudoscientist or pseudo-archaeologist as an instant dismissal of other ideas. And those who are in the profession, they don't want to get taught with that brush. They want to keep themselves clean and pure. I understand that, but you're talking about hard evidence. You're talking about this nuclear glass. You're talking about nanodimons. You're talking about core samples that show this massive shift when you do the ice core samples, massive shift in temperature. And you're talking about very clear evidence of impacts that we know exists. It's not like a comet's a theory. It's not like it's Bigfoot or something. We're looking for the final piece of evidence that shows a comet's real thing. Exactly. It's real. It's totally real, but it's so difficult for those who are invested in other models to accept. And unfortunately, they have the ear of the media. There are, or by the way, all the scientists in the comet research group are absolutely mainstream scientists. And they have taken a lot of flack from their colleagues for even daring to investigate this area. That's why they've had no funding. They've had to fund themselves all the way along. That is so crazy. Because this is not a controversial thing in my mind. It should not be. This is not an airy, fairy thing. We're not talking about psychics. We're not talking about UFOs. We're talking about something we know exists. So to bury your head in the sand over something like this seems to me vested in so preposterous interest. So, that's the interest right now. I'm not say spending the equivalent. or something we know exists. So to bury your head in the sand over something like this seems to me vested in so preposterous. That's the interest. Right now, NASA is spending the equivalent of one attack helicopter a year on investigating the comet and asteroid danger. You know, $50 million a year. That's not that much. It's peanuts. It's a tiny, it's a minuscule sum. Hundreds of billions of dollars on massive sophisticated military equipment, which we can use to slaughter one another in ever more sophisticated ways, but just $50 million a year on saving the Earth from a potential cataclysm that could put our civilization back into the stone age tomorrow. And I don't mean to keep harping on Michael Schirmer because I like Michael, but he highlights this sort of natural inclination to poke fun at something that he has done no research on whatsoever. When I pointed out Gobekli Teppian, I sent him some articles from National Geographic. You were radio silent. I mean, he should know about it. He's astonishing. But that's sure that mocking it. Yeah. You're going to mock it. You should actually know what you're mocking. And to say that Gobekli Teppian was created by hunter-gatherers, well, I'm sorry, that's just a theory. That's not a fact. I mean, you have a sophisticated site with astronomical alignments with hundreds and hundreds of megalithic pillars weighing up to 20 tons each. The world's first perfectly aligned north-south building, which you can only do with astronomy. It's not enough to say, oh, they were just hunter-gatherers. There was something extraordinary. It's drawn from a half a mile away. Yeah. I mean, there's some serious sophistication. I mean, how big were these stones? Well, the biggest one, actually still in the quarry, they left it because it had a fault in it. They clearly intended to move it 50 tons. You're looking at 20-foot high objects. And then it's the putting together of them. See, here's the problem. Intergatherous societies are not the kinds of societies that produce large-scale fixed monuments. Why? Because they don't generate a surplus. You can't pay for somebody to become an architect and for those times somebody to come in astronomy. You're busy hunting and gathering and that's what you do. Agriculture generates a surplus. And that is the problem at Gobekli Tepe because there is no background. This site just appears out of nowhere amidst what appears to be a hunter-gatherer community, but what they're not considering is the possibility we're looking at a technology transfer that the survivors of a lost civilization who already had all that knowledge came to Gobekli Tepe and used that site as a center of initiation to teach the local hunter-gatherers how to do agriculture. And that's now taken as the beginnings of civilization. I would say it is the reinvention or the re-making of civilization. So when we're looking back at Sumer and any artifacts we find ancient Mesopotamia in that area, Iraq, those are the people that are sort of reinventing and relearning. Well, that's the thing. Actually, when we talk of Mesopotamia, which means between two rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates, Gobekli Tepe is sitting right there in the headwaters between the Tigris and the Euphrates. And we cannot separate that from the later cultures that end a history 5,000, 6,000 years ago, they're part of the lineage that descended from Gobekli Tepe times. And what's fascinating about Gobekli Tepe is the way it doesn't fit, the way there's no background to it, that you would expect to see them practicing, learning architectural skills. The oldest stuff should be the worst. And as they carry on it gets better, that site ran for a thousand years. The best stuff is the oldest. A thousand years later what they were producing wasn't so good. This is a real anomaly and it needs to be investigated not mocked by skeptics, but actually explore it to consider maybe this does rock the whole paradigm. And it's kind of ironic that in their desire to get away from the ancient myths and tales in the Bible, they've ignored those ancient myths and tales which all talk about cataclysm. Well, our modern psychology is to imagine that we are somehow so far advanced from our predecessors that we now represent the pinnacle of civilization and anything that preceded us has to be looked upon almost as, you know, as if the workings of children. It requires a major psychological shift to admit or accept that our ancestors may have been far, far more sophisticated than we had imagined in our 19th century models, which basically still dominate thinking today. And you know in Graham's book he devotes several chapters to the story of one 19th, our 20th century here at J. Harlan Brets. In his story to me kind of encapsulates the whole process of forcing his paradigm shift. And for years he was out there exploring this evidence that there had been this tremendous flooding in Washington state. And all of his critics were dismissive without ever even going out and looking at the evidence firsthand in the field. What he did was he stuck to his guns for three decades and continued to a mass evidence to the point where they just couldn't, they couldn't dismiss it anymore. And finally, a group of them went out and began to explore the landscapes for themselves. And one of the leaders, I think you talked about it in your book, James Galooley, who was sort of the leader of the skeptic faction that had set out their sole purpose was to discredit and lay this whole flood heresy to rest once and for all. But he went out in the field and they spent about eight days in the field where he's seeing this evidence for himself over and over again. And when you look at just one piece of it, you might be able to say, okay, there's all other explanations for that. But what happens is when you get multiple lines of evidence all converging and there's no way to individually explain away each one of those things other than just saying, oh well, it's all coincidence. He, this James Galooley was honest enough so that after a week out there, they were in a place called Pollus Falls in southern Washington, which was one of these areas where these tremendous inland tsunamis swept across the land. And I actually just visited there about eight weeks ago with I took a group of people out there and took them to Pollus Falls to show them right on the spot where James Galooley was standing when he finally had his epiphany. Did you have any images of that that you brought with us? I have images. I can dig them up here. Yeah, I sure do. Yeah, I've got some really interesting images to show you, which relates because see this flooding stuff relates directly to the idea of the impact. And we can get into a little bit of that explaining how, how these parallel lines of evidence are now converging. But the interesting thing about, but Galooley was that in the, in the descriptions of the trip, he wandered off by himself for a long time away from the group and was standing there looking at this massive cataract with 400 foot cliffs and this little tiny ribbon of water flowing over it in this huge canyon below it and these big boulders and he'd seen for a whole week had been seeing this stuff. And it finally got to the point where it was undeniable and he walked back to the group and the words out of his mouth verbatim were, how could I have been so wrong? And he finally admitted and at that, that was like a turning point. And now and again, Graham describes this very effectively in the book how in a way the flooding phenomena was hijacked and then placed within this more gradualistic context. To really to avoid the fact that it was something so anomalous and so such a departure from our modern experience that we had to look outside of our modern experience to find an explanation. What they wanted to do was find something within our modern experience and this is the cornerstone of the uniformitarian approach is that we look for a modern example and then we extrapolate backwards from that. So what they did was they saw well in the modern term in the modern world we have pro glacial lakes, lake that's that form in front of glaciers and sometimes these pro glacial lakes might be held in by an ice dam or another glacier. These ice dams will give away and they will cause pretty catastrophic flooding. They're very common up in Iceland because you've got several volcanoes under the Icelandic ice sheets and up there they use the term yolkalops to describe these outburst floods. But here's the thing when you look at the modern versions of it you basically are looking at floods that are less than one thousandth of one single flow from these floods we're talking about that happened you know 12 and 13 thousand years ago. Less than a thousandth. Less than a thousandth in peak discharge and in total volume. And so in his been admitted in several places I've extracted the quotes saying well we do admit that this is a major extrapolation upwards but never mind. You know we're going to never mind it's so disturbing me. See Holland breaths for 30 years was walking the walk in the channel's gap lands and what he saw was evidence for as he called it a humongous flood which actually rose and fall within three weeks and he went through decades of being put aside by his colleagues insulted they mocked him they laughed at him just as the skeptics do today. But gradually the evidence began to matter and they couldn't deny it anymore that there had been flooding and actually eventually they gave Holland breaths. Jay Holland breaths the Penrose medal which is the ultimate you know the ultimate bestowal of geology in America he got the accolade and he said it that he was more than 90 years old at that time and he said at that time he said all my enemies are dead so I have no one left to gloat over. But the point is in a way there was nothing to gloat about because what they did was they separated him from his central idea instead of accepting that there had been one huge flood and that was always his view. They said there must have been 70 or 80 floods that caused all this damage and that's what we are seriously challenging right now. So ironic in a way that the human desire for knowledge is what has led us to where we are today. We have this insatiable desire for knowledge and for innovation but that same human desire to achieve is also what the ego is responsible for that and the ego blocks anything that's contrary to what you've already established as fact. As soon as you see something that might throw a monkey wrench into the gears of what you've been teaching and practicing your whole life and I know that you've gone through this with Egypt. Your whole issue with the Sphinx and with Dr. Shock and John Anthony West who was on the podcast. John was with you just recently. Yeah he's amazing. By the way I'm going to be doing an event in New York with John Anthony West on the 29th of November. Where? Well it's in again it's linked on my website. The details are on the talks and events pages. It's in some church somewhere but I'm going to give a presentation and then I'm going to interview John live on stage. This time I've ever done that. I'm kind of podcasting. He's such a character. He's an amazing love that dude and magically Egypt is I think one of the most important things anybody can ever watch. I think that DVD series is just insane. It's so spectacular and so fantastic and next to going to Egypt which I haven't done I think that's probably the second best thing. You bet. And John is an example of why we need heretics. This is the thing you see that the science today yes you're right we have this thirst for knowledge and it's human characteristics. But also we get invested in particular positions and when people criticize those positions we take it as an existential threat and where we get all angry and hot and bothered about it. If we allow that to happen too much we don't keep a place for heretics in our society. Then we're never going to do anything novel. We're gradually going to get locked down. Ossified into the existing system we need heretics John has been the leading heretic on ancient Egypt for decades pointing out that we should listen to what the ancient Egyptians said that their civilization was not a development it was a legacy. It was a legacy from the time of the gods and that cast me back again to this whole issue of a lost civilization. Now when go backly Tappy was discovered it vindicated you in so many ways but what are the possibilities of any of more of these sites being explored and exposed. Are there more that people are looking at right now are there any that are under the radar? A year ago at the bottom of the Sicily channel at a depth of more than 120 feet it's been under water for at least 9,000 years is a huge megalithic sites. Before the discovery of go backly Tappy that site could never have been explained the dating is absolutely definitely the seas rose uncovered it at least 9,000 years ago. We don't know how long it stood there before it was covered by the rising seas but there it sits underwater and I think underwater discoveries are and I've had a part to play in this over the years are one of the ways forward we need to look at those areas because there was a 400 foot rise in sea level at the end of the ice age. You're looking at the amount of land that would be put together in say Europe and China added together that amount of land was swallowed by those rising seas and archaeology has largely proceeded without taking account of those lost lands. I'm not saying they haven't looked at all but they're primarily in marine archaeology interested in shipwrecks. Now this this megalithic site is there images of this that we could look at? There are, yeah. Yeah, yeah. I can probably find it. Or just monolith at the bottom of the Sicily channel. Try that. Try that, search on that. Pull that up Jamie. But so what does this look like? Is this and is this been clearly established that this actually is the work of man. This is not some sort of a yard dang or something? Of course there's dispute. Of course. The mainstream is not going to just accept this overnight but again it's mainstream scientists who founded their absolutely certain that they're dealing with the man-made site. There are holes drilled through these megaliths. One of them is very very large. There's a series of other megaliths round about it's not a natural thing. So here we're looking at some of it right now. So there's that big big megalith broken into two parts right there. Oh wow. And this we can say often with archaeological sites the problem is dating them. For example there are incredible megalithic temples all over the island of Malta not far away from this place. Incredible megalithic temples. But they can't date the stone directly. They have to date organic material associated with the stone and that can give them misleading young dates. In a case of a site that's been covered by sea level rise there can be no argument. Nobody went down there and built that 9,000 years ago. They had to be built before the seas rose and that puts a minimum age on it of 9,000 years. What are the best images that we can look at? Because right now I'm just seeing rocks. It's very difficult because I'm looking at some very tiny dimension. And I'm afraid that's all you're going to see. Those are the best images of it that exist. Was it a diver one? Right above that? That's in Yonaguni. That's not in the Sicily channel. So what are the biggest pieces down there? This right here is what you're doing. Yeah that big thing, big thing there. 30 feet long I think. And is it what, what leads you to believe that this is man made? The scientists who worked on it, the fact that there are holes drilled through the stone. The fact that you can go to neighboring areas like Armenia and find really very ancient megalithic sites where they have exactly the same kind of holes drilled through the stones. And the holes seem to have been used for astronomical sightings. Now this site's a mess. It's been knocked over by the sea. It's fallen down. But we're seeing the same thing, big megaliths with holes drilled through them. And you're also dealing with 9,000 plus years of erosion and barnacle growth. All of that. All of that. And the ocean is a difficult place to work. It's not easy visibility can be bad. You're dealing with currents. There's all kinds of problems. This is bringing up camera in this crazy little submarine. Ring in James Cameron. Yeah. Well I spent seven years scuba diving all around the world looking at this stuff. And it's pretty convincing in my view. It does make sense that if we do know for a fact and we do that the sea level rose dramatically at the end of the ice age. It makes sense that some things would be buried under the water. Well, enduring the ice age, whatever, you know, you don't have to talk about advanced civilizations or anything. But during the ice age, living on the coastlines and establishing your villages, communities, everything on the coastlines would have been probably one of the most benign places. Because for one thing, you're down to your sea, the sea level, the presence of the seas is going to smooth out the climate and so forth. So you're going to have probably most cultural development during the ice age is going to be close to the sea. So it's going to be underwater now, just like Graham was talking about. And so this to me is probably the future of archaeology is marine archaeology, where a lot of discoveries are going to be made. And that particular thing, I mean, there's a lot of megolithic structures around the world. But if you set that thing up like this and put those siding holes through it, would look precisely like, scrape the barnacles off of it. And no one's saying, oh, it's proven. But what it is is we have to keep an open mind and say, well, there are some very strong similarities here. So let's investigate this thing further. And that's the whole point of all this is all of this stuff needs more research. It doesn't need some cavalier dismissal by somebody who's protecting their own paradigm. It needs more research on all fronts. I mean, because I think that there's enough evidence that is now accumulated to suggest that there is a deep history to the human species on earth. And we're just beginning to really appreciate how much deeper it really is than the conventional models of history. And rather than just waving an arm and dismissing this with a skeptical sneer. It's interesting is there is accepted scientific models of humanity when you're talking about Supervolcanoes, right? Like the Supervolcano of 60, 70,000 years ago. Oh, yeah. I mean, they pretty much accept that wiped out of the vast majority of human beings on earth. And why is the Supervolcano hypothesis so easily accepted, but yet the asteroid will impact? And both of them are real events, both of them are historically documented. In fact, we've never watched a Supervolcano take over the world, but we've seen asteroids hit other planets. We've actually watched Shoemaker Levy. Like you were talking about before, we bombarding Jupiter unbelievable. Big impact in the planet earth itself. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. So, yeah. And actually more than 20 impacts, each one of them would have wiped out all life on earth if that object had hit the earth. Yeah, so, you know, so it's a stretch. Another thing to, we were talking about underwater structures, but let's also consider the possibility, and again, John Anthony West work is important here. Let's also consider the possibility that we have misidentified a number of structures that are standing in plain view like the Great Sphinx. Egyptology read any age of logical text. Any encyclopedia actually, they will tell you that thing was put there by a specific Pharaoh, Pharaoh, Kafre of the fourth dynasty, round about 2500 BC. That is not a fact. That is an opinion, but it's presented as a fact. There is not a single inscription that relates the Sphinx to that Pharaoh, not a contemporary inscription, not one dating from 2500 BC. In fact, there's nothing at all. It's just the assumption because it's close to a pyramid, which they assume the same Pharaoh built again on the absence of evidence that the Sphinx must have been built by them. But John Anthony West was the first to see that actually, when we look at the Sphinx, we're looking at a highly eroded stone object. And that erosion is very odd. And that's why he brought Professor Robert Schott, Professor of Geology from Boston University, two geyser in 1992 to look at the Sphinx and say, what actually caused this weathering on the Sphinx and Schott immediately saw it. But caused it was exposure to a very long period of heavy, heavy, heavy rainfall. And no such rains have fallen in Egypt in the last 5,000 years, but they did fall. During the Younger Dryas, we had a prolonged rainout from this comet impact as that ice cap was pulverized and a massive amount of ice water was thrown up into the upper atmosphere, prolonged rainout, which could have been the cause of the erosion on the Sphinx. Now what has occurred new? What discoveries have been discovered in the last year? Like what is new that we can look at? In terms of archaeology, there's not much new. Go backly-tepi at the moment is in deep freeze. It's right 30 miles from the Syrian border. There's been massive unrest in Shanley Orfa, which is the main town. Archaeology is very difficult for them to carry on there. It's basically just frozen. So they just sort of stopped. They've just kind of stopped. In fact, there's an amazing number of these sites. Another site I visited for the Magicians of the Gods was Baalbeck in the Lebanon. Absolutely stunning site. And again, I'm convinced that that site is nuanced. It is yes, there is a rum and temple there. But they put that temple there because the site was sacred long before. And there's this incredible U-shaped Megalithic wall, which surrounds Baalbeck, which does not appear to have any connection to the rum and structure at all. Again, that's an area which is subject to tremendous unrest and difficulty. And it's difficult for archaeologists to proceed. But just in 2014, they made a huge new discovery at Baalbeck of a buried block, which weighs 1,460 tons, which was sitting there on the site. They've been working that site for 100 years. They only found it in 2014. 1,000 tons. 1,460 tons. Is that 2 million pounds? Is that what that is? I don't know. My middle-class math is better than mine in conveying it into pounds. Well, one ton is 2,000 pounds. Yeah. 2,000 pounds to a ton, to an imperial ton. So whatever, I had three zeros on it. Double it and I had three zeros on it. It's a horrendous amount of pounds. But that way there's a single largest block of stone ever cut and quarried in the ancient world. And they found this just in 2014. Now there's another big one right beside it, which has been in plain view for about the last 100 years. And it's astonishing to me that this one, which is just below it, was covered by sediment that they've been able to figure out. Yeah, an actual calculator? You might be the only person who's less. I never go anywhere without my calculator. You have a real calculator. Nobody has one of those. We were just talking about that yesterday. You're like, who's a fuck fuck fuck fuck? It's not an actual calculator. It's not an actual calculator. I got you the last guy. Fuck. I got you the last guy. I got you the last guy. Take care of me when I think. Wow. And so Bobek was also the site of, I mean, there's many, many monoliths that have been discovered there. And it's really fascinating site that most many people have sort of overlooked when you talk about ancient structures in the past. Absolutely. I have to resist. I've got nothing against aliens, but I don't need aliens to explain these things. I think a much leaner and more elegant explanation for these huge archaeological anomalies is a lost human civilization. Much better. The case that I've been making for 25 years, I think the alien thing is a bit of a distraction with, of course, those aliens, of course the universe is full of life. But the ancient archaeological sites are not good evidence for that idea. They're very, unless you massage the evidence a lot. They're not good evidence. I think we are dealing with a lost human civilization and that Baal back 20 feet above the ground. We have three blocks of stone. Join so closely together that you can't get it. Edge of a sheet of paper between them. Each one weighs more than 900 tons and they are 20 feet above the ground. From the stunning achievement, it's just absolutely astonishing. How on earth did they do that? And how does mainstream archaeology deal with that? They say all the Romans built it all. All the Romans. The Romans did it. The Romans did do some awesome stuff. They did do some awesome stuff. They absolutely did. But this site is separate from the Roman site. It surrounds it, but it's not part of it in my view. In terms of your question, what's happened within the last year or two? I would think that probably the most significant thing or certainly right up there would be the comic research. And the discovery, I mean, like this article I have right here, which came out in 2014. So it's not that old. A nano diamond rich layer across three continents consistent with major cosmic impact at 12,800 years ago. And it's something like 2425 highly pedagreed scientists. And these are the comic research group. These are the scientists from the comic research group who have funded all their research themselves. They came out with another paper in 2015. Where was this published if anybody wants to read this? That's in the journal of geology. But then there's the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, a lot of their work as well. And the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences get into trouble for hosting their work, but they feel it's important. So they keep on hosting it. This is so spectacular confusing to me because that's rock solid science. This is evidence. This is actually, you can weigh this stuff. You can measure it. You can run tests on it and find out what its components are. This to me is so baffling. Yeah. It's very baffling. They brought out another paper in 2015. I won't go into the, some of the details are boring, but it's called a basey and chronological analysis. And basically what they were looking at, is it, they asked themselves, is it possible that this evidence, these nano diamonds, these melt glass, the carbon's failures, could that have been laid down gradually? And the chronological analysis that they've done absolutely answers that, no, it was not laid down gradually. This whole thing unfolded in a period of about 24 hours. Whoa. What a night. Yeah. And what had happened, Joe, was that for years, archaeologists had recognized this black mat layer at about two dozen or more of the clovis sites around North America, which there had been over 50 of them that have been studied. And it was C. Vance Haynes who wrote an interesting paper saying that he was the one who noted that below this black mat layer, which is only two to three inches thick in most sites, you found evidence of the clovis culture. You found their tool kits and their spear points and so on. You found evidence of the extinct megafauna, but not above it. You would find this evidence of this cultural activity and the megafauna right up to the bottom of the of the black mat layer, but not above it. So what finally happened was in 2007, Richard Firestone and Alan West and some of their colleagues and it was just basically a small group at that point took a look at this closer look. And that's when they begin to discover these impact proxies usually right at the base of the layer. And the layer itself is carbonaceous, which suggests that there had been a lot of soot deposited, which would imply widespread wildfires. In fact, there was a study off the right off the coast of California here on the Santa Rosa islands that pretty much concluded that there was just massive wildfires that pretty much just annihilated everything. And then this was preceded by the deposition of this black mat layer. And right at the bottom of this black mat layers where you find the nano diamonds, the magnetic grains, the microspherels, the carbonaceous spherels, full of reans, you find these impact proxies and they're not all the same at all the sites. In fact, that's been one of the things that the critics have seized upon. But what they're doing is I think taking an oversimplified model. And when you look at a comic fragmentation event, you could be looking at the individual pieces could be very different compositions. And what we were talking about earlier, the Torrid Meteor stream. I'm not convinced at this point it was necessarily just a single impact event. It may have been a bombardment episode that may have lasted even several decades. It may have then ceased for a while. And we were talking about this last night over dinner that there seems to be a second spasm at 11,600 years ago that's also associated with a massive rise in sea level. They call there's two meltwater spikes, meltwater spike one A and meltwater spike one B. And quite convinced that these meltwater spikes that have been documented by marine geologists and oceanographers are correlated with these melting events of the ice sheet that I've been looking at in terms of their geomorphic consequences. Because some of these events, I mean the only way I can describe some of these meltwater events is that the only modern analog to this would be a tsunami. And we've seen some pretty devastating tsunamis within the last decade or two, both in Indonesia and in Japan. And I don't know if you've ever seen any of the like the videos of these tsunamis. Anybody listening it is definitely worthwhile to go online and look at some of these videos where you can actually see the unbelievably powerful effects of a 30 or 40 or 50 foot tsunami. Right? Now some of the landscapes and I have some images we can pull up here shortly. There are places in Montana, Idaho, Washington where you literally had a tsunami sweeping over the land that was over a thousand feet deep. And that tsunami came off the ice camp. That's not an oceanic tsunami. Right. It's a friend. Tommy sweeping over the land that was over a thousand feet deep. And that tsunami came off the ice camp. That's not an oceanic tsunami. Right. It's a freshwater tsunami. It's meltwater coming off this catastrophic melting of the ice sheet. And I've traced the sources of some of these meltwater. I've made two trips now up into the plateau country of British Columbia looking for the source of this meltwater because in the conventional models now of this flooding, that goes back to Harlan Brets. And basically what they've done is they said initially there could have been no flood because Harlan Brets didn't provide a source for the water. They said the critics said, well, you're saying that all of this evidence in the landscape is evidence of the flood but what was the source of the flood? And he didn't have a source. So the critics then said, well you don't have a source for the flood water, therefore the flood didn't take place. Then as the research evolved you had independent evidence accumulating in western Montana by J.T. Pardee who was with the US Geological Survey. And he was investigating evidence that the mountain valleys of western Montana had been filled up with an enormous volume of water. And this volume of water seemed to be exactly the same time as Brets' floods. He then assumed that this was a giant lake. And because you can see, and we can, I think we have some images, I think Jamie has some images so we'll pull them up shortly. We're on the mountainside you see the shorelines etched, you know, a thousand feet above the valley floor. And what he then decided was that based upon a 19th century interpretation by T.C. Chamberlain that there had been an ice dam, he said, well there must have been an ice dam west here somewhere in the Clark Fork Valley, a giant lake backed up burst through the ice dam and then this is what would have caused Harle and Brets' floods. So now the geological community is shifting because number one, the evidence is overwhelming and they can't deny it anymore. But what they're doing is looking for a gradualist or a more uniformitarian explanation. So they immediately latched onto this. Well, it was a giant pro glacial or in front of a glacial lake in western Montana. Well, you're talking about somewhere between 520 and 550 cubic miles of water. That's a lot of water, right? And normally when you have a large lake, you have a huge catchment base and it is feeding lots of streams and rivers that are feeding into that lake. When you look at the, any of the big lakes around North America, you have the lake and then you have this big old catchment basin and all of that's feeding it. In Lake Missoula, the whole lake fills almost the whole catchment basin. It's like to me what they did was they said, okay, we're just going to push the source of the water from here over to here. But let's not go into the question of where did the water come from that's filling these mountain valleys of western Montana. And this is what I'd spent a couple of weeks in September going up into some of these following these valleys up into British Columbia. And there's spectacular evidence. And it's almost like the American geologists stopped at the 49th parallel and they say, well, that's the Canadians preserve up there. We'll let them, they've got their own theories. We've got ours. Interestingly, the Canadians are saying that we think that the water for these floods came from up here. But they don't like that because you see, one of the leading geologists who saying that these floods came from Canada is John Shaw, who basically came up to this idea that drumlins, which are these inverted bolt hull shaped landforms, they're found by hundreds of thousands in regions where glaciers were, that they were formed not by the glaciers grinding over the landscape, but they were actually formed by massive subglacial flows of water. And his critics have all been saying, well, here's the problem. What's the source of your water? Therefore, it wasn't water, it wasn't subglacial floods. It parallels the Harlan Brets' story very closely. Well, here's the thing. Sean, his colleagues couldn't really come up with a plausible explanation for how you could form these massive subglacial reservoirs. In fact, what they call the Livingstone Lake event required 84,000 cubic kilometers of water. And 84,000 kilometers, I can do it really quickly here. We divide that by 36. That's about 2,300 cubic miles of water. That's more than all of the Great Lakes combined, vastly bigger than all of the Great Lakes combined. It's probably every lake in North America combined. And he said this one event required over 2,000 cubic miles of water. Well, where did that water come from? So he basically said, well, there must have been a reservoir somehow that formed his critics have said, that's impossible. You couldn't form that much water under the ice sheet. Well, what's happened now is the idea of a major cosmic impact into the ice sheet has completely obviated the need for a subglacial reservoir, because now we have a way of instantaneously melting enormous volumes of ice. It's no longer a mystery when the water came from. It's fully explained. And this has been the missing piece of the puzzle until the comet research group began to identify this evidence. Well, it's baffling to me that this is a source of controversy because we know that the Great Lakes were created by melting glaciers. We also know that there's vast areas of North America that are flattened by these glaciers. You know, a buddy of mine, my friend Doug lives in Casanova, Wisconsin, which is what's called the driftless area where the glaciers didn't go through. I just was there in May. It's beautiful. It's beautiful. It's gorgeous. It's rolling hills. And it's just it wasn't it wasn't crushed flat like other parts of North America were. Right. So we know we know that those glaciers melted and they created the Great Lakes. I mean, the Great Lakes were from glaciers. We know that that's an established fact. So why is all this confusing? I just don't understand why they wouldn't just add that to it. They're just going to accept the Great, the glaciers somehow or another in the last 10,000 years, the glaciers just decided to stop smashing North America flat and melt and create these Great inland oceans of fresh water. Yeah. Yeah. It's very bizarre. Ultimately, a lot of ideology is involved in this. There's this design also in the modern world. There's a design not to panic the public, not to say things that are going to cause that are going to cause panic. You know, you would Donald Trump being president? Do you think people are ready now? I think people are ready for panic. I think so. Is there is anybody debated you on this either one of you on this? Well, you know, I tried to damn, but not specifically on this. I tried to do a debate with Zahi Ha was who's the guy who runs the Giza Pyram is a madman. Yeah, total total. I mean, very crazy event, but there's a video of an online video of it online. The debate last, what? 30 seconds? Something like that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then and then later on when he finally agreed to come back into the room because he was so angry with me walked out when he finally came back into the room. He was asked a question about go back to be and just like your skeptic, he didn't know anything about go back to the tech. Or he claimed not to know about. I mean, this is this is supposed to be the world's most famous archaeologist and he knew nothing about this incredible site in a, in a neighboring country. But one point to make the Randall was talking about the second event, 11,600 years ago, we're dealing with an with an episode of cataclysm, which begins 12,800 years ago and ends 11,600 years ago. Both episodes are accompanied by massive floods. And the 11,600 years ago data may have mentioned this last year. It's in, it's in magicians of the gods. What's interesting about that is that is the exact date that Plato gives us for the destruction of the lost civilization of Atlantis. Plato, that's the only source we have for Atlantis. It comes to us. Many people think it's all over the place, but it's not. Atlantis comes to us from the Greek philosopher Plato who lived around 340 BC. And he got the story from through his family line from his ancestor Solon who had visited Egypt in 600 BC. And their Solon was told of a great civilization that had existed on earth that was the progenitor civilization of Egypt, but that was destroyed in a terrible cataclysm. And he asked at a cataclysm involving a gigantic flood. And Atlantis was submerged beneath the waves and was never seen again. And so Solon said to the priest, when did this happen? And they said 9,000 years ago. That was in 600 BC. So that's 9,600 BC. That's 11,600 years ago. That's meltwater pulse 1B. How could they know? Yeah, how could they have? We have to start taking this stuff more seriously. Instead of sneering at it and skeptizing it out of existence, we need to leave a little bit of room for extraordinary ideas possibly being right. That's the main beef I have with the skeptics is that they want to throw the baby out with a bathwater. I want to add something to that in the case. Plato discusses Atlantis in two dialogues. And in the to me, he preface the story of Atlantis by recounting the myth of fate. Now the myth of fate is a very interesting story. And basically what it is, is fate was the offspring of Helios, the sun god, who was raised, didn't know who his father was. His mother kept it a secret from him. And then one day he was being taught at school because all of his schoolmates had recounting the great deeds of their fathers and everything. So he went home distraught and finally his mother said, well actually your father is the big granddaddy of them all. Helios, the sun god, so fate and decides he's going to go and find his father. And eventually does. And he goes to some celestial realm where his father is located. And the way it is with the Greek gods, they have unlimited powers except they also have certain restrictions. For example, if a god makes a promise, he here, she cannot go back on it. Right. So when Helios sees fate and his lost son come, he's overjoyed. He says, I'm so happy to see you. I will grant you any boon you want. And fate and says, I want to drive the chariot to the sun. I want to drive your chariot. And Helio says, well, I meant anything you wanted except that. So it goes back and forth and back and forth finally, fate and convinces his father. Let me do it. His father says, look, you've got to hang onto those rains tight because those seeds are going to pull away from you. He gets in there, the gates of the sun open. It describes in the myth, you can go, you know, you can read Edith Hamilton or Bullfancher, any of the great retellings of the Greek myths, in there, it goes through the signs of the zodiac. And then all of a sudden it carines off and heads down to earth. And then it describes his whole litany of catastrophes just setting the earth on fire. And finally, the Jupiter at the, at the, the beceaching of Poseidon who's afraid that the oceans are going to boil away gets Zeus to mount his, his Mount Olympus and Hurle, his thunderbolt, which knocks fate in from the sky. And he falls to earth and, in, in, falls into the river Eredonis, which is a metaphor for the Milky Way. And his sisters, the Helliades, then weep over the death of their brother and their tears fall to earth and cause the great flood. Plato, then, after referencing that myth, he then says, now, this has the form of a myth. But what it really represents is a declination or a declining of the bodies in space orbiting around the earth in an eventual falling to earth of one of those bodies and a conflagration of all things triggered by the fall of that body. It's intriguing that he mentions the zodiac because the torrid meteor stream is so cold because it appears to come at us from the direction of the constellation of tourists, a zodiacal constellation. That's where those shooting stars amongst which are some very large objects that, that have hit us in the past and can hit us again in the future. That's where they come from. That area of the sky. It's an actual illusion. It appears that they're not actually coming from tourists. It looks like that. They come from that area of the sky. They come from that area of the sky. And so anybody in ancient times who was witnessing and according to the Victor Club and William Napier and those guys who are the British neocatastifists that have been doing all of this work for decades on the torrid meteor shower have concluded that, you know, in times past, it was an extremely active shower and would have created some pretty darn impressive light shows. Even if it wasn't causing catastrophes down here below, but what they've, what they've conjectured is that there might be times of multiple tungusco-like impact bombardment when, you know, there could be thousands of objects within the torrid meteor stream on the same scale as the tungusco object. And that if you go and you read the accounts, the eyewitness accounts over and over again, people are saying things like, well, it looked like it was being disgourged from the sun. It looked like it was being born out of the sun, right? It looked like a second sun in the sky, like for a short period of time, the sun had a twin, right? Well, the summertime torids are coming from their perihelion passage around the sun. So you like Graham was saying they make an elliptical orbit out to Jupiter and back around the sun in this stream, right? Earth crosses that stream twice each year. One time late June, early July, we cross, but at that point, they're coming from the direction of the sun. So their arrival to Earth is going to be very difficult to see because they're coming from the direction of the sun, right? But that's exactly where on June 30th, a torrid meteor would be coming from. And then also the fact that it's the perfect date for the peak of the of the shower and the correct place in the sky, to me, it's pretty convincing evidence that it was most likely a remnant of that torrid stream. The other time that the Earth crosses is as late October, early in November, in fact, we've just passed out of it within the last week, basically. But it peaks interestingly coincidentally between like October 30th and November 4th or 5th. So it's peaking right around Halloween time. In fact, they've been called the Halloween meteors and there's some very interesting fireworks sometimes they called them the Halloween fireworks. Yeah, but there's some very interesting work done by a research you back around the early 20th century named Grant Halliburton who spent about 15 years researching the connections between ancient calendars. And he concluded one thing very interesting was that a lot of these ancient calendars were being synchronized by people's observations of the rise and fall of the Pleiades, which is the shoulder of the bull. The Pleiades comprises basically part of that constellation. Yeah, the shoulder of the bull. And what he came up with was that in his research, he discovered that many of these stories that were associated with this like the slaying of the celestial bull, you know, Gilgamesh and Enchidu in the earliest known story. They fight this celestial bull. There's many counterparts in variants of that in mythical stories. And so what he then found out though was that in many cases, that our modern Halloween actually goes back thousands of years to an ancient day of the dead that was observed all over the earth at the same time every year, even in the southern hemisphere. And it usually revolved around the commemoration of the culmination of the Pleiades, which is when the Pleiades crosses the local meridian. In other words, it reaches the keystone of the Royal Arch, so to speak, up in the sky. So if you got on Halloween now and you face the south in the northern hemisphere, you will see the Pleiades right at midnight. At midnight, they will be, if you think of the arch of the Zodiac as being a clock, it's right there at midnight. At midnight. Well, here's the interesting link is that in all of these myths, what Halliburton discovered over and over again was that the day of the dead ultimately went back to myth about the destruction of the world by a great flood and or fire. It's fascinating that it's all coming out of the constellation tourist too and it's the celestial bull that they're fighting in these ancient myths and all these cultures around the world are celebrating the day of the dead of this exact same time. It's amazing stuff. And right now, our science is closing its eyes to this. I think it's fair to say with the Torrid meatiest dream, which is a very big issue in this whole discussion that we are dealing with a hidden hand in human history. It's something that is going to ultimately require us to re-explain almost everything, that the skeptics hate it. They can't bear it because first of all, it involves cataclysm. And secondly, it involves the possibility of losing a whole civilization from the record. It's really interesting when you look at the dates of this cluster, this episode of bombardment between 12,811,600 years ago, that's the period that just immediately precedes what mainstream academia think of as the very beginnings of civilization. And they've just never, maybe it's not even their fault. This is so recent, this science is so new that they've not had time to adapt to it. But if they adapt to it and take this into account, then suddenly what was an extraordinary and absurd and impossible idea that there was a lost civilization 12,000 years ago becomes a very plausible and reasonable idea. And then we start, once we take that on board, then we can start opening our eyes to archaeological anomalies, like the great Sphinx, like Balbek, like submerged ruins, like Gobekli Tepe, and begin to consider what does all this mean? Are we in fact a species with amnesia? Are we here? Forgetful of the truth about ourselves. Maybe that's why we're so fucked up, you know, because we just actually don't know, we've made up a story about where we came from and what we are. I certainly think it plays a part. And I also think that conservative skepticism is probably prudent when you're dealing with most scientific issues. Most things that come out that people are claiming, I mean there's so many charlatans out there, crazy people that are claiming new discoveries. But in some cases, they examine these discoveries, as long as they're far enough away from us or weird enough, like this new planet that they believe they have a 90-plus per sign. Yeah. They're pretty sure there's something outside past the Kuiper Belt and they think it's massive. They think it's at least four times, maybe larger than the United States or then excuse me, the world. And I've got an orbit of about 10,000 years. And that's interesting with comets because this huge massive object circulating in the outer solar system through the Kuiper Belt, which is a source of many of the comets that hit the earth, is destabilizing comets from safe orbits and putting them into really dangerous orbits that come our way. Correctly from wrong, but what is the source of all these near-Earth objects? Does this have anything to do with Earth 1 and Earth 2? Does it have anything to do with the initial impact that created the moon? Is that because we were hit by another planet right during the formation of the earth? And this is all scientifically established, astroscientists or astrophysicists rather, and astronomers all agree on that, right? There's a lot of debris that would go back to that time. But comets are another story because they're coming in from the far reaches of outer space. They're coming in from the oat cloud and the Kuiper Belt, just vast distances away. They're voyagers. They're kind of messages from the distant reaches of the cosmos who come in in an unpredictable way because their orbits are destabilized by something like planet 9. Isn't there something called Bodes Law where you can measure the mass and the orbit of a certain planet and you can accurately depict where the next planet is going to be and doesn't that fall apart somewhere between Mars and Jupiter? With the asteroid belt. Yeah, which would indicate that something was probably there. That's been the theory of the asteroid belt that it wasn't an exploded planet. Of course there's a lot of opposition to that theory too. You know, your right skepticism really has an important role to play. It's really essential that we are skeptical. Otherwise we'd all be found Zachariah Citz in waiting for the Anunnaki to land. Exactly. We would have sold our houses December 21st, 2012. We'd all be going with the fuck now I'm homeless. Exactly. And I have to say there's a skeptic called Michael Heiser who has done really an excellent job of thoroughly debunking the bogus translations of Zachariah Citz. Yeah, he's he's Citz in his wrong dot com. It's a very useful it's a very useful site. So we hated him and loved him at the same time. So I feel sad. I love the idea of the aliens come down and manipulating the monkeys and making this to mine gold. It's a wonderful story. But unfortunately, it's a work of science fiction. It's not a work of fact. We need. I knew him. He was a fascinating man. I once drove him from Stonehenge to London. We had we had many conversations. He was a deep and serious researcher. But I think he I think he got he got carried away with his own fact. I also think that that fantasy became very lucrative. And it also became a source of identity to him. Yeah. And I followed him pretty closely as well. I've read the 12th planet. And I got really in his research. And this is in my early pot smoking days when I first started smoking pots while I was I was all in. I was all in. And then as I got wiser and then as I got my honest, maybe not wiser. Just I started recognizing objectively why these these things are so attractive. The fantastical is more attractive than the practical. And so something else, again, I don't want I don't want to put sich in down. And I'm here also to say that sich in that did a lot of really good work. He was a clever guy. And it's a lot of very, very, very thorough research. I've just lost my track actually smoking too much dope. Where was I going? Well, we were talking about all the difference between the fantastical and the practical that there's this inclination to accept things that are fun. Yeah. You know, that's what I was going to say is that when you start talking about the Anunnaki, those from heaven to earth cane, these fantastic creatures from thank you. You've brought my memory to be a fan of me. I remember what I was going to say. What's interesting needs and pot? I know it could be. It could be good. What's interesting is that the level of technology that Zechariah attributes to the Anunnaki oblique nephillim, that that level of technology is the level of technology that we had in the 1970s when we were, you know, NASA was doing its stuff. So it's NASA technology from the 1970s that is projected out onto that is projected over the ground. But it's projected out that is projected out onto his theory of the past. Now, it seems to me very unlikely that the nephillim or the Anunnaki would have had for 400,000 years, which is what he's saying, the same technology that NASA had in the 1970s as much more likely that he's projecting that onto the data rather than that it's actually inherent in the data. There was also some interesting ideas that he had that turned out to be ideas that scientists had also proposed about preserving our atmosphere by levitating or by suspending reflective particles in our atmosphere. And that is something that the Anunnaki in his books were going to use gold for because gold has such unique properties, which is why they use gold to plate things because you can take a little tiny piece of gold. You can plate this entire table. Gold is a really spectacular piece of, I mean, there's nothing like it, right? Absolutely. No, there's a lot of really good material in Zechariah, but unfortunately the translations of the texts, the translations of the texts are not translations of the texts. They misrepresent the texts. Often what he did was he took a 19th century translation and he massaged it so that it would fit his, fit his argument. And that's a pity. So we need skeptics and they help us to sift out the wheat from the chaff and that, but occasionally what the skeptics do with this drive to criticize anything that's not mainstream, occasionally what they do is they let go a really good idea, which deserves investigation and which the human species could benefit from. And that's my feeling is with this amazing species, we've developed all this science. Why are we so ready to let go of wonderful ideas? Well, it's also fascinating to me that because of what Sichan has been sort of criticized for, people now ignore the stuff that's absolutely undeniable, like the actual stone tablets themselves, the clay tablets, where you can see the depictions of the solar system. Somehow or another, these people from 6,000 plus years ago had a detailed map of the solar system. That's a clear idea of the solar system. With the size in like a relatively correct order and the planets in the right place, like they somehow or another knew that Jupiter was bigger than Mars, they knew these things in some weird way. And we don't know why and we don't know how. Also the Cadusius representing the double helix of the DNA, that's a really fascinating concept too, that the Cadusius is used for medicine and it's used to rip. I mean, he had some really interesting points that I did. So it's kind of too bad. There was so much crazy involved in that. I think what any of us should do when we're exploring the deep and hidden mysteries of the past is to go to a lot of different sources. Go to a lot of don't just stick with the mainstream, don't just stick with the alternative, but try to bring it all together. And in a way, that's what I try to do in my books except the Skepics still hate them. Yeah. But it's so hard because it's so it's so fun to go with the crazy story. Yeah. Like the alien story is so compelling. It's so fun. Very compelling story. I mean, if we found some sort of evidence of aliens, it would be so utterly spectacular, even if it was a simple alien. Like I've always said this, that if we found a jellyfish on the moon, we would freak out. But you know, there's really complex, bizarre things at the bottom of our ocean that we've never discovered, just they're just not in the correct location for us to be excited. And then the other issue, we're getting slightly off our flood topic here. That's okay. But the other issue of entities that the encounters with entities, anybody who smoked DMT will know that as you have, that will know that you do encounter entities in the DMT, in the DMT state and they do communicate with us. And there's a lot of parallels with ETs or the aliens as they described in modern UFO abduction accounts. And Rick Strassman, have you ever had a money or show? You know, Rick out sick, he was supposed to be here a couple of times. We're trying to reschedule it now. But he had some pretty serious health issues. We had a date scheduled out, but I love that guy. We had a chance to sit down with him a couple of times and talk to him. And of course you presented the M2 to the state molecule. Yeah, he's brilliant. And he's so important to me because I remember when I did it, I was so confused. I mean to me, it was like the first, my first DMT experience changed everything I thought about the world. And I immediately didn't give a shit about aliens anymore. Like it was almost instantaneous. Like before then, I was like, Roswell, they've got the ship and it's in a hangar. But what I encountered doing DMT was so spectacularly alien that the pedestrian concept of something that looks like a person but has a bare head and large eyes and high attack. Yeah. Yeah. It was weird and cool as it would be if it was real. It was nothing. I mean, literally not one millionth is interesting as what you absolutely can encounter when you do DMT. Yeah. That's the aliens. That's the aliens. At utterly alien realm filled with alien intelligences who can mean it. Of course, again, the skeptic say, oh, it's all just made up in your brain. But we don't know that. And Rick is open to the possibility that we are dealing with areas of reality that are not normally accessible to our senses and that become accessible to our senses by retuning the receiver wavelength of the brain, which is what he suggests DMT does. And I think I think that's very plausible. And at the very least, those who are interested in you for as an alien should be also investigating this line of inquiry. Can we can we use changes in consciousness to understand the majestic complexity of the universe in which we live? And I think the answer is definitely yes. And many of Rick's volunteers, I paraphrase, but they came back with reports that the entities who'd encountered them said, we're so glad you've discovered this technology. Now we can communicate with you much more easily. You know, it's fascinating. So there's a technology for encountering other intelligences and against that, this mechanistic, simplistic alien meme that's going around now that they're a bit like us, but they came here in high tech, the high attack. It's dull by comparison with it. It is dull by comparison. If you're interested in anybody, the book is amazing. It's called DMT, the spirit molecule. And he has a new book that he's putting out about DMT and the solar prophecy. Yeah. And he's just a really, really interesting guy. But his his experience that he did, he did where the first, I think in many, many decades to get approved by the government. So he did everything above ground. I mean, he was above board. He did. And because it was government approved, his remit was that he had to find some therapeutic benefit for DMT. And he couldn't actually. But that's not the point. Yeah. I'm sure actually there are. proved his his remit was that he had to find some therapeutic benefit for DMT and he couldn't actually but that's not the point yeah I'm sure actually there are therapeutic benefits but that's not the point the point is here is a tool for investigating the mystery of consciousness and the mysterious nature of reality and I mean fuck me if we get five or six volunteers who haven't compared notes all coming back who've met entities who said we're so happy you found this technology yeah it's hard to explain that as just to reduce it to brain activity not only that when we talk about things that are so big and ignored by mainstream culture this is one that's just like that you're talking about an endogenous human chemical yeah that not only is in us but is in thousands of different plants like how many different plants contain DMT huge numbers I mean it's very prosaic ones like peas and you know well there's the main story okay that's what I was going to say this is an external tree is actually illegal isn't that but looking the Jerusalem the professors from the University of Jerusalem I believe though any Shannon yeah we're talking about they believe that that's what the story of the burning bush and Moses is so that is mimosa with the DMT and Syrian rule with the mono Amy noxid days inhibitor in other words it's it's ayahuasca but a Middle Eastern alternative of it doing the same thing me like molecularly and isn't it possible in some way that the idea of the burning bush was them figuring out how to dry or extract DMT and burn it very very possibly right because they're talking about the burning bush producing God and it just so happens that this bush is the acacia trees incredibly common in super rich and DMT and it's all over the area and I should probably insert at this point that if you're at all familiar with the Masonic ritual you'll know that the acacia plant plays a central role that's why you want to them 1% mason characters every now every now and then on Facebook around like it accused of being a Freemason Hancock is a Freemason as though it explains everything I know lots of Freemasons I spoke in the Masonic lodges but I'm an author and I shouldn't belong to clubs you know I went to a few I went to a wedding that my friend Duncan Troso was performing at for these two Satanists and like 2003 into this day was one of the levays Anton Lavais or Stanton Lavais whatever is his son and his son got married this was some young hedonist you know and they call themselves Satanists and so Duncan performed at this wedding and I went there to this day I get fucking tweets about being a Satanist so I can't join your little club pal. People are your masons I need to confess here Graham yes you didn't realize this but I secretly initiated you oh my god oh you're in so we get in how do you still really initiate somebody can you do that no I sort of did sort of so you could get him in if you wanted to though right if you know the people oh of course you even you Joe I don't think so I'm gonna have them I met a couple of masons they're very cool well most masons don't really understand the corpus of symbolism that's that they're sitting on top of I gotta say that not to get off on the Freemasons but simply there's a mass of symbolism and that's the whole that's that's the thing that their custodians of and most of them don't have a clue what it means but they're doing an important job by preserving this corpus of symbolism through the through the layout of the lodge the the meaning of every component in the lodge because it's a purely astronomical allegory and then you have the Masonic carpets and that's where you have the whole story of the comet the flood it's all there the occasion you plant it's all there it's all correct me from wrong but it's all also an integral part of how Washington DC was designed is that true yeah to somebody I haven't you know I honestly haven't studied that book but what I've seen is that there's a there's a bunch of videos we could watch it where they sort of describe how the layout you know is in some way some sort of sacred geometry I think what it's based on the Freemasons were massively involved in the construction of Washington as they were of many great cities of city island in England has got you know the major masonic architecture so is it like people like me like my initial projects I hear something like the masons like oh fuck it doesn't occult get out of here leave me alone like we assume that all groups of people that follow anything somehow another wacky masons in my opinion they're largely a drinking club for men mainly that's what it is guys you can make special arrangements to bring women into a lot for example my wife when I've given a talk in a lodge I've given talks in two or three lodges been asked to do so then they make a special ceremony to allow my wife santa to come in because I won't go anywhere without santa and so women can women can go in but then there are more there are others within masonry who are pursuing deeply esoteric interests and exploring the mysteries and you can have incredible conversations and faceted it's just another another group of people who you know are doing are doing their thing it's not for me I wouldn't join I don't I would lose I think if I joined Freemasonry it would weaken me as an author I think I think I'm better able to comment on these things by not being a member of any such group that's interesting why do you think that well because I think I have to remain open to all possibilities and if I if I commit myself to a particular line I don't commit myself to a particular religion I don't commit myself to a particular men's club either I just which is what masonry is I think if I commit that then but then ultimately I would become a spokesperson for that and I don't want to be that that makes a lot of sense considering your occupation and how important being open mind it has been to your life it's vital it's absolutely without it how could you have ever done fingerprints of the gods I could not you should have I mean and the thing the initial thing where you were to tell me about Ethiopia the place where they believe that the the architect of covenant lays which is one of the most bizarre ideas ever and that was my first book on a historical mystery was the sign in the ceiling to try and we need to go into it like it's so interesting but I just I've always imagined you as a young guy forced to sort of reconcile with this bizarre piece of evidence you've got these old men that have cataracts in their eyes like they're around radiation sites and no one's allowed to go inside and see this thing and they claim they have the arc of the covenant in there and like what the fuck is in there was the beginning of a magical journey for me it's been a magical journey for all your fans too for guys like me man when I read the gods it was to me it was one of those books I just couldn't put down it was so mind blowing and this is again was in my the heart of my yeah fucking a thing man fingerprints was published in 1995 and magicians came out in 20 in in 2015 and I would say in that time the the evidence when I made the case for a lost civilization and a global cataclysm in fingerprints of the gods I can't begin to account for the amount of hostility and anger and rage that I generated in the academic community and the idea was considered to be absolutely absurd 20 years later with magicians of the gods it's not so absurd anymore the evidence is mounting we have incredible evidence now for a global cataclysm in exactly the period that counts between 12,811,600 years ago and we have sites like Gobekli Tepe we have a redefinition of the Sphinx the whole area is just about to explode in in in in the future we're on the edge I believe of a paradigm shift and this comment material is central to it what I really appreciate about your courage is that you've also had the courage to admit when you've been mistakes yeah you're not you don't in any way pretend to be some sort of a bear of secret knowledge that no one else possesses absolutely not a guru I don't want to be anything like that I'm a reporter that's that's what I am and I'm a reporter who's reporting on offbeat subjects and to some extent I'm an outsider so one of the talks I do now is about being a being an outsider I think there is a I think there is a place for outside is in society well I don't think you're an outsider I think you're an outsider from the established mainstream ideas I just think that I do have the same we're both both outside is in that area I'm working in different fields to get into this but don't you think that these established channels that were so deeply grooved in distributing information those things have widened so well you're getting you mean a professor could do a podcast like he could teach a class he could write a book or he can do a podcast on a certain subject and like you're aware of Dan Carlin and that hardcore history podcast I just can't stop raving about but what he's done is brought historical accurate but really dramatic stories of real events that took place to millions I can know that's just that no one's doing that like this is but it's not mainstream well what's more mainstream than being number one on the iTunes podcast list which he is all the time what is more mainstream and he must be getting millions of downloads it's part of the big changes taking place in our society that the old structures are being overthrown are being thrown away it's a very uncomfortable time it's a very uncertain time it's a very exciting time right because we can build out of this something something amazing in the future the internet's had a huge part to play in it the fact that people can communicate with one another all around the world well since I've had a web presence in the last I was late summer but maybe two or two to three years ago I've been getting contacted by I mean professionals from around the world I've got probably a dozen major ones I've geologists who want to know more about and interestingly you said earlier about debating you know I'm always looking for somebody debate about right I you know because I have questions and I'm thinking maybe somebody even somebody who would disagree with me on something good still help me answer some of the questions right but I try to associate as much as possible and hang out with professionals in the field and of course what I discover is that a lot of them are working in these things part time almost clandestinely without making it part of their you know if I go on a field trip of geologists into the flood lands none of them are really working out of full time it's all part time you know they're working for the government they're working for the oil companies or you know exploration mineral exploration whatever they're doing this research into geological catastrophes on their own time right but recently just last summer I got invited to actually present some of my research the Atlanta Geological Society which is the largest society of professional geologists in the southeast so I jumped at the chance rather than you know and so I presented hoping that I would get challenged that somebody would say wait a second there's a flaw in your thinking here didn't happen so did you make friends with some of these mainstream geologists oh yeah well I mean I've been knowing I mean I just took a trip for in September spent 10 days back out in the flood lands and I did geologists with me on that trip so yeah I'm getting to know more and more people who are working as well you know I majored in geology and so I still am in touch regularly with the head of the geology department I see her pretty much on a regular basis and have been keeping her prized of some of my stuff and she has offered to sponsor me at whatever point I think that I can pull it together as a dissertation but we'll see how that goes I mean my objective was to learn geology not to become a professional geologist I wasn't interested in working for the government or working for you know the energy industry I had geological questions and that's why I majored in geology and you've walked the walk and in my opinion you know more about this stuff ten fully PhD geologists yeah you always freaking me out so what what's what's fascinating to me about all this is that I think what you've done has been very measured you know everything you back up with facts and photographs and descriptions and disclaimers you know when you when you say well it's it is possible you will go down other various paths you're not dogmatic about these ideas but you've spent so much time going over this and I don't know if there's another if there's a commensurate guy in mainstream archaeology that has been public about it the way you happen because if there is I feel like we probably would have heard about them your podcast have been the ones that we've done they've been seen by millions of people they've been listened to by millions of people I mean the the information's getting out there and making a real difference you're always going to have the the guys like I think Michael Schirmers very important and I criticize him but that knee jerk reaction to do something to mock something or put down something that's not mainstream like one of his tweets he said you know what archaeology with evidence is and he wrote archaeology like why would you even tweet that yeah this doesn't even make any sense like that someone is not paying attention to your work that means that all you do is focus on evidence I'm reminded of the Shakespearean line me thinks the lady doth protest too much why does he need to say that it's got the evidence you know it's like as he tweet like fox news saying fair and balance you know he's tweeting at you with this yeah meanwhile your entire book is based on photographic evidence yeah and all the other various pieces of evidence I mean that your whole thing documents he told about examining all these pieces of evidence these not these are things that you've invented these are actual real sites that you can look at I'm drawing inferences from them that they don't like that's the thing well Robert shock and guys like him are so important guys who have the courage who's a Boston University professor absolutely encourage to look at the stones and say this is the product of water roger stone to cut us to Robert shock as a geologist as a career academic geologist who's taken that risk and put himself out there and followed the evidence where it leads another one is Danny Hillman Natawa judge in Indonesia who's been responsible for the investigation of this extraordinary site at Gunung Padang where work has been stopped since 2014 again he's a highly credentialed geologist he's Indonesia's leading expert in mega thrust earthquakes but he's been looking at archaeology bringing his geological expertise to that so the things are changing we are finding we are finding academics who are willing to engage and willing to to discuss I I got into a very interesting email correspondence with a guy called Daniel Lohman at Balbek what from the German archaeological institute who's an architect and an archaeologist and he was very civil with me and I he answered my question we went into it in depth we had quite a long debate that's very refreshing that kind of thing wasn't happening 20 years ago yeah that is very refreshing now what about those pyramids in Bosnia has that been what is what is the deal with that are those things I've been there I know Sam Aswanajic personally Sam is the guy who's who's promoted the site I like Sam very much I must say when I'm in his aura I'm extremely convinced but when I when I look rationally at the at the so-called pyramids I don't think they're pyramids I think their hills I did spend with Sam showing me around I did spend three days in Bosnia looking at the so-called pyramid of the Sun the pyramid of the moon the love pyramid and so on and so forth I do see that a tourist industry has built up around this and it's a fabulously beautiful intriguing site and massive beautiful mountainous place but they are hills they are not pyramids impression is given that there are tunnels passageways inside the pyramids that's not true the passageways are about two two and a half kilometers away they're very low tech I just don't I just don't see it and for that reason I did not cover the Bosnia and pyramids and magicians of the gods I'm not going to say they're not pyramids I'm not going to write a book saying that they're but they didn't excite me enough to justify devoting a chapter to them there's much more exciting and important archaeological discoveries that are being made like go backly toppy which need more space and there's some pyramid-like structures or hills in China as well right there's thousands of pyramids in China see and the province of see and it's just the moment you land there for your aircraft you're seeing pyramids everywhere I'll be dealing with that there are certainly hundreds and hundreds of them distributed across fields vanishing off into the distance in all in all directions they've been terraced and used as agriculture but local farmers grow crops on them I went there with Chinese archaeologists they haven't excavated a single one not one why not they said we don't have this was nearly 10 years ago I was there they said they probably got the money now but they said then they didn't have the money they said we're in old country we don't mind if we wait 200 years to get the grips with this and the famous tomb of the first emperor is part of this pattern it is also a pyramid it has also not been excavated the terracotta army around it has been found the terracotta armies amazing oh yeah there was on display somewhere wasn't it well you can go and see it live yeah they did some kind of trouble I'd want to see that thing I'd want to look at those things what put a bizarre concept now these pyramids so this one that this emperor was buried and that had the terracotta army was that a pyramid as well it is a pyramid it is absolutely it's a man-made pyramid the terracotta army was buried around its edges not in the pyramid itself so the army was there to protect him yeah to protect his soul into the afterlife seems to have been the seems to have been the idea and then there's a mythology that's come down that the that within the pyramid is a lake of mercury that there are mechanical devices in there which will fire arrows at you if you go in that there's a whole story about how intensely protected it is and up to this day it's not been excavated that's so crazy how could someone leave that alone and you know even major archaeological sites like Tuanako in Bolivia for example you'll find that only about 2% of the site has been excavated I don't know how we can draw inferences about the whole site from from a tiny little fragment fraction like that and that's the that's the problem I think with archaeology and it's why we have to you know consider another way we're looking at an image of the terracotta army now you know in front of this pyramid and it is spectacular now that I think about it I don't think that was on display anywhere I think maybe they had a couple of them they brought some of them they came to the British Museum there were a number of museums but it's so much bigger than I thought it was yeah you know I mean there's I mean how many there's thousands yes thousands of these terracotta figures absolutely and this period was made out it's stone earth mainly okay so they just sort of shape the ground they just dug around yeah they brought in earth and turned it into a pyramidial mount but it wasn't it's not massive stone blocks it's not massive stuff that's why they can grow crops on the sides of some of these pyramids wow how weird yeah so they would build these giant mounds of dirt and then dig holes in them and support them well they probably created the interior you know subterranean as they were building the whole thing and they just stacked dirt on top of it yeah wow what a weird way to make a house yeah and then we have to consider this with you know with with archaeological sites all all around the world is that any site may actually not be the product of just one culture but may have been reworked and worked over and used by many different cultures over this is a different period stunning to me I found out about this because of a friend of John Anthony West who was here with him he showed me he lives in China who showed me some video of it and I was like how do I not know about this I had no idea there's this many of them also here's one that's exposed what's this controversial ancient pyramids of China that one looks exposed it's been one of those blocky yeah yeah well that is another thing about China that we just don't have a clue when we when we think about the the age and scale of things we're so silly we've only been around since you know 1776 is when the country was established it's not really that long ago you're dealing with China you're dealing with literally thousands of years of civilization all rising and falling and taking place and adapting and growing all in this one area that's still in our eyes in a lot of ways it's kind of behind right I mean they're behind environmentally they're behind when it comes to human rights consider this the Portuguese in the late 1400s have rounded the Cape of Good Hope and they've entered the Indian Ocean in their little ships they've entered the Indian Ocean and they actually established a huge empire they go to Malacca they go all over the place okay the seas are open to them if they had come 40 years earlier they would have encountered the Chinese treasure ships ships that were 50 times larger than the little caravilles that the Portuguese were sailing in Basje and you know what the Chinese did at that time they went through a period where they felt they just wanted to give gifts to people and they put together these huge fleets carrying incredibly precious gifts silks and ceramics and they took them all around the Indian Ocean and they just gave them to people so off the coast of East Africa and any stuff you can find remains of this pottery from this episode and then a Chinese emperor came along and he closed the doors burned all the boats shut everything down and didn't let anybody speak to China for 200 years whoa what a dick well he he felt it was time for the Chinese culture to turn inward yeah and he they were afraid that they were that they're ancient culture and one and there might have been maybe a laudable motive in that they were concerned that the ancient culture was going to get contaminated by too much contact with it's not genera cultures from other places and that was a that the constant desire to maintain the current situation human we have to say it's some kind of some kind of human nature yeah for sure i'd love to see some of these images of the yeah let's look at the drone stuff from the kamas the kamas prairie and what what let's let's let's have a look at it you got that one here this Chinese parents are still blowing my mind they blow my mind as well I just can't believe they haven't been excavated it's an eerie spooky scene i mean i recommend anybody to go to see and i'm just just it's incredible how many of them there are and how unexplained it all is and it's again it feeds into my general point is we don't remember how paused what are we looking at here okay let's let's can we pause so i can talk about what we're looking at yeah you look at this one that way you can hit the mic right in front of you okay this is the beginning but okay what we're here so we're looking at a place in western Montana called kamas prairie and you see some hills in the foreground and you see a basin in the background right okay right here on top of this hill and down on the side here you see that there are some quarrying operations those are quarrying gravel because everything you're looking at here this whole landscape between the hills are these large masses of gravel trillions of tons of gravel now what we're going to do is we're going to start sweeping around as the video plays and you're going to load us down here a series of ripples okay i see that okay and i'm going to have Jamie pause in a second but let's keep coming around you start seeing the ripples on the landscape let's pause right there right there let's pause now i wish i had a pointer but if you look up you're going to see a flat piece of land like a ton coming out round it yeah jammies uh right here that's it gets your laser that's a delta that's a delta you know what a delta is you ever heard of a delta it's when a river comes into a body of water and it's carrying sediment and because the river is moving along swiftly it's carrying the sediment but when it comes into the standing body of water it slows down and it drops its sediment it builds a delta the whole city of portland for example is built on a giant delta right new Orleans is built on a delta right okay so what we're seeing there is a delta and then in front of it we're seeing rippled landscape let's keep coming around jammies rippled landscape did looks exactly like the beach looks yeah keep coming around with that's the thing it's fractal because this this is the whole mystery of this that this happens at a scale of inches on beaches and a scale of hundreds of feet here stop again okay now right here in the middle you see a massive delta yeah it's beautiful like a big tongue splayed out and then right down here you start seeing the ripples and there's a farmhouse you see the farmhouse there now those ripples are the tallest ones are about the height of a five-story building whoa how bizarre keep okay let's keep keep swinging around stop it stop this for a second if you don't mind no I don't see these things they're the size of a five-story building what is that like 70 feet or something okay 50 feet okay so that's those are 50 feet high and how much water we'll get to that let's see let's see the rest of it and these are just dirt right there well if you dig into one what you're going to find is there are there a massive okay let's pause again look at this this is crazy this is totally crazy this is one of the craziest things you'll ever see this is these ripples repeated ripples in an area where there's nothing else like it this is the fingerprints of the flood that's what it is where can someone look at this how does someone look at this in real you know this right now this what we're looking at this this video well my colleague Brad young did this with his drone and I think he's got it on the website geocasmic rat is this being played in the youtube video right now okay all right so the youtube people are cool with it if you're listening on iTunes find it find it on youtube but it's worth looking at it's what my point this is this is mind-blowing share and I think I think you made the crucial point Joe which is which is that we can understand what this is because we can see it on any beach we can see how water flows receding across a sandy medium will produce ripples but here they're on this unbelievable scale where they're hundreds of feet long and 50 feet high where they draw houses and they're lying all across and that to what that tells us is that a huge water flow went across this plane and did this you were seeing it from this perspective of love which is a rare perspective unless you're in a plane or helicopter something you get a chance to look at it this way you really get a better sense of what it is if you were on the ground there you'd probably say oh look at all the hills hard to see you don't quite get the impression oh we did visit this this location and in to that day it was overcast so you don't quite get the effect like you do when you've got when a low sun angle really helps you to see what what what's going on in the landscape can I ask you is there a dispute to this is there no no nobody disputes it nobody disputes it no from a flood not anymore wow no in fact it was this jt part let's be clear nobody disputes that it was caused by massive water flows okay but those said people would still not buy into the notion that there was this one humongous okay so they they think it's an accumulative effect but that this was all created this was the bottom of Lake Missoula right yeah and this is supposed to actually represent the draining of Lake Missoula right whereas I argue from a number of different reasons that this is the filling of Lake Missoula I have a friend of mine who his friend lives in Montana and they found a dinosaur on his ranch oh wow yeah really recently we should come back to that because there's a connection yeah the well the great western inland sea all that at that area there was I mean this is a crazy place at one point in time it still is arguably yeah it did different way the the water here joe that did this the way to visualize this is to again begin to think of tsunami you have to think tsunami because it's the tsunami is the closest scale of water flow that we've experienced in modern times no river flood has even approached this right no no flood in any flood plain nothing that we can put into perspective right the closest the closest we can get to it is a is a tsunami but even there you got a picture the tsunamis that we've experienced in the last decade and a half and you know in Indonesia and Japan when they made landfall those tsunamis were roughly between 20 and 50 feet depending on where you were relative to the to the oncoming wave and how far distant you were from it here what you have to visualize is the tsunami sweeping over the land that's over a thousand feet deep that's that's what happened here and we know that because we can trace the the high watermarks on the hillsides are clearly left the high watermarks are clearly etched into the into the hillsides so we now know based upon the study of the ripples and the water here was moving down it's filling this base and it's rushing in in a great tsunami from the north of freshwater meltwater coming off the ice sheet and it's sweeping down over this land at probably two or three hundred million cubic feet per second which is an inconceivable amount of it's it's many times in excess of every river flowing on earth flowing today all at once it's it's beyond that many times 10 or 20 times beyond that one of the trip your things about water is that water in itself it's kind of fractal in some sort of a weird way when you look at the the actual molecules of water it's almost like we don't we don't distinguish it as being a fractal thing because we see it as like this moving flume but if you're you're looking at the actual molecules of water the cup of water that you dip your fingers in which is seemingly completely innocuous becomes this massive element of change when the volume is a thousand feet high and just rolling over with massive amount becomes this massive element of change when the volume is a thousand feet high and just rolling over with massive amounts of weight behind it. It's that same stuff massive amounts of weight enough enough very that it's actually causing seismic responses. It's only imagine how much weight are you talking about that's getting create these 50 foot high walls. But this what's fascinating to me is that we don't have we don't have a scale like in our minds as a reference like the difference between that little cup and these gigantic waves that you see that surfers travel by jet ski to get to you know the off of I believe it's Mexico right you're seeing those massive waves they go way out miles out to get to these crazy waves and we ride them in like 60 70 feet high. Like that's that's the comparison almost like a glass of water to those waves and then that to the scales up it scales up it scales up and at a certain point it can change the whole story of civilization almost doesn't compute. It's almost not computing one of these flood flows here is three orders of magnitude greater than the largest measured modern flood. In other words over a thousand times greater in terms of peak discharge or volume you would have to scale up at least a thousand times greater than any modern measured flood to get to the smallest really of these flows here. This is just one one place one locale of on five states where you can trace the literally the ocean of fresh water sweeping across the entire Pacific Northwest pretty much washing away anything that was there. It's almost like we have a defense mechanism built in where we ignore how vulnerable we really are like we put it maybe that's one of the reasons why people are so reluctant to really go deep into studying asteroid Olympics. I think it was or even to pay attention to this stuff like that this could happen. And this is I mean that those are not two separate subjects because this is the result of the comet impact on the on the ice cap. This is the this is why I feel that the research in this field is so vital. Right there. Yeah. Now here notice. This is great. That's a beach. But it's a it's a beach for giant monsters what it is. You can see in this here that you've actually got three massive currents converging here. Do you see that over here right you've got a massive current coming in that would be from the west. And then we're standing we would be standing looking down current. Of course this the drone I'm guessing here is about 200 feet in elevation. So the top of the water was another eight to 900 feet above this perspective right here. And it's moving very very fast. And it's sweeping down into a river valley that's down in those mountains you see in the distance. And from there it's being carried down and joining up other equally as large floods coming in from other valleys. And all of this is happening once and it's covering five states basically. That's just one region that's being affected by this sudden catastrophic melting of the ice sheets. We are dealing with the largest flood that ever occurred on Earth. Yeah this is insane. I mean it's insane to look at it. And it happened here in North America and it happened 12,800 years ago and its story has yet to be fully told. Is it impossible there was something larger before like the 65 million year ago one that hit the eucatan like what you know what kind of an impact that have. Well it actually would because if it if it happened 12,000 years ago we wouldn't be happy. None of us would be here. Yeah that would be a wrap right. Yeah that was a single large object. About six miles wide. That was a much more devastating impact than the impacts of 12,800 years ago. But nevertheless those impacts of 12,800 years ago were really really bad and they did stuff like this. And anything that was in the way of this of these massive flows of water would have been rubbed completely from the story. See this all makes sense. And here's the thing that the Michael Shermers don't get. When you understand the extent of this the scale of this phenomena and the severity, the inconceivable severity of this. In the aftermath of an event like this what would remain of a city of village refrigerator? No not a goddamn thing. Nothing. Nothing. Nothing would exist in the aftermath of this. And most things wouldn't exist. I mean you find like an old refrigerator or a car up on blocks and someone's backyard in the south. And it's in the 1970s and the the the rot has gotten into a frame. The nature is going to eat it up. Yeah nature is heating it up just a couple of decades. Right. What's it going to be like in a couple thousand years? We should not be surprised about how little we really know about our past. This is also a comfort game with our kilo geo. Yeah we've got the past all worked out. We understand it here. It is what we teach in schools. This is what our friends in the media report. This is the fact it's not the fact that we know nothing. There's been so much lost so many missing pieces of the puzzle that we're desperately trying to stitch together. And it's important I think that we actually do get some clarity on events like this. Because we still live on this planet and we have kids and we have a future and we want to hopefully. We want to follow those big boys come our way. Well that's right. But again I come down to this which is that we are not dealing with gloom and doom in the end of the world. We're dealing with a problem that humanity should be confronting. We should not be sticking our heads in the sand. We should be confronting this problem. And that's why I support the work of the comment research group because they are the only people right now who are confronting this problem and really getting to grips with it. We should all confront. I mean we should absolutely all support them and confront it because this if something like this can happen once. What really makes sense is how many stories of floods there are in ancient times and how many parallels there are. And how many there are from North America. Well dozens and dozens. Yeah it was the Caitlin. The Indian artist who spent 30 years or so pre civil war I think maybe a decade after the Civil War. painting Indians of different tribes. And he wrote a book called Last Rambled Among the North American Indians. Very interesting book. But what really is interesting to me when I read the book years and years ago was his final conclusion to the book. He says after all of these different customs and traditions that have been handed down amongst these tribes. They all have one thing in common. They all have a memory or a story of a gigantic world destroying flood. And this was included tribes down into Central America that he visited. I believe the Americas are the repository, the Native American peoples who have been subjected to so much destruction over the years. They in their mythology, their traditions, their memories, they keep more of this than almost anybody else. It's really tragic what has happened in the Americas from the time of the Spanish conquest. The deliberate destruction of knowledge, the terrible horrendous abuses that Native American people suffered. They are wisdom keepers. They are the people who passed down the oral tradition and remembered the past. So not only do we have cataclysm's wiping the human memory, but we ourselves actively get involved in the human memory and wipe it. We rub it out. The burning of the myocodices by the Spanish friars. Thousands and thousands. God knows what was in those documents. You know, we might have had a whole other story about ourselves if we could have had access to those. But instead with this destructive cannibalistic species that just goes and dismashes everything to bits. It's a weird impulse that human beings have is when they move into an area and take over. One of the things they like to do is destroy their icons. Destroy everything. What's going on with ISIS and all these ancient Buddhist structures. Thousands plus year old beautiful sculptures. They're blowing them up. You know, and yelling praise God while they're doing it. It's really very bizarre. It's a very bizarre inclination that we have. But it's almost like we don't want people to know. You know, it's a bizarre, almost human instinct to wipe out the past and just to constantly keep moving forward. Or is there some trauma? Is there some collective trauma, some deeply, deeply suppressed memory that we can't quite confront? That's exactly the thought I had because I think that's the one way one of those areas where Velikovsky finally really nailed it was mankind in amnesia. That somehow we carry this, the trauma because once you begin to get a handle and you get to get the picture of these events as they occurred and did occur and would have been experienced by our ancestors, you've got to understand what would it be like to see your entire world completely obliterated, starting over again from basically a barren mudfield. You know, that's essentially what these people were facing. If they lived at all and so few probably did because here we are. But you know, again, the evidence is emerging of major cultural collapse. If you had a guess, what percentage of the population of human beings, just is obviously just a guess, but how many do you think were wiped out? Half of them? Three quarters of them? I don't think that would be unrealistic. No. It doesn't seem like it would be. And if it was that number and those people, that's enough for people to survive. It was that number. Boy, what a strange fucking mythical past they would have. The other thing to bear in mind is in the world today, our world, we have an advanced civilization, America, you know, Germany, the industrialized technological countries. And we have co-existing with them in South America, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in desert, we have hunter-gatherers. And the, the notion that hunter-gatherers and an advanced civilization might coexist in the same epoch of history should not be strange to us because we're doing that today. And that's what I would suggest happened before 12,800 years ago, before the cataclysm of 12,800 years ago that there was a fairly advanced civilization that was capable of mapping and exploring the world, creating gigantic works of architecture. So existed with hunter-gatherers, and who were the ones who survived the cataclysm? The answer is the ones who survived the cataclysm were the hunter-gatherers, not the sophisticated peoples, a few of them survived and they then settled amongst the hunter-gatherers and tried to transfer some of their knowledge and skills to them. And it's the same today, if we, if we were to have a repeat of the younger dryest cataclysm today, I don't think that people from Los Angeles or London would be amongst the leading survivors. I think the survivors would be people like the hunter-gatherers of the Amazon rainforest because they're in the business of surviving. That's what they do, it's not a mystery to them, it's not even a problem, they do it all the time. They would, they would carry the human story forward. And 10,000 years from now their descendants would be telling a myth about how there was once a great civilization on this planet so advanced that they could even go to the moon. They could fly around the planet, they could speak to one another on other sides of the earth, but they did something wrong. They fell out of harmony with the universe, they ceased to wear their prosperity with moderation, that's actually a line from Plato about Atlantis and the universe slapped them down. So there would be a differential survival rate, those who were, I would say that those who are more technologically advanced are less likely to survive because they depend on a complex, interrelated network of skill. And any individual on his or her own, most of them, well you're a different joke because you're doing how to survive, but a lot of people don't know how to survive. No, I'm barely know how to survive. Most likely, but at least you've worked at it, you know. But I'm not that good at it. But most of us haven't even worked at it at all. We haven't got a clue. Let me fucking open everybody's eyes to all these people that think that you just go out there and shoot animals and stay alive. Good fucking luck. You're probably screwed if you have a rifle, even if you have a rifle you're probably screwed. If you have a bow and arrow, you're going to fucking starve to death. Right. It's extremely difficult to get close, you know. And yet hunter gatherers for thousands and thousands of years have succeeded in doing that. Like the Bushmen of the Kalahari. I think there was less humans and more animals. Right. I think that's also part of the rub. Okay. And one of the terrible things we've done is taking these giant swaths of land and made them entirely inhabitable for wildlife. Like cities. Like how many people grow food in the city? What is the percentage? Is it even one-tenth of one percent of people in the city grow their own food? Probably not. Probably not even that. So you have these massive essentially deserts where no wildlife exists other than predatory species, like coyotes and ravens and things like that. You go out from there and then you have these vast farmlands. The only benefit of the vast farmlands is the amount of deer that exists now is greatly more than when Columbus landed. But it's because they've almost become an agricultural animal. It's almost like they're almost a domesticated animal. They're a free wild domesticated animal. I have a friend who has a farm in Iowa. And when you go there, it's very strange because he's got these wild, giant 300 pound forest horses running around. his backyard. I mean, they're fucking everywhere. There's all these giant deer. And when we were there, it's what's called the rut. So all these, they're very horny. So the big bucks who usually hide, they show themselves. I'm like, this is a crazy place. Like there's all these wild animals that exist along with people. And even in a game-rich place like that, it's incredibly difficult to get to one. And you have to have vegetables. You have to have your own vegetables. So let's imagine a situation where all the resources of our cities, all the... Yeah. All the amenities, all the infrastructure are gone. Most of us are fucked. I would say radically, I would say in fact our civilization, which appears so strong, is actually very, very fragile. Extremely. Just a little push. It's like when you look out the window and you're like, wow, that's the outside. No, that's a piece of glass. You're outside. It's not that piece of glass in your outside. Yeah. The effort list it is. It just seems impenetrable because you know you pulled the shades tight and you set your alarm clock. Yeah. You're sleeping next to glass. Like it's hilarious. You feel confident. You're sleeping next to a piece of fucking glass. There's this incredible complacency and arrogance of modern civilization. We are the apex and pinnacle of the human story that we're the best that's ever come. And that's a danger mythologically. That is a very dangerous place to be. When you start imagining yourself as the apex and the pinnacle of everything, that's precisely when the universe reminds you that you are not that at all. Yeah. It's a very weird existence that we have where we just sort of look at how things are right now and we can't imagine things being any different. No matter what. Whether it's people that have to come to the realization that they've been injured, so it breaks their leg and all of a sudden it just doesn't compute. Like how come I can't walk anymore? Well, your reality is now shifted. And this reality that we have here with this fairly healthy earth could shift it any moment. The Yellowstone volcanoes, the one that's been freaking me out the most over the last few years, another big issue. Yeah. An interesting parallel would be if we look at small or what happens in smaller catastrophes, like we've seen today. When we look at, for example, when Katrina hit in New Orleans, right, it was almost as if the human species separated into two subspecies. You had one group of people that rose to the occasion and did heroic things. They organized and they saved people spontaneously because the government was conspicuously absent for five days, the first five days of the Katrina disaster. And here you had a major flooding of New Orleans and you had people spontaneously organizing and performing these heroic actions of saving their fellow man and doing just stupendous things, super hero type things. But then you had another segment to the population that just went completely barbaric. And you had mass rapes and smashing of businesses and looting and just people running in wild, complete unrestrained gangs, just committing violent acts at random. So an America, the richest country on earth did not manage that crisis well. No. And that was a little crisis by comparison with what we're talking about. You remember in Kanye West, go on TV? George Bush does not like black people. I don't remember that. But yeah, George Bush, I think it was on day four, George Bush flew over in Air Force One in the window. The window. It's wave. Yeah. But there's a lesson in those kinds of events. Sure. We have not prepared. We have to extrapolate from that. And if you go back, I often time as a thought exercise. Like how, how would we respond if we knew that there was a high probability of a younger dryest type event or series of events impending in our future? What would you do to start drinking air? Well, it can make it all. It all depends on lead time. Right. It all depends on lead time. What if it's a 10 day lead time? Like 10 day, no, let's shoot a rock it up there. There's a man playing up that Subaru again. And let's go hard. Go hard to the end. Yeah. It's 10 days. But 10 years or 20. Then we can do some stuff. The real scary thing is there's two scary things. One, if you survived, it's like fuck. You know, if you really did survive and everybody else was jacked and also new dealing with some mad max type reality where people are starving to death and they're very desperate and they become almost like animals, that's entirely inside the realm of possibility. Well, that's what we learned from Katrina. Or the other terrifying possibility is that you leave the future of civilization up to those other people. Is that they survive and they have kids and their kids survive. And somehow another somewhere along the line, we get better and better at understanding our place here, which is what I think has happened. And all it would take is one, I mean, this is as much as people are complaining right now as much as there's riots in the streets because it or excuse me, protests in the streets some riots apparently. But over the president elect, what this time is, it represents the greatest time in history when it comes to safety, when it comes to knowledge, access to information, the way we understand each other. I don't think it's ever been better as far as we know. We have everything at our feet. There's incredible potential in modern civilization. But the problem is that there's also very rigid mind control. The way that our societies work is it's turning people into drones. People brought up to believe that their only purpose in existence is production and consumption, that the people forced to fit into a narrow place in the machine, mass media, beaming messages at us all the time. Even the concept of democracy is absurd when you don't have complete transparency, when there are secrets, when things are hidden. How can the people vote with a clear mind? If a lot is being hidden from them, that's not democracy. Democracy is in fact invest in mind control, most unfortunate development. I wonder how long it's going to take before the rigid mindsets that are in place right now and this idea of resistance to change that we were talking about when it comes to science, when it comes to accepting this asteroidal impact theory. And I think that exists in politics. I think it exists in religion. I think it exists socially. The way we approach relationships and friendships and just all of it is evolving in front of our eyes. I was watching a movie last night, not another teenage movie, is that what it is? That's what it's called? And I was live tweeting it. So smoke and pot and writing. And sometimes I just like to have the TV on and not listen to it. Just sometimes I like to see some things when I'm just writing things. Sometimes I know. That last night I chose to do it that way. And I just got so enamored in this weird movie from 2001. This is the movie felt like a time machine. I was watching this culture that does not exist anymore. It's one of those like teenager movies where like in college and they're drinking and there's a lot of naked women and really racist, sexist humor. And it's really crude and goofy and stupid. And I'm like, this is so bizarre because this doesn't exist anymore. This kind of film. This is like Al Jolson with blackface on or something. In a way, it's like a cultural time machine. Like you get to go and for a brief moment see like this comedy that somebody concocted in 2001, which seems so recent. But it's such a in that film, you get evidence of this weird cultural change or shouldn't say weird massive cultural change that's happened as far as the way we're allowed to joke around about things. And there's some racist shit in that movie. Like racist and sexist shit and violence like men punching women in the face and shit. Like they just can't really do an economy today. And that's only 15 years ago. And what is it going to be like if we can avoid getting hit by a rock, blowing ourselves up, Yellowstone blowing up in our face, if we can keep going, I think we're on a great path. I think we're on a great path. I think we're on a great path. It's a hazardous path. It's a path where the future is not at all certain. But humanity is at one of those moments, moments across roads where you kind of stand on the edge of an abyss and you don't quite know what lies ahead. And we can take a really great path out of this or we can take a really horrible path out of this. And I think the key issue is that we do actually have choice. It doesn't have to be that way. I see a lot of positive positive positive out there out there in the world. I do think people are waking up. I think they are questioning old structures. They're refusing to put up with the bullshit any longer. More and more people are doing that. It's happening in the realm of politics. It's happening in the realm dealing with the big corporations. It's happening in the realm of investigating the past. We're just not going to be told what to think anymore. That's encouraging. But then on the other side, there are huge efforts being put precisely into making people think in certain ways, whether it's the advertising industry, whether it's political messages. And so we have to be aware of that. And it could go, it could go down the drone path. I mean like the be the beehive path, which would be why even bother to be human if your society is turning you into a work-it-drone and a beehive life existence. Or it could go down an expansion of consciousness and a realization of the incredible beautiful potential of the human race. I know that's not feeling like that's where it's going. I need to honestly do. I'm optimistic. Very optimistic. Well, that's beautiful to hear because this is a time where I was watching a John Oliver show. And HBO, a very funny guy, and he's very left-wing leaning as his show. But they had this fuck 2016 thing where they were just naming off all the horrible things that happened in 2016. And then just saying goodbye to this terrible year. I'm like, do you have a lot of good shit happened this year too? There's a lot of fantastic discoveries, a lot of interesting observations, a lot of people learned a lot of things in 2016 as well. And I think that I'm quite a number of American states have made cannabis legal. Yes. I think there's a huge development. It's also a big factor in our cultural evolution. It really will. Well, it was a big factor in the 60s. It was a huge factor. In effect, what happened, you had a very closed conservative society and then you had an outside shock in the form of the psychedelic drugs that came in and completely stirred up everything in art and music and fashion and even into scientific concepts of our place in the universe and time and space. And in so many ways that had just a major impact on the direction that our society went. And what would be the equivalent today or in our near future in terms of an outside shock that would suddenly wake people up would be another event, another Tungoos government. And based upon everything that I've seen, it would suggest that events like that are going to happen and probably within our lifetime. And when it does happen, especially if the message of the story has been out and enough people have heard it, 5% of the people or 10% of the people are aware that there is this major impending potential paradigm shift. And then we have an event like that, an event like Tungooska 1908. I think that's all it would take because the magnitude of that event would have been such that it occurred today and you had anywhere from a million to two million people instantly wiped out or a whole city instantly annihilated from a shot from space. What effect would that have on the planetary consciousness? And which with this latest exercise, NASA coming late to the party finally seems to be thinking about what happened there. What happened if LA is hit by a 350-foot diameter? Right. An epidemic is because when the probability models for a Tungooska type event were first laid out in the 50s and 60s and into the 70s, it was pretty much determined that it was like something that would happen once a millennium, once every couple of millenniums, then it sort of got contracted to once every few centuries. It may be that it's actually much more like one or two a century or maybe even perhaps a cluster of events where you may have three or four or half a dozen of those type events occurring over a very short window of time. But an event like that happening, not one that would be caused the extinction of civilization by any means, but an event like that that could wipe out 1,000 square miles of landscape completely in an instant would have a major effect, I think, on the people of this planet. It would focus minds. It would focus minds in a way that nothing else would. And to me, is it pessimistic to say that might be what it's going to take or is it just realistic? I don't know. Well, I think it's like the massive impact versus the slow trickle effect. I mean, is it going to happen eventually or is it going to happen in one gigantic swoop because of an event like an asteroidal impact where it kills a bunch of people and we wake up to the fragility of our existence? But either way, it's a waking up of humanity and that is in process. That is happening. That is in process now. Look, as a as a Brit observing what's been happening in America as an outsider, I'm enormously encouraged by the legalization of cannabis movement that is taking place here and what it and what it all means. Sure, I like to smoke a joint, but this is not about getting high. It's not about recreation. What this is about is recognizing the sovereignty of adults to make decisions over their own bodies, their own health and their own consciousness while doing no harm to others. That's what it's about. That's a really fucking important issue. That is for me, that is the most important issue because if we live in a society that is not prepared to recognize adult sovereignty over one's own body and one's own consciousness, then that cannot be a free society in any meaningful way. And so I applaud the people of America in those states who have voted for full legalization. That's a brilliant thing to do. That's going to have an impact around the world because the war on drugs, all the ideology and lies about cannabis are all going to be proved wrong. We're going to know that the emperor wears no clothes, that you can legalize cannabis and civilization does not fall apart as the war on drugs lobby have been telling us for ages. It's going to change everything and it's a beautiful thing because it's the American people. Whereas the American state, America as a governmental state presence on the world stage has been the dark force behind the war on drugs. So it's a, for me, a beautiful thing that it's the American people's state by state who are winding that back and saying we will not put up with this shit anymore. I think what you were talking about earlier is really important too. We're talking about different factions of our civilization are creating it to this day. They're still creating disinformation and still trying to mislead people. But I think that goes to what we're talking about before. It's a system and systems protect themselves. And I think that they develop almost a consciousness of their own. It's scary in a way. Yeah. Yeah. They bureaucracies armed bureaucracies. They got to kind of personality. Well, even when there's no financial stake in it, there's just a social stake. Like what you're seeing right now with the left versus the right. Like just some people, like my friend Wanda Sykes just got boot off stage at some thing last night apparently, where she went on some anti-Trump rant and then people got super upset at her. There's these systems that are in place. This almost wanting to fight. It sets us up in this bizarre team mentality where this left protects its ideas of the future and the right protects its ideas. And I'm watching these people go at it back and forth on social media and it's toxic. And I don't like to use that term because it's so compromised by toxic sexuality or toxic masculinity. It's so many uses of that word in our culture. But I think that this desire to fight with each other. It'd be deeply unpleasant. Yes, it's a really horrible, hurtful, ghastly things. You see it's so often in really, I mean, vile. And from the left too, as well as the right, the left is toxic. It's toxic. It's the right word. Exactly. It's a really horrible, hurtful, ghastly things. You see it's so often in real, I mean, vile. And from the left, too, as well as the right, the left is talking about the right word. Exactly. And I think that we have to resist the urge to fight. I think this is when people push too far on the left, that's when the alt-right emerges. When people push too far on the right, that's when the left comes up. And that's when Kent State emerges. You have all these weird factions that's duking it out that have so much in common. And a lot of times, the things that they don't have in common, it's either because of an ignorance, or it's because of an ideological dispute or lack of communication. And I think of those three things are in place, at least open lines of communication. Lynch is also fostered by marijuana. You get these people talking openly and vulnerable about these things. And you find out that a lot of our misgivings and our misunderstandings about each other are just misconceptions, miscommunications. And even if we disagree on things, I have friends that disagree on a lot of stuff with, but we're very close. Because you're allowed to have different opinions. Of course, that's what makes the world interesting. It doesn't have to be we have to be each other because one person's loud. We can listen to somebody else's opinion with empathy rather than with, you know, hatred or anger. We're too, it's too attractive to be on a team. Like the fucking masons. It's the very mason. Yeah, it is, man. It's too attractive. It's too attractive. And we love, I mean, we love city versus city. We love that. We love when, you know, Chicago is going to take on Cleveland. Fuck you. We love that. The tribal is the tribal thing. We've not really evolved out of that. We've changed our social structures, but we're still tribal mentality. We should. No nationalism is just tribalism writ large. That's how bold it is. It really is. Just like religion is just to coat with a lot more people. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Should we look at one more? Yeah, we could look at as many as you want, man. Oh, roll the party. What do you got? Let's see the next one back to the flood. This is the place that I didn't get to take Graham. That I really wanted to take. Okay. I really wanted to take you here. Let's see it. Let's see it. So you're going to see it second best. Okay. This is the potholes. Holy shit. Look at that. This is crazy. This will we're looking at folks that people were just um, listening in. You have to go to the YouTube now because this is insanity. This is as close like an opera dummy like me to look at something like that and then go, oh, fucking free. Yeah, that's definitely a river. A river carved that. Okay. What you're looking at there is a gigantic, extinct set of cataracts like you would find it Niagara Falls, but to use Graham's turn. Great. Large. We're looking at a ridge. We're looking east. The tsunami wave that swept down over these four states, one branch of it swept off to the west. This particular branch of it was 400 feet deep when it hit this ridge. And what it did was it spilled over the ridge and down here in the foreground, you see the modern day Columbia River. From the top of the ridge where you see the, the agriculture and the landscape down to the rivers about a thousand feet. Wow. So you basically have to picture you've got this huge sheet of water three to 400 feet deep. It's rushing over and it finds a low, little, the lowest spot within this ridge. And that's where it starts focusing its energy. And as it does, it begins to just strip away the rock. Now what you're looking at here is this cataract complex is about five miles across. And the water came and you see you've got those kind of curved finger lakes at the top. And those tunnels, those are potholes. That's insane. Potholes are formed by underwater turbulence. And in a flood, this swiftly moving with this much turbulence, you literally have particular eddies, high intensity, high amplitude, high energy underwater tornadoes, literally underwater tornadoes. Now these underwater tornadoes are typically in this case about a half a mile walk. Oh my God. You're spinning at a high rate of speed and they're right there. They're probably 600 feet deep. Because the water pouring over the ridges, at least 200. And you can see what it's done to the bedrock. Anybody listening, you've got to look at this. You have to look at this and then listen to the scale. This is a gigantic scar in the landscape of which there are hundreds around this region. The exact location, Randall? This is potholes cataract. The exact location. Somebody wants to get to it, which we're in Washington state still. Yes, we're in Washington state. Central Washington is going to be right on the Columbia River just below Wenatchee. OK, where we saw that huge, that huge erratic. Yeah, 18,000 ton boulder brought there in chained in an ice bag, an ice bag floating on the flood. Carry an ice bag the size of an oil tanker, carrying an 18,000 ton boulder. Carried on the flood, grounds 700 feet up of valley side. Rest there as the floodwaters recede, the ice melts away and the boulder is left sitting there. We're going to look at the picture of that boulder in a second. What are the people back in this part of the country? What do they think about this? Well, you know, they're only just catching on to what they're sitting on top of. Jesus, the first time I went out here in 98, there was the the Ice Age Floods Institute. And I went to their only location, which was a, which was in the better business bureau in Moses Lake, Washington. And it was they had one room in the back of this better business or no chamber of commerce, chamber of commerce. And it was two elderly ladies in there who are basically the overseers of the group. Now there's about two dozen chapters. And every year there's several guided field trips led by geologists who are studying this in their off time. And I've been on a number of these just to participate and get the access to the geologists in order to pick their brains. But this is very close to when at you Washington, so anybody's wanting to find this on Google Earth. This is a Google Earth image. Now what we're going to do before we leave the Google Earth image, I was going to explain that you've got those, you got those, see those lakes, those, those meandering lakes up there. What you got a picture is you've got a sheet of water coming. And as it's coming over this ridge, it's beginning to selectively erode into fault lines and cracks within the bedrock. Can you picture them? The water is going to naturally try to go into those low spots where there's cracks and fissures. And it'll start going from a sheet into channeling. What goes from sheet to a channel, then that spills over the ridge. And in the middle, you see this, it's called a rock blade. See that the rock blade is that, that, that, yes, that's it right there separating the two alcoves. If the flood had continued for another few days that rock blade would have been gone. And you would have had a single alcove up there. Now in the next, as, as this proceeds, what we're going to do is we're going to go down and we're going to be right to head of the rock blade right there. Yeah, right there. We're standing right there. So now you're going to get to see as the drone is about to take off. You're seeing the landscape. We're looking to the east into direction of those finger lakes. And I guess the soundtrack. Is it not playing in the sound? No, there we go in here. A little to cut of and frug and deminer. Ooh, okay. And the landscape opens up. So you're on that rock blade. We're on the rock blade right there. So now you can begin to see the scale of this thing that we were just seeing from Google Earth. Well, now the way when you describe it, I mean, I would have just looked at it and go, wow, that's kind of cool. Looking. I would have never have thought. See. Oh, that was obviously created by water pouring through. That's the problem is because we haven't had the scale of perception. It took breaths 25 years to put the pieces together. Well, also, we haven't been able to take these sort of high-resolution photographs of drones right above it to recently. Yeah. That's that's it gives us a whole other insight. I mean, it used to be $1,000 a hour to get up there in a helicopter. Now you can fly a drone around, you know, with a phone. Yeah, exactly. GoPro on it. Right here in the middle ground, you see that big hole? That's about 200 feet in diameter. That's that's a poth hole that was created by this swirling vortex of massively turbulent water. Holy shit. This is incredible. In other words, the evidence is all over the landscape, staring us in the eyes. And it's only in the recent years that it started to make sense. Well, we've evolved the eyes to be able to see this. And so now by going out here with a drone, I've been over this landscape several times in a small plane to see it from that perspective. But now, like he just said, like Graham just said, now we've got a drone, it can go up and see it from a whole different perspective. And now you can see the see the man standing right down there on the rock. No. Oh, that little dude. Yeah. That little dude. Yeah. That little, that little dude is six feet tall. He's not that little. Me and on the picture. He's a little. No, no, and real life is actually four inches. And it's, it's an illusion. What's me stunning. I mean, this is really beautiful and cool and everything like that. But what's really stunning is the initial picture where it becomes so obvious that above picture where you see the farm land and that just it's so obviously cut. Slice out of the land. Well, let's see the rest of it then as the drone flies over. Yeah. So and then we have what's classic scab land. You see all these mounds, these kind of lumps. That's what, what are the scabs on the scab land. That's why it's called scab land. And again, it's flooding that causes it. Plucking, fluff, or actually plucking material off the surface. Mm. Wow. This is incredible. And then there's water remaining. Yeah, they filled, filled the potholes. Yeah. There you get a sauerkraut. Oh my God. There you get a sense of the rock blade. Mm. Well, there you get a sense of what the volume of water must have looked like when it was rushing through there. Right. And see, this is just whole. I mean, we've looked at two features now. Camus Prairie and potholes cataract. We could sit here for the next 10 hours looking at dozens and dozens of these megafutures. And you look at there's a whole bar. This is a gravel bar down here over there. And you can see the giant ripples on it. Mm-hmm. You see those? Yeah. I've never seen those reported in the literature. It may be that nobody's ever seen really seen them before. Mm-hmm. Or no one's ever paid attention. Nobody's ever paid attention. But there they are. So how, what is mainstream science used to describe this sort of or mainstream archaeology used to describe these features? This would be geology. Well, cataract. That's archaeology. Yeah. What, what, they, so they believe this is catastrophic flooding is what we got. Oh yeah. They just think it's a slower. They think it's lots of small catastrophic floods. They're not, not one, not one big catastrophic flood. And how, what kind of timeline are these geologists putting on us? Oh, two or three thousand years. Yeah. And why do they think that? Well, because of the, the ice-damped model and how much time it would take, see, it gets complicated. And, and because until the comet research, there was no credible source of heat that could melt that amount of ice and cause that. Now, that's the new factor that's come into the equation. Now you look at, look at the people standing on the cliff edge there. The edge of the rock would you see them down there? Yeah. So now you get the sense of scale. What would survive again in the aftermath? Not that dude. Something. No, not that dude. Not that dude. Or is buddies. Yeah. This is the crazy place, man. It's crazy to look at. It's just so when you're looking above it, like even here, I mean, you get a sense of it. But if you had just showed this to me quite honestly, I probably wouldn't have pieced that together. But when you look at it, the original image, it's so blatantly obvious. Right. Well, that's that's the thing now is we are in this position where we can we can see it. And when I take people out in the field, what I do is I prep them first by showing these images from NASA, the satellite photography, the Google Earth imagery, aerial photography, then ground photography, and then you go out in the landscape. And at that point, you can start having this framework for understanding what you're seeing. Otherwise, you just don't. The scale of it is too vast. It's amazing. It's really amazing. And this is an adventure of exploration that we're just getting launched on. This is recovering the loss past of humanity. And if I may, I want to make a picture game for the comet research group. If anybody, I think it's really important. It's not just a matter of funding their research. It's also a matter of sending a message that we the people are prepared to take matters into our own hands and support those scientists who are working with open minds, inquiring into the past. And whether you give a dollar or $100 or whatever, any little counts, it's the voice of the people as much as the money that really matters. These guys, the comet research group, they need their research funding. They have an indigo go crowd funding campaign. You can go to my website, press the comet research group, banner. It will take you to a page with all the relevant links. Please consider supporting it. It's valid. It's worthwhile. It's worthy work. And it has the potential to change the whole story of our past and our future. And it's a story that would be incredibly exciting to be a part of. And that's what I'm trying to get people to think, look, there's this thing happening. And it really, it is democratic in its own way. And you don't have to be some specialist or a particular authority in some branch of academically approved science to begin to appreciate and understand this. It's just human being. Getting out into the field and seeing this kind of stuff firsthand. Getting it into the discussion and to debate and spending more time on this because it's such an interesting story. And that's what the scientists at the comet research group are offering that the people who contribute will participate in certain ways in this process. That's awesome. Well, we're all human beings. We're a part of this planet. We are pedestrians walking along at the, we're being carried by this planet. And all this stuff is all right. It's your right to understand what the history of this crazy rock has gone through. Absolutely. This is amazing. Yes. Amazing stuff. And the perspective to understand this is like this. For 12,000 years, this story has been written into the landscape of the earth. And only now are we able to step back and begin to see the big picture in tandem with ever greater detail. And what's emerging is really, it's a really high hotel. But the evidence is there to support it completely. And this is, I mean, this is what I've, this is the story I've told in magicians of the Gomes. This is, this is recovering this, this lost memory. It really is wild. And our, our time here on this planet has been confusing for so many reasons. And one of the big ones is not, not understanding how we got here. And that's one of the reasons why your book, I think, is so important to me to give you this new perspective of how this sort of civilization emerged. Another problem I think we deal with all the time is light pollution. I think light pollution. You never see the stars. It's, I think it's really a perspective blocker in a big way. No, it absolutely is. And Rattle and I were having a discussion earlier about how ancient cultures related to the cosmos as above so below. They felt themselves connected with the cosmos. They made their monuments in alignment with key celestial bodies. They did it very carefully. There was a sense of bringing down the enchantment of the heavens onto, onto Earth. In modern societies, we can't even see the stars. You live in the middle of the big city. The stars are gone. The light pollution just blots them out. You never think they're there. And you forget actually that you're part of a majestic cosmos. So everything about it is mystery. We are immersed in mystery from the moment we're born to the moment we're die. And yet our society is telling us oh, it's all very prosaic and dull and it's just about production and social ... Everything's all explained. You don't really need to worry yourself about it too much. Because some authority somewhere has it all figured out. No one has it all figured out. It's not possible. I think everybody owes to themselves to go out and to the desert in the middle of when when you know there's a stretch of the moon is not going to be out and there's going to be clear skies, especially if you live in Southern California. You can get out to the desert pretty easy. Just get out away from all the cities and just look up and it'll freak you out. It'll freak you out because it's one of those things that you kind of really take for granted. Because most of the time the sky is just a dark black feature list thing with a little couple of white dots that aren't really that compelling. When you get out there and you see the actual Milky Way itself, you go, oh, holy shit. Well, see, now we could have, you know, every year there's probably a dozen high altitude events that could have been witnessed by ancient peoples that we are completely oblivious to because of our urban existence because of light pollution. Yeah. Because nobody is really looking at the sky. But these high altitude events would be essentially equivalent to like here, she sheem of sized bombs going off 20 miles up. Just outside. Yeah. It's basically like if it's in the daytime and you're not looking right up there. That's right. You're not going to see it in the daytime. And at night, if you're living in the city, if you're inside the light pollution, by the time it happens, it's over. But if you're out in a completely wilderness area where you've got visual access to the stars and you're aware of that and you're constantly aware of the presence of the sky, you're going to see much more of that kind of thing happening. Then if the cosmos decides to get a little bit more active, which it apparently does from time to time, suddenly the sky is now becomes a major factor in your existence, your tribal existence, your cultural existence, especially if in those episodes you have multiple fireball type events that could be on the scale of anywhere from Chelliabinsk up to Tunguska. And that's what Clue and Nabir, that's their scenario is these clusters of. That we enter episodes of bombardment when we are passing through a filament of the torrid meteor stream that's thick with heavy debris, asteroids of a kilometer, a more in diameter. When we enter those filaments, we are entering a period of episodic bombardment when human civilization is at risk. And according to their calculations, we are entering one of those filaments in the next 30 years. Jesus. And that's why we need to pay attention to this because 30 years is enough time to do something about it. If we apply the resources of our civilization to this, we can solve this problem. Let's look at a couple more pictures, because I'd like to get the picture of Graham. I want to have a picture. People are too busy making new phones. I don't have time to fix the asteroid time. Exactly. Exactly. They need a phone. Project images and holograms. That's my contention that it's going to take a little bit. Well, but then again, those are the serious commercial talk of mining asteroids. That is the way into this. That if they can see an economic return for them, then maybe they'll do the good thing actually for the human race. Would this have to be a man-dex petition, like Bruce Willis, in that asteroid movie? Not necessary. OK. What's the image that we want to show? Well, Jamie, why don't you go to the folder of the one we open the folder of awesomeness? The folder of the folder of the folder of awesomeness? Yeah. Just let's start with 1-0-0-7. What are we going to look at here? Well, we're going to look at some NASA stuff. Oh, cool. And then we'll look at a couple of Google Earth things. And then we will look at some a couple of US geological survey things. And then we'll look at some photographs. Five minutes worth. OK. Let's do it. We've got. OK. Holy shit. This is an early one of the early NASA photographs taken from 500 miles up back in the late 70s, actually. And what we got here is the two big scabland tracks that show two of the big meltwater streams that have left their scars in the landscape. So each one of those is very roughly between 10 and 20 miles wide. And the bigger one on the right is probably 50 to 60 miles long or actually a little bit longer than that. But you can actually see that when the water swept down from the north out of British Columbia, it washed away 200 feet roughly, 1 to 200 feet of the existing top soil. It had covered the basalt bedrock. The basalt bedrock, by the way, that was originally formed by eruptions of the Yellowstone Caldera, interestingly. But so the water came down swept away the top soil and left the bare dark basalt exposed down below. The feature that we just looked at is not even really in this NASA photograph. It's over to the west. But let's go ahead to the next one, Jamie. With the Snake River down there, which is. Yeah. Where's the Snake River? Snake River comes up out of Idaho and it joins the Columbia and then flows out to the Pacific Ocean. All right. Then we got a Google Earth image coming up. OK. On order because there's a lot. There's a lot in here. Oh, OK. Tell me what number you want me to pull up. We're 1,081,008, the next one. What's going on with our TV keeps going off and on. That TV's not really made for the way we use it. So it doesn't like the inputs. And I just turned it off so I could pull up the next one. OK. There we go. So now we're getting actually a bigger view of the landscape. And you can see the two meltwater that's a scab land track. Mm-hmm. I mean, here and here. OK. And then you have what's going on. No one can hear you if you do this. Just just tell me where it is. I get it. OK. So there's the two scab land tracks. Then you've got the Grand Coulee, which is that dark rims going up to Columbia River. There, Grand Coulee Dam is right almost, you almost had it. It's where the Columbia River suddenly gets skinny. Right there, that's Grand Coulee Dam. That's the widest, the most massive concrete dam in North America. And it's impounding water in Franklin Delano Roosevelt Lake to about 400 feet deep. Now, all of the area at the top, the glacier, the green mountainous area, this was all covered in ice. And then over to the left, right there, you have that brown area. And do you see the kind of semi-circular arc of dark ground right there? Yes. That is where a tongue of the ice came out of Canada. And it stopped right there. And when it receded, when it melted back, what it did was it left all this rubble that can't really be farmed effectively. This is called Till, glacial till. And where the glacier ended, that's called more, moreane, moreane. And you can see it's circular where the glacier came. And then coming right off the snout of the glacier, do you see kind of a ribbony? That's a giant scar in the landscape that was formed by a meltwater stream coming off of that ice sheet. It's called Moses Coulee. Hey, Randall, I think we should keep in mind a lot of the audience aren't actually seeing the visuals on this. They're not. I mean, the takeaway is that all across the Pacific Northwest is a landscape that has been utterly scarred and devastated by gigantic flood that took place 12,000, and it's left its marks everywhere. And this is right near Cordellane. So Cordellane is from that. That's the residue of this. It's some cordellane, right there. If people go to the geocosmic recs website or the sacred geometry and international website, they can see most of the images that we're showing you. Well, they'll see it if they watch the YouTube video. They can watch it and hear you talk about it at the same time. It's just the vast majority, probably 90% of our people just seeing the visuals right now. But they can. It's probably well. So they can go to that and watch it. You can look down way down on the lower left is the potholes cataract. Right. Go up a little, up along the river, come down south, south, keep coming, keep coming, stop. Look to the right of the river. That's what we were just. This mountain knows these landscapes. To the right. To the right. To the right, Jamie. That's all. How dare you. Yeah, this whole area. So we get it. This whole area has been absolutely unequivably undeniably. As you see this, Joe, and you realize the scale of what we just looked at. And now you're seeing that within this whole landscape. Yeah. There was essentially inundated. You'll start to get the scale of the thing. And that's what I'm trying to do here. If you, Joe, can get the scale of this in your mind, I've accomplished something. Yeah, I think I got it from that one image was those are real mind blower. The ripples. Yeah, the ripples. Yeah. The ripples were real mind blower. And then the other one with the farmland. And then there's massive channel cut into it. You kind of get it. Yeah. The ripples aren't even on this image. They're way to the east. Has anybody sat down with you and tried to dispute this? I mean, the people that believe that this was a slow and gradual effect. Does anybody sat down and tried to debate you on this? No. It seems like something that would be really interesting to debate. I mean, I would love to see someone who's a geologist that, I'm sure there's someone out there that is listening to this that may have a dispute with it. But there is. I'm sure. But I would love to see them talk to you about it and go over all the various things, the nuclear glass that they find all of it. All the top bottom. But here's a thing, Joe. At this point, nobody is connecting the work of the comic research group with the Missoula flight effects that we're looking at or all the rest. Except us. Except us. Yeah. That's crazy. Most people are like, that's crazy. How's it possible? Because it's the missing link. It's such an obvious connection. And it really merits explanation. It scares us shit out of me. What if you guys didn't exist? What if you guys were never born? What if you never wrote that book? What if you've never been freaking out about this shit your whole life? How would I know about that? How many times in the human story as this happened? Where stuff has just not been explored that really needed to be. It sounds crazy to a Michael Shurmer, to a skeptical person. Well, I say to Michael Shurmer, come on, man. Let's go spend a week out in that landscape. Well, he does want to debate you. He wants to sit down and debate you. OK. All right. Let's, can we set that up? We can set that up. I will love it. Yeah. That sounds like fun. Yes. It would be a good time. In my mind, there's really no arguing with this evidence. I mean, it's too overwhelming. And into question really comes down to, at this point, nobody disputes that there were catastrophic floods. The question is, what was the mechanism? How many were there? How long did it take? Was it a bunch of catastrophic but smaller floods? Or was it back to Bredce's original model of one giant flood? And I think the truth actually lies somewhere between the two. And again, the geology gets complicated, but I'm writing it up. So I will explain in detail what my thoughts are after having crisscrossed thousands of miles of this landscape repeatedly and basically absorbed every piece of scientific literature, every written on it. I've evolved some ideas about what could have happened here and how it happened. Well, I was a grown adult and I found out that North America, most of it was by what was it 10, 12,000 years ago, was covered by a mile high sheet of ice. I was, yes. I was a grown adult. North America, roughly north of Minneapolis. And that's common, not. I mean, everybody knew that. Anybody who's actually studied the history of it, but it never made it to my dopey head until I was a grown adult and then I went, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. What? And the idea in my mind that this whole thing was covered just 12,000 years ago. That seems so incredibly recent. And by the way, that ice was more like two miles deep. Could consider the weight of those ice masses pressing down. I mean, anything that was there before the ice came down would have been ground to powder. And then as the ice cut, because the melts everything below it is washed away forever. It's like an eraser for the world. And eraser. That's exactly that's a great phrase and eraser for the world. And that is the thing that so many of the skeptics haven't factored into their thinking when you're going, well, where's the evidence? Yeah. The evidence is you've got to understand is that we have to rethink the possibility of evidence once we know that there has been these erasers of the world that have transpired. And not just once. But I mean, what we're looking at here is probably the most severe events in the last five million years. And I have a reason for using that number five million. Well, it's the reason. Well, the reason is based upon the severity of the mass extinction. We have to go back five million years to find an extinction event of an equivalent level as what occurred at the Younger Dryas. It's funny because what I would call a knee jerks, skeptical person would always say that extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence. Is there anything more extraordinary than that image of those farmlands and that giant swath cut into the land that's on my own. That is the extraordinary evidence. That is it. Yeah. That's pretty, pretty extraordinary. And then the core samples. The core samples that show this massive fluctuation of temperature. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That coincides with the melting of the ice. Yes. Yes. Well, it obviously all leads even to someone like me. It leads to an event. And this cataclysmic episode immediately proceeds the time when we. Yes, it's all there it obviously all leads even to someone like me it leads to an event and this cataclysmic episode Immediately proceeds the time when we've been told that civilization began That's the other point which is really important. We have this huge punctuation mark and then civilization Suddenly starts to evolve. No, it was there before this is a reinvention those hunter gatherers like those people that you would watch in one of those shows Are they surviving Alaska? You watch those shows? Yes. This shows a great like life below zero. It's crazy assholes Those people would make it those people would make it and they would breed and they would carry on. Yeah. Yeah. What is that? What does it say? 12 oh you could just say it next to me No, I don't interrupt your Joe no worries. No worries. Look at this Wow Okay, so that to me I'm looking at this after what you've told me that looks like water that is sort of like receded and left these lines and this Think think of a bathtub ring. Yeah after Joe you get in there and you take a bath and the water is basically brown with sediment What does it have to find in the way? It leaves bathtub rings You leave in sediment in your tub and have you a quoting Genesis and the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth and all the high hills were covered Wow, not because I'm you know trying to pump the biblical flood model Far from it what I am trying to do to throw out them pictures whenever I realize here's a great quote and it doesn't matter Where it's from because there's so many flood legends you can quote from Well the biblical flood model is It is one of those myths is one of those traditions that have come to one of thousands of traditions that speak of this the whole Ancestral memory of the human race is telling us that something terrible happened It's it's also very unfortunate that's all that's all connected with an ideology that a lot of people find problematic Like that there's this issues with that being you know religion of course culture There's faith based beliefs. We must we must immediately realize the flood is not the property of the monotheistic Religions the fountains with that and every culture on it also and had a lot of these stories You're talking about massive translations from ancient Hebrew to Latin degree and a lot is lost in the process And you're dealing with a lot of these stories were handed down from generation and generation for like what was it a thousand years before The first version was ever ripped Absolutely, absolutely I mean that is unbelievably fascinating go to 14 1014 And we'll see a topographic map Yeah, whoa Now that you know It's like it's crazy. It looks like something just what like you had a sandcastle or some flat sand set up and A wave came in and cut through it and then pulled back the wave came from the north and it swept down over the landscape and basically Carved and plucked and quarried and gouged and gashed that landscape and This one of the places Graham and I went if you look right in there You'll see where it says grand part of Grand Coulee G R A N D right there with the D is we have a great video clip online of me and Graham We're looking at this actual topo map right here and and then surveying the the cataract around us You'll also notice that there's a rock blade Just like similar to the one that we just saw in drone footage. Yeah, the rock blade you and you recognize the alcoves now yeah, and if we go to the next one we have a Google Earth image of 2015 of this feature and There's the Google Earth image and for scale in the upper left hand. I've superimposed Niagara Falls at the same scale so you can see by comparison Wow, have you seen been to Niagara Falls Joe? I? Went when I was a little kid. Okay. Honestly. Don't remember. I think I went when I was a little kid. I'll have to check with my mom Yeah, but you kid the point here is that anybody looking at this and you know if the folks look at the The imagery on the online Is that one of the biggest waterfalls in the world? One Niagara yeah not in terms of volume. No What are the days of the African or something? Yeah or South American maybe Victoria Falls It depends. You know the highest or the greatest volume. It's it's about 200,000 between a hundred and fifteen two hundred thousand cubic feet per second Going over those falls depending on the flow of the river But the flow that came through here was about 350 million cubic feet per second and left this and Yeah, if you go online the geocosmic recs website. There's a video clip of me and Graham Down there just just by perch lake I ask you a question here. Yeah now if the water that was creating Grand Canyon or the Niagara Falls rather right up there if that all receded and we could see the bottom wouldn't it look similar to what you seen here? The one of Grand Canyon no I mean Niagara Falls right there right above it right there. Yes It would but on a smaller scale on a small scale But like on a smaller scale like some of the smaller features that you see right there Yeah, and that's the thing you were saying earlier. It's fractal the interesting thing about water erosion and sedimentation is its scale invariant So you can look at features and coming up into pictures here I've got a beautiful example of scale invariants where you see the small version in the large version in its exactly the same thing That's why if you go into any geology text they've always got something in the photographs like a Rock pick or a person standing there. Otherwise. It's hard to get a sense of the scale of what you're looking at Right so my question though was that if that's the case if you could drain Niagara Falls and it would have a similar Feature set to what you're seeing on the ground there. Well. We know that Niagara Falls has been doing that for a long long time 12,000 years of work of the river at Niagara Falls Here you're looking at a moment in time that unfolded in a few weeks Right, but how do we know that well for one thing to scale of it because if it if it because in other words How long would it take Niagara to Carve something on this scale if it's taken Niagara 10,000 years say to carve that How long would it take an equivalent flow to carve this but it would have would look like if you drained it though What would it look like in equivalent any of these things? Well for one thing It's not basalt bedrock So you're not going to see quite the same type of erosion because really what you what you've got to consider is that all different rock types are Road differently right also You know what happens is you have regimes of flow So that what you have in in Niagara today is a lower flow regime Which doesn't have anywhere near the type of turbulence or a rowse of potential is when you get water moving at 50 or 60 miles an hour One reason we definitely can know that this is the case is because we see the association with the giant current ripples We see the boulders that have been plucked and quarried and some of them are 40 and 50 feet in diameter You see and we'll look at some of those Coming up in the next next picture Do you have that image that you were talking about before of that one gigantic boulder that was carried on the yes It's coming up. Okay, if we move quickly through here. We'll we'll we'll get to it. So go to go to 1,017 and that will be from the ground view again with Niagara Falls superimposed For scale the the horseshoe falls the Canadian falls Superimposed for scale now basically that Cataracted horseshoe falls is about 120 feet in height the Cliff wall of this giant cataract is about 400 feet high and then you see the beginning of the blade rock out there and The full extent of the thing actually goes all the way to the horizon But we can't see that beyond there, but this erosion goes all the way to the horizon and that cut into stone that cut into Basalt hard columnar basalt God That was extruded basically with the eruption of the Yellowstone called era long Mill 15 million years ago basically, but then covered up by a couple hundred feet of Lost topsoil and then that was exposed when the floods came through Go to the next 1,000 and 18 and you'll see an example of some of the debris that was left behind By the floodwaters when they finally ceased There's the stuff that you're looking at now the bigger stuff there is 30 and 40 feet Those would be like four story buildings down there So those are just washed away by this gigantic river. That's just this right this massive gigantic river moving 50 60 miles an hour sweeps through there Plucks and tears the bedrock and then when the spigots finally get turned off The water starts subsiding and this stuff that's being carried in there just gets left into wake Just like you're gonna see any modern smaller flood is gonna leave material in its wake the difference is this material is Piles of boulders the size of houses gravel bars two and three hundred feet thick and three miles long And they're all in it. So see here's the the answer to your question is and this is how Bretz finally did it was by showing that it was the full suite of evidence Taken integrally that created a picture that was undeniable to the skeptics It was just it was overwhelming because it was every piece fit together Too perfectly to and there was no other explanation other than gigantic hydraulic events And and now it's a question of the detail what caused them? How long did it take and You know, that's where the controversy is now This is amazing. It's amazing and terrifying, but what's cool about us is it's terrifying But everything's okay right now So it's like you feel like I'll be fine, but maybe not if something like this happens again Well, you have to ask what what could be the change in you know in the human orientation to life on this planet? Like for example, I remember the first earth day 1970 right when when this consciousness about hey, you know what? Our existence on this planet is having an effect on this planet right and at that point you see this a whole environmental Consciousness emerge that didn't exist before that right Well, I think maybe in the next decade or two we're going to see a new environmental consciousness that involves The recognition that this planet we live on is a very dynamic place And has been so it is the key to deciphering a lot of mysteries geological cultural historical and paleontological Biological etc that that this has been a dominant factor in the evolution of Basically everything that's been going on on this planet whether you're looking at millions of years or thousands of years It's just it's such a strange time to be alive where all this stuff is coming together all this information is being exposed So hello, no, I've been broken open and the stuff is spilling out and you don't know Whether you've opened Pandora's box by letting it out, but it's all logical And it's all logical so easy to follow. It's all I mean it seems like when it comes to a step by step 1029 coming up 1029 Fill it come up bingo guy now this room travel about 500 miles south out onto the Utah Canyon is beautiful and what you're seeing there is basically dry cataracts Now that you've seen these cataracts you can begin to recognize them all over the place Now this has not been acknowledged as being A cataract but what you actually see when you look at the modern erosion is that these features are being slowly eroded In eaten away by the modern erosion and it's a different erosion of regime altogether that it creates features like this And this is a vast scale of erosion here and when you travel over the southwest That is the most striking thing that you're going to experience If you're you know in empathic with the landscape which is that there's been this enormous amount of erosion Now I'm not saying that this enormous amount of erosion was all created by one flood But I think what it is possibly saying is that when we go back over several million years Gigantic floods on this scale aren't that exceptional that there's something that Some time to time and see here's the thing this is completely removed from the glaciers Any water that would have eroded this landscape was not coming from the glaciers. It had to have been coming from rainfall Go if you go to the next slide Jamie went out, which is not which is not a disconnected element because Because of the massive rainout that was that resulted from the impacts on the ice camp What's this this is volus calderus? This is the largest volcanic caldera in North America Oh, it's 11 miles across oh and Here's what's it it was born out of a catastrophe millions of years ago right and then Subsequent eruptions over hundreds of thousands of years have left this feature But what's interesting to us here is what happened around 12,000 years ago The entire caldera filled up suddenly and if you look at right about if you look at it as a clock at about eight o'clock You can see a breach of valley coming off. You see that? Yeah Jamie can you yeah right there? That was the spillover so At the same time now get this at the same window of time That this these flood events are happening up in Washington and Idaho and Montana This caldera suddenly fills up with water and the water spills over the rim and cuts the canyon hundreds of feet deep Now what could cause that to suddenly fill up with water and it's completely removed It's not receiving glacial meltwater There's only one thing by default and that would be rainfall a lot of rainfall Falling over days and days at a time so if you go to the next Slide we'll see what sits down in the bottom of this valley is Thousands of these gigantic rolled boulders and you know that their water transported because they're round their role That's what water does it rolls these things now. This is in New Mexico See So this is related to the spillway the overflow of all us caldera which has been dated to that same interval When the floods were happening up north the same interval that now the comet is dating to is this coincidence or are the two related? I would say it would be very premature to dismiss it and say that they're not related because as Graham just said one of the One of the consequences of an impact whether it's into the ocean or the ice sheet is you're going to have extreme amounts of water vapor Injected catastrophically into the atmosphere which is then going to rain out in incredible Tarantral downpours that might last for days at a time and Along with that water vapor is a tremendous amount of particulate mass And it's that rain out that I would say caused the erosion on this finks and tells us that this finks is 12,000 years old not 2500 BC you guys are freaking me out This is amazing This is the most convincing argument yet that you guys have ever made It's all it's all been convincing This is this is more compelling and then all the pieces Going together. Yeah, that's the next slide Jamie which would be 132 which is to me a beautiful example of scale invariance. Oh wow here We have the modern snake river flowing in the modern channel And then we have the ancient flood channel And which you can see there the average annual discharge of the snake 56,900 cubic feet But the estimated flood that created the big channel is 40 million cubic feet world and now this flood actually was coming up get this out of Utah It was coming up was part of the giant lake Bonneville of which the great salt lake is but a diminutive remnant So the Bonneville salt flat the Bonneville salt flats were the bottom of this gigantic lake That that filled the basins of north eastern Utah and at the end of the last ice age It's suddenly filled up very rapidly and spilled over a mountain pass to the north And then flooded the south the snake river plane of southern Idaho and anybody can see the snake river plane If you go to google earth or any topographic map and it cut channels like this that ultimately led to the Columbia river But interestingly the dating of this puts it again right in that window um So that window of 12,800 to 11,600 years ago when everything changes Yes, everything changes and so what I'm showing you is just a little bit selecting random almost dots To show you that no matter where you look you're going to see evidence of these of these events imprinted into the landscape um Yeah, go to the next slide 1,033 And if you go down and you stand on that flood plane down there You'll see the kind of stuff that got left behind This is the sediment load being carried into flood So you got what kind of powerful currents are necessary to transport and i'm standing in the canyon It was cut by the flood those walls are 400 feet high So what we would think of as being like little pebbles at the bottom of a stream Yeah, it gets moved around In this grand scan This is like sand grains on the bottom of a modern little creek but or river set that humongous boulders Yes, and this is what a geologist or geomorphologist would call the bed load the stuff being swept along in the flood waters being rolled and tumbled and geologists recognize this but they think took Mainstream geologists think it took a long period No, I mean the the few geological Papers that have been written on this admit that it was like one big catastrophic flood Wow, and what is their explanation for that catastrophic flood? Well that somehow Lake Bonneville rose up and and something, right? breached them up past and it's northern rim But you know is that possible in any way? Well, yeah, if you have enough rainfall prolonged over a period of time days or weeks That the whole body water could have raised by 300 feet roughly and then it but you again You would need something like the comet impact to provide you with a source for that rainfall Because otherwise there's no other explanation for that kind of a that kind of rainfall in its known from the modeling of oceanic impacts that yes, there would be Unbelievable rainout in the aftermath of an oceanic impact and clearly the same thing would would follow in the wake of a of an ice impact What oceanic impacts that we have on record only a few of them? There's one up by Sweden We were discussing also the possible Indian Ocean impact possibly one in the ocean 5000 years ago, which which creates tsunamis on both sides of the Indian Ocean dated to about massive massive tsunami disposal deposits And again the this whole argument of the younger dry-ass cataclysm between 1200 and 11,600 years ago the strongest case is The focus of the science has been on 12,800 years ago, but there's a lot of interest in the 11,600 years ago as well and the strongest Suggestion of what caused that that sudden rise in temperatures accompanied by meltwater pulse. Well one B was a second encounter with more fragments of the debris of the comet this time The impacts not being on the North American ice camp, but in a major ocean probably the Pacific and that that then puts a huge Plume of water vapor into the upper atmosphere and shrouds the earth and creates the greenhouse effect that accounts for the radical rise in temperature that occurred 11,600 years ago more science needs to be done on that It's another reason why I want to see the comet research group funded because this is this is important work Goddamners are an awesome podcast This might be my all-time favorite Okay, we'll talk about half a dozen more. Yeah for sure. It was roll. Okay, 1,039 And this is here now you'll be able to see actually a person in the field of view next to one a giant current ripple And There's a giant that's a giant current ripple field. We did see this one. Graham. This is the west bar Um, I call yes if you go back One slide we can see an aerial photo. I took years ago of west bar It's three miles long There it is. Wow, and there's an airport down the lighter colored buffs of is a landing strip and the the the the the Airport building there is three stories tall so this whole feature is Three miles long and the ripples here are on the same scale as the canvas prairie ripples that we just looked at Of course, this is in central Washington the other one was in Montana So again, as we begin to place these Event nodes around on the map. We can begin to see the outlines of a really really huge event And all of this is going on at the same time So all this is dated to the same time all this is dated to the the same time that you think the impact took place And it's all over that coast The only dates that we have that are hard dates are a volcanic ash primarily From Mount St. Helens the date at 13,000 years But they use that as a baseline and then assume that there was multiple floods and each flood was separated by 50 to 100 years And what they've done is they've gone from Brex's original model of a single flood into a dozen floods into 40 floods and now up to 80 or 90 floods Which I disagree with but on the other hand, there were see I think you have to understand this in two phases Because the inip impact phase is going to melt a whole lot of ice all of a sudden But it's not going to melt all of it. It's going to leave a huge amount of residual ice in the aftermath Now what we see is that particularly after the 11,600 year ago event at that point the whole planet comes right out of the Ice Age Inexplicably, that's the end of the ice age the beginning of the Holocene. It's over and and basically What we're seeing there is that there is a great deal of heat suddenly that's brought the planet out of the ice It does not convert revert back into the ice age like it did at the 12,900 event See so what we then have is that in the aftermath of this event The whole climate of the earth has been completely altered the whole balance of nature Has been completely altered from before these events to after these events But what you have now is a lot of residual ice that takes about two or three thousand years to melt away So I say levels continue to rise sea levels continue to rise and the melting of this ice produces some pretty big floods But not on the scale of what we're looking at here And I think it's my personal opinion that there's a confusion between the two different flood regimes And I'm going to document all I'm writing all this up in detail as a as a like as a thesis to explain My interpretation of the phenomenon over you know 20 years, but let's go to That would be so important. I would love to see people Really go over this with a fine tooth comb because it's so compelling. It's just so amazing like just this image itself It's just wow what would it what kind of power Enforce would it take to create those rebels those 50 foot high rebels all over the place miles and miles and miles of them Yeah, and and she nothing since that event has really affected them They're still sitting here as these gigantic monstrous fossil features in the landscape Now when they do core samples on that stuff, what do they find out like as far as the dating of it Like if they get to the bottom of one of those ripples Well, you've got to find you've got to be able to find organic material in there And to the extent that there's organic material it basically all dates from the end of the ice age The problem is is when you have a flood like this coming through It's sweeping up everything in its path including forests and animals So if you've got a bone in there or a piece of wood That doesn't necessarily mean when the flood happened right it's not a nice layer of set layers of sediment It's a jumbled. Yes, messed up chaotic mass It's not like you could just go dig into the side of that hill at that same level and find something that's organic and Absolutely dated to that because that's all stone right right. It's boulders It's if you saw a cross section of one of those ripples It's it's just a jumbled chaotic mess of everything from finest sand and silt up to boulders the size of cars and even houses Stuff just yeah, that's so crazy go to 1041 and we'll see an interesting artist rendition by Edward Rial who did all the illustrations for the jewels original jewels urn books and he did a version for an astro geology text Guys name is skipping me right now But I thought it was an interesting image because it basically shows an event on the scale of what we're talking about And what's interesting here is you see that the torrents are carrying icebergs and in this one iceberg in the foreground I call it Graham's rock from now on. It's gonna be I have officially Turned named it because it's carrying it gigantic color and I or we're talking about it. It's now. It's Graham's yeah Because I went and climbed that it's no longer the when at your radic I'm on edge right I'm on edge right Thank you, okay, so we got the Graham erratic coming up in about three images So let's go to the next one 1042 and this is basically another key piece of evidence is strewn for thousands of Square miles throughout the path of the flood you have these gigantic boulders And these are being carried aboard iceberg Let me let me describe what we're looking at right now because as a person is that you there? I took the picture so it's two of my fellow travelers, okay normal size people and you know whatever six feet tall and And bounce them on top of each other 12 18 You're looking at probably at least 35 40 feet tall right? Yeah, yeah and Wider wider than it is tall. Oh, yeah 60 feet wide. That's insane and that was carried by water It was carried it was carried on icebergs in the water. Oh my god. So this flood this flood is not just water It's it's a huge thousands of icebergs. It's for its trips up by their roots It's a jumbling mass of powerful erosive flow Amazing thousands of megafauna are done down in fact a lot of The there've been a lot of Mammoth remains found in Missoula flood sediments particularly in the Willamette Valley Okay, let's go to the next image There we go. This is like out in the middle of the prairie again You got thousands of these things. I'll tell you what I'ma chicken. I wouldn't stand right there I think that thing's gonna roll on top of you That would be a rap song. Yeah This is known as Jaeger rock that things huge and is that you want to meet there? No, that's one of my tried-took the pictures. Tell me stand there Yeah, I said stand here and then I had the other guys go around the back Rock it and push on This thing is kind of hanging off the side of that hill the way some of those Hollywood Hills houses are ones that are on stilts see that that that Rounded mass of stuff that it's sitting in is called a bird mound And you see these icebergs are not clean ice. They're dirty. They're filled with gravel and debris So when a bird when a bird that's being carried into flood and the flood waters subside the birds get stranded in the land They then melt and if there's no boulder there's just a mound if there's no gigantic boulder There's just a mound, but if there is a gigantic boulder being carried aboard the iceberg It will be sitting in a bird mound like you see right here. That's amazing So that white line that we see it was where the iceberg was when it deposited that thing that it just melted from there No, that's actually a bedding plane between two different kinds of basalt So okay, so the mound itself below it is what you're saying is the bird mound That's the bird mound and and the boulder the big boulder was the cargo sitting on top of the iceberg Okay, so the bird is not just water. It's water with a bunch of dirt and all kinds of other shit in as well Yeah, and so when it melts that's what it leaves behind it leaves behind I see that's amazing Okay in the next image we have the Hancock around Is that you up there? Well, that's me on top of that 18,000 ton of water Once you're breaking more. Yeah, I was I do that from time to time But it but it's it's an amazing experience to stand there and to think What transported this well? We know it was transported in an iceberg and it was dumped there on the side of that valley And it's just the thought of thousands of these things Plowing along at 60 or 70 miles an hour carried on a gigantic flood. How do we have anything left? You know no wonder no wonder we've forgotten our past and see in here's the thing I mean what we're doing here is we're looking where these flood events are preserved the most spectacularly in the reason is is because You had a very steep gradient from the ice sheet elevation to the Pacific Ocean But like Graham and I when we traveled across we traveled across the continental divide and traveled from the Rocky Mountains to the Twin Cities make an ocean. But like Graham and I, when we traveled across, we traveled across the continental divide and traveled from the Rocky Mountains to the Twin Cities, which is on the Mississippi River. And all the way across, we were crossing huge meltwater coulies. We crossed the Missouri River Valley, which is an under-fit stream, just very similar to the snake, where the modern Missouri is just a little ribbon of river occupying this massive meltwater channel of which there are hundreds across the plains. And then when we got to Minneapolis, we went up and we visited some of the largest known pop. Amazing potholes. Again, you're looking on the scale of giants. This is beyond imagination what you look at. And the only this, the flood explanation makes sense of it. Go to 1-0-5-4, Jamie. And you'll see, there we go. I'm down inside the pothole, one of the potholes, looking up at Graham. So that's a pothole carved into stone by whirlpools. Yeah. Picking up. It's not rocks in them. And the rocks are the erosive agent that's cutting out the pothole. Just think of like a massive hydraulic drill. Just picking up, you know, course rock and then just drilling, literally drilling holes 50, 60, 80 feet deep into the rock. Go to the please if you're listening to this. Just go. Just got a fast forward to this. This is insane. This image is insane. Just thinking of watching rocks spin around. Yeah. And you're talking about over a short period of time. Oh yeah. Probably, you know, I'm guessing, you know, these giant meltwater floods, this is right along the same Roy River, which forms the border between Minnesota and Wisconsin. It was probably a several weeks duration at its peak and it's peak. And so the drilling of these bedrock probably was accomplished within that time span. What I wouldn't give to know what that was like just to see it. Well, you had to bend an orbit to survive it. Right. Yeah. Even if you're flying over in a plane, probably that just the atmospheric change is on top of these flood sediments from documented from Ohio to Washington state. There are thick layers of loss. Now, loss is this strange top soil that came down and it's, they've been arguing for generations. Is it wind deposited or water deposited? But the curious thing is it seems to be both wind and water deposited. But I think the obvious explanation for it is that when you see the like the top layers of the flood sediments, particularly in the back flood regions where the where the water was calm or rather than so torrential, you see these layers, these beautiful, they're called rivmites. They're very rivmical. On top of that is a layer of this loss top soil with this vertical structure. Right. Well, to me and again, without getting into the technical background, I think the logic explanation and most likely explanation is that at the tail end of the the final flood flows, what you're seeing is a rainfall of mud and this rainfall of mud came down in a which many ancient traditions speak of. Yes, a black bitumenous rain mud falling from the sky, darkness, a time of darkness. It's all described in the myth. The myths are the memory banks of humanity. We should not call the myths. We should call the memories. Yeah, exactly. And again, this this muddy rainfall perfectly fits the whole narrative. And again, with the mythology, it's it's right there. When we think of these the idea of these tsunamis, we think of water that you can see. We're most likely dealing with the entire air around you filled with torrential dantor and solid matter. Everything's flying through the air. Yeah, slurry. Incredible winds. Incredible winds. Yes. So it's both wind and water and just full on chaos, super hurricane it's it's nature gone chaotic and crazy on ultimate steroids. Wow. This is what it is. Oh, wild. And it's real. That's the thing. It's real. While people were alive. Oh, yeah, and after all, people were alive. Absolutely. It's not an attack on the north thing. No, it happened a blink of an eye ago. It happened. It happened when anatomically modern humans had already been around for 200,000 years. Well, no, but not according to the orthodoxy story. Right. But if we're dealing with a lost civilization, which I believe to be the case, then, yes, it totally makes sense. Completely totally makes sense. Yeah. And it's time it's time to get to grips with this. It's time to move forward to the next level and start recovering our memory. Yeah. And also start recognizing this is a this is a potential reality. Yeah, this is a not just the past. This is also very possible. Yeah. And and and again, if I may say so crowdfunding, it's the opportunity for the people to give their voice, sure, can you show that page? This is the crowdfunding page for the comet research group. And it's on in the link is on Graham. So if you got a Graham Hancock dot com and click on the comet research group banner, then you'll you'll get taken immediately to the crowdfunding page. Please support it. Whatever you can give, it'll make all the difference. It sends a message that we that we care about alternative heretical research. And also when you're at my website, I put up there a lot of other follow ups to this podcast. If people want to go places, I'm talking in America in the next weeks. Yes. And links and connections, a lot of stuff related to this podcast is on my site. I'd like to plug my DVD that has a lot of these images on it. Okay. And it's about five hours of stuff, Blu-ray. And if they go to the website, sacred geometry, international, I do have that available as a download. It's going to be if it's not already. Yeah. I think it is available for a download. My laptop doesn't even know. Nobody's does anymore. The answer is yes. Okay. If it's not now, it will be. I think it is actually now available. Get it on iTunes or Amazon. Yeah. And it's hours of stuff. But I get into a lot of other stuff. The some of the interesting sidelines, the archaeo astronomy and the sacred geometry and so forth that might be associated with ancient cultures. And what's the name of this again? Cosmic patterns and cycles of catastrophe. Beautiful. And there it is. Yeah. That's the older version. This is the newer upgraded version. All right. Yeah. There we go. There we go. Beautiful. And there's the Blu-ray. Yeah. There's the Blu-ray. Yeah. Okay. So an NHD download excellent. There it is. Yeah. Gentlemen. This has been a long podcast of awesomeness. Man, this cemented in my head, the idea was already cemented in my head. But these images along with your compelling narrative is cemented even further. It was amazing. Such a cool podcast. And managed to entertain and scare the shit out of me at the same time. So thank you for that. Thank you. Graham. It's Graham underscore Hancock on Twitter. Yeah. Graham double underscore Hancock. But double underscore. Yeah. They made it really difficult to reach me on Twitter. But it is there. And then, you know, I've got my Facebook page. And my website is the main portal Graham Hancock.com. Everything comes off there. My book, my events and all kinds of files. Are you verified on Twitter so they know which one to file? You know, I'm verified on Facebook, but they haven't verified me on Twitter. Oh, dear. You know, I got 100,000 followers there. But they haven't verified me. And I mean, I am me. Yeah. Randall, how much do you pay attention to social media at all? Yeah. You've got a lot of time. I'll immerse myself into it for a few days or as much as I can take. and then I got a back off for a while. Well, you're going to get a flood of questions about this one because this was awesome. Really. Thank you so much. I'm so, so thankful and honored to know you guys because to me, this is, I mean, the ultimate thing for me on this podcast is to be able to have people on that are talking about things that I find absolutely captivating. And you guys, I think what you're doing is so important. You're playing a huge role, Joe, in opening people's minds to unthinkable thoughts all around the world, stuff that people have been told they are not allowed to think about. Your, your show is opening doors that have never been opened before. Stumbled into it. I don't know how to happen. I would like to get you out in the field. I would like to get out in the field. I would like to get out in the field. I would like to get out in the field. I want to see that stuff. Yeah, that's what I'm going to watch in the state. Let's do it. Let's set something up and make a video. I want to go there. I want to see that. Let's do it. That looks crazy. This is, this is, you know, Jamie, you in. Jamie's in. All right. Thank you so much, everybody. See you soon.