So that interview that you did in 2011, the famous Tigerblood interview, I watched that. And I have never forgotten it. And I never will forget it. And here was my takeaway. My takeaway was this is a guy who's obviously in drugs. Like there's a man at quality to it, which I recognized. But despite that, the life force and the talent, it was just so obvious. And I thought to myself, how many actors, how many people could be? whatever, an eight ball in the bag, or whatever was going on with you personally, and talk like that. And reveal so much of those. I just thought there was something really great, despite the craziness that came out of that interview. And when I heard that you had gotten sober and were happy and cultural, I've been all stuff. I was just thrilled. Thank you for you. I mean that. That's why I wanted to talk to you. I thought that interview revealed something really impressive about you. Wow. Wow. Not everyone felt that way. I don't know. That is the only, I mean, I'm the only person to comment that interview up to this moment in time in my life. That is the only positive review. Is that true? I've never received what that interview. Oh yeah. So this is why I'm going to sit inside this moment for a second. Well, I'm creating a thank you. On a drug curve, having, right, used it as candidly. And I'm very against drugs, just to be clear. But I was like, if someone can talk like that while he's impaired, that's crazy. Thank you. What did people other than me think about that interview? Oh, just that it was the beginning of the end. It was the moment when the, yeah, when it just, I had completely left the reservation and with, well, that's fair. Yeah. That that, I think people might have respected the commitment to it. But then I knew there was no turning back. You know, I do respect that. I mean, right? You burned your boats. Yeah. If you're going to go, I mean, all the way, is the only direction that you know, right? You definitely went. How long, I should do people approach you and say you got to make a change or do they stop talking to you or like how, what was the response? Well, you mean right after that? Yeah. Yeah. It, I, there was, there was fallout. There was fallout, you know, especially what was going on within that work in the show. Yeah. You know, all the, all the, all the high stakes elements in play, you know. Yeah. I, I, I, it's weird because I've watched it and I've watched it just on this recent tour as it's been referenced and played and in clips and stuff and it's, it's, it's like watching somebody else. Yeah. It's like it's like a kind of look the same. I mean, I look kind of the beat up version of me. Yeah. Very fatigued version of me. Sound asleep was not, you know, something I, not on the menu. I picked up there. Yeah. No. And it's interesting. The, the quality of my voice, did you notice that? No. This, the gravel and the depth and the thing. And I was like, yeah, that was from the testosterone cream, which I was doing, he, heaping amounts of in the, in the book. I describe it as a slathering on like a, like a freaking ponds commercial. So what that's, it's, it's interesting that everyone's all for hormone treatments now for kids. But I think it's still forbidden to want to use testosterone cream. I've never used anything like that. But I'm interested. Like what does that do? It was in the doses, it was, it was prescribed and recommended to be applied at, um, that, you know, following those dosage guidelines, um, it was, it was for enhanced. Yeah. Yeah. You know, sexual enhancement, uh, uh, more lean muscle mass, more energy. Uh, when you exceed those, you know, 40 X, um, then it, it, it can metabolize into what, what's essentially of a, the right rage. Wow. So there was, that was a lot about what was going on during that whole thing. That's why I couldn't, that's why I couldn't pull the train back into the station, you know, that once it, uh, once it got away from me, um, you just become the incredible Hulk pretty much. Yeah. Yeah. Um, but it's, but it's just during this time and even, you know, working on some of that, yeah, that, that chapter in the book, um, it, there's something that dawned on me. It's like I turned into the, the, I, I became that thing that, the, um, which I, I, I detest most. And that was a bully. Yeah. You know, and, and I could say, I was bullied as a kid. And I wanted to see how it felt from the other side. It's so what, right? Um, it didn't, it didn't feel good from the other side. You know, bullying is still like not cool. Yeah. You know, sucks. Would you recommend testosterone lower doses? Um, I would. I would because I've been in, in recent years have, have, have used it responsibly and have had, have gotten results that were promised or that, that, that, that I was expecting. Yeah. Is there a downside? Um, responsible use. I, I don't, I hope not. I don't know. I don't know. They are finding downside, uh, uh, you know, in long term use to, uh, HDH to human growth homework, you know, um, I believe, uh, yeah. If it's going to, if it's going to make things grow, then if you got, you know, if you you got a tumor or something that's, that's kind of been lurking, you can bring that thing, um, into, you know, you know, some larger form. Yeah. Yeah. Men with prostate cancer have typically have their testosterone reduced medically. Gotcha. Because it, it feeds the tumor. So that makes sense. Yeah. I don't use shaving cream or Florida toothpaste. So it's like not my world. But I'm interested. Have you tried the toothpaste from, uh, wellness? No. I used the doctor, Bronors. Oh, okay. Okay. Yeah. We grew up on Dr. Bronors. So did I. That's why I used it. Yeah. We ate his chips and everything. Yeah. Was this other California thing in the seven? Remember healthy, Honsa? No, but I just, you know, you use the castile soap with all weird sayings on the side. We are one. It was like a hangover from the hippie era. That's the stuff my mom bought us exactly. Yeah. That's exactly. Yeah. Yeah. And I still use it this day. Oh, really? Yes, I do. Wow. Dr. Zoggs. Surfwax. Remember that best day? Yeah. That's right. Probably doesn't exist. But, um, so you got better. You got sober after that. How long did it take from that interview? Tell sobriety. Um, so that was 2011. Yep. Yeah. No, it got pretty dark after that. Um, even though I did another somehow manage to do another TV show, like it's still in the middle of all that. You know, I mean, I was able to pull it back and present, you know, nicely enough. Um, you know, at least walk into a room and, and, and, and, well, actually, can I just go back to check one of the things I loved about that interview was the hostility that you so clearly had. I mean, it just was obvious toward like the whole class of people who profit from the creatives in Los Angeles. Right. And, you know, the agents, the managers, just the whole constellation of people and you clearly were at war with them. And yet the way the system is set up even now, we were telling a breakfast like it's necessary. You can't really work without participating in that system. So how did you fix those relationships? Time. Just over time and, and, and just, you know, working on myself. Um, and, and, yeah. You know, those relationships can only be fixed if, um, if both parties are still in the game. Yeah. You know, um, so I think I think that helped. Um, but the stuff I talk about in the book about that time was that, um, it was that tour that, that really, um, was ill-advised, you know, and that was not my idea. And I'm still not sure how I allowed myself to get talked into it. You know, um, yeah. Everybody blames Mark Berg, but it wasn't Mark's, it really, really wasn't Mark's brain child. It was life, it was live nation. They, they watched all of that and like their, they, it, through their filter, they saw that as taking that on the road. Yeah. We got to get this man into expensive hotel rooms. Exactly. Exactly. Yes. And in front of a crowd drove paying customers. Most coffee companies sell weakness basically watered down drinks from faceless corporations that don't care about the American family. Black rifle is very different. Drink it this morning. It's American brood. It's unapologetically patriotic. This coffee is building people who love this country. We actually know them, have shot with them and can tell you that's real. And they know what it means to fight for the freedoms that we have special forces, veterans, ranchers, hard workers across this country represent the best that we are. The coffee is strong. The energy drinks even stronger, not because they're jumped up on sugar. It's on empty marketing, but it's actual fuel for people who work hard and keep this country running. Every purchase from black rifle helps support veterans for responders law enforcement. From bold roast to ready to drink cans, mugs, cool t-shirts, tons of gear, black rifle makes everything it makes with pride. How many companies can say that? Honestly, not many. Visit black rifle.com, black rifle coffee.com, use code Tucker for 30% off your first order. That's black rifle coffee.com, use the code Tucker. Pick it up at your convenience or grocery store. It's awesome. It's not even about the performances, but the experience of being on the road, which anyone has ever done it, can tell you, I mean, there's a reason so many performers wind up with these really tragic personal lives, which is like being on the road is not good for you at all. It was especially really not good for me. I mean, on a good day, it's not good for a good person. Yeah. But an addicted person is just going to like, so what happened? It was 21 cities in like 31 days with no act, but Jeff Ross did come in and rescue a good portion of it. So that was, did they call Jeff like midway through and they called him like right after the second show. Yeah. I mean, we bombed right out of the gate. So what was that like? It was awful. It was awful because I know that it was bad when it was happening. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. No, it was an absolute train wreck. It was a complete bed shit. No, it's fine. I'm sorry to laugh at your mind. No, I'll take it because there's a thing I talk about in the book that, you know, the Hemingways, you know, to become a man, you know, his list, right? You got to fight a bull. You got to have a son and plant a tree. Yeah. Right. He left out being boot off stage in Detroit on opening night. Yeah. It was, we didn't make it, we didn't make it to the second act. Wow. Wow. He's a woman racks, you know, he has no, he's an actor and he done some wrapping and he had this one song that I really dug and so he was going to perform it, you know, and I was getting pelted with stuff like like not food, but like programs and shoes and whatever anybody could throw and he was in the wings. And so I started like motioning him actually on stage. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And it's it's it's turning violent. There's where like on the verge of bedlam. And so I wave him out and I and I switch places with him. I'm done. It's over and he tried to do his song and they kept then he went to harder on him. And then he told me afterwards, he said, dude, you can't like you have to. He says you completely overlooked the fact that you that you brought a a white rapper out on stage in Detroit who wasn't Eminem and expected the crowd to be satisfied. You know, we but we're skipping over. Yeah, yeah. Which is what is you to make the crowd so mad? Stuck to the script. There was absolute dog shit. This thing that I built back home thinking, yeah, then we'll do this. We'll do that. And then the girls will come out and just all this stuff that I was imagining would be crowd pleasing stuff. But they just literally wanted me on stage. It's screaming those dumb slogans. They don't want a more tiger butt. Yeah, they wanted more seven gram rocks. They wanted more Donus DNA. And what I finally explained in the book is that none of that the biggest irony in this whole thing, none of that stuff was my original material. I didn't I didn't I didn't cook all that all that stuff up. Now it came from a phone call from a baseball player like three days before I sat down for the interview. And it was it was I think it was delivered as a pep talk. Again, some dugout. No, there's a guy named Brian Wilson. He he used to pitch for the giants. They called him the beard, right? Great ball player, super dude. And I was watching a highlight package of him one night. And I just I don't know. There was something about his magnetism as present to all of it, right? And I told my friend Tony Thomas said get get him on the phone. I want to I want to speak to that man, right? And the next day I was on the phone with him. I think it was before the season started. And he just he he just volunteered. He said it's a pleasure to talk to you man. And it was already known that that that that that you know, the training left the tracks with my show and the beef with Chuck and all that stuff was already in play. So he says to me, he says, you know, we're not like other people. We're not we're we're we're we're different man. We got we got we got we got Tiger blood running through our veins. We got a we got a substrate of a downest DNA that doesn't allow guys like us to ever lose because we're always winning, right? This is all him giving me this material. So and he's he's probably thinking cool man. That's going to that's going to make him feel better at least for today. And you know, maybe maybe held held, you know, make some progress with this other mass, right? And then the interview comes around. And there was something that she did says not that no part of it was her fault. I mean, no part of the ABC lady. Yeah. Andrea canning. And so she made a crack to the two gals that I had shacked up with, right? And and then she tried to continue like on to her next question. And I was like, whoa, whoa, whoa, you you owe them an apology. She was like, I'm okay. My bad. I apologize. I'm sorry. I'm like, thank you. And so then she tried to continue the interview. And I started grinding on it. I wouldn't let it go. Even though she apologized and we should have just moved past it and we didn't. And and so that's that's when the whole thing just came out. I suddenly felt like I'm, I'm going to be delivering another interview and checking every box that they want. And I'm supposed to show remorse. I'm supposed to show, you know, all of those all those things that that you know, that you sit down and do that interview and and deliver, you know, which I mean, that was the point of the interview, right? That was set up because you have to go through this ritual. Right. Yeah. I think that's what they were expecting. And I think I might have agreed to it on those terms. And yeah, I flipped the script sort of midway through. And then it did, I had all of his material and it was just kind of like, you know, it was there. And I was kind of kind of on a loop just looking for the right venue and there it was. And it all just flew out. And that that's what started that whole thing. Did he call you? Did he see it? The ball? Yeah. He was probably like, oh my God, what have I done? I gave, I gave my best stuff to the wrong guy or the most right guy ever, you know. So I felt maybe I'm a shower wall just so I felt you created a kind of art. I felt like that was like a thank you. I did think that's awesome. Thank you. And most lines are other people's lines. So there's no shame in that. Thank you. Okay. Good. Good. Yeah. No. And for years, I didn't want, I didn't think it was fair to, to try to lasso him into the craziness. So I always kept it, kept him out of it. I kept Brian out of it, which I felt was the right thing to do. And then, and then over time, I did start admitting that, yeah, that, that, that wasn't my material. I didn't come up with any of that stuff originally. And then with the book and this tour, I've just said, yeah, it was, it was Brian was that guy. He still talked to him. Yeah, I spoke to him about a year ago because we asked him to be in the dog. And he said he was going to do it and they needed to, he just changed his mind and want to. That's fine. He doesn't have to revisit it. I, I kind of do. So, and well, I was telling stories in about it in the dog where I was already anticipating them cutting to him for his side of it. So what it made sense if, if he was there, but no, I don't, there's no love lost at all about that, you know? Yeah. I don't know. I, I again, totally pro sobriety. On the other hand, it's just nice to see vigor in a man in a world filled with men without vigor that, you know, I'll take a little crazy in us. I just wrote that word to somebody yesterday, which vigor. Yeah, it's much needed. Yeah. No, somebody wrote something to me, hey, this thing, or did you guys do this, something, something, and I, and I, I was sitting there for like four minutes. And I finally wrote back with vigor. Yeah, exactly. So yeah, we have a little Teddy Roosevelt. Right. And I saw a little cocaine infused Teddy Roosevelt and not a, so you go on tour, life nation decide to take, we can profit from this. Sure. Yeah. Not to impute low motives to live nation. No, of course not. But, and so you, and you bomb the first two nights, so then they call Jeff Ross, the Toastmaster General, the community in shape, which not stupid actually. No. He did a great job. Yeah, of course. He did a great job. But what surprised me is that the, the set that he rolled out with, he showed up in a hazmat suit. Like he was there to clean up, you know, the radioactive spill, right? Which he kind of was. And the crowd loved it. And his jokes were terrific. And I'm like, wow, and then I just figured he would be, then we get to the next city. And he would come out with a different set. And he didn't. He just stuck to the, the, the ones he had assembled and built and, and they already killed and he figured that the next city hadn't heard them yet. Whatever name was in the paper. Because it's no internet or something. Right. Yeah. And he just stayed with it, you know. Ooh. And then 190 couldn't make it. So, you know, Chuck Zito is. Yeah. Yeah. So, Chuck was helping me with security during the tour. I said, Chuck, I think it's going to be funny if like you, you come out and just take the podium and say, Jeff Ross couldn't make it tonight. So, I have, I have his material and I'm just going to go through one by one. And he did. And it bombed. It bombed. But it vomited in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, shooting guy red Jeff Ross's set. Yeah. Yeah. We're in his leather jacket and the whole thing. Not Jeff's. Chuck Zito. So, meta actually. I would have enjoyed that. Yeah. I did enjoy it. I was on stage. I was stadium, Chuck. I was on stage. Oh, it was on stage. Yeah. Yeah. So, Chuck Zito filming for Jeff Ross. Hey, it's a brag. But we're pretty confident. This show is the most vehemently pro dog podcast you're ever going to see. We can take our leave. Some people, but dogs are non-negotiable. They are the best. They really are our best friends. And so, for that reason, we're thrilled to have a new partner called Dutch Pet. It's the fastest growing pet telehealth service. Which dot com is on a mission to create what you need, but you actually need affordable quality, veterinary care anytime no matter where you are. They will get your dog or cat what you need immediately. It's offering an exclusive discount dutches for our listeners. You get 50 bucks off your vet care per year. Visit dutch.com slash chakra to learn more. Use the code tucker for $50 off. That is an unlimited vet visits. $82 a year. We actually use this. Dutch has vets who can handle any pet under any circumstance in a 10 minute call. It's pretty amazing. Actually, you never have to leave your house. You don't have to throw the dog in the truck no wasted time waiting for appointments, no wasted money on clinics or visit fees, unlimited visits and follow-ups for an extra cost plus free shipping on all products for up to five pets. It sounds amazing. It couldn't be real, but it actually is real. Visit dutch.com slash chakra to learn more. Use the code tucker for $50 off your veterinary care per year. Your dogs, your cats and your wallet will thank you. When you get off stage the first two nights when you bomb and people are throwing things at you giving you the old Islamic shoe treatment. What do your people say when you get back? Good job Charlie. No, they were like, huh, okay, we really have to sit down and figure out if there's any way like what is going to cost you to issue like all of those refunds. Yeah. Refund. Yeah. Actually, the second it was really just the first night I was wrong about that because something did happen between Detroit and Chicago. Something actually does. Yeah, right between those two cities. Yeah, about that, but especially on a tour bus. Yes. So I said, okay, everything that we had planned to just leave it right where it belongs in the toilet. We're wound up in the sewer, in the gutter. We are scrapping everything and they said, okay, all right, good start. Good. Okay, cool, Shane, you're reading the room, man. Was it the shoes? Yeah. Finally, it was that last high heel. And I said, I think I have a fix. And they were like, well, do you want to share it? I'm like, no, no, I don't have it yet. So I'm going to ride the tour bus. I'm not going to fly. I'm going to take the bus from Detroit to Chicago by myself. And I just need a note pad and two pens. And I did. And I just rewrote the entire show alone on that trip knowing that it was, it was do or die because they were all right. Cause I knew that tour was also, it was, it was the child support tour. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Cause where is this hanging on to all my dough? They were keeping my dough hostage because I violated all the morals clauses and I acted in bad faith and therefore they didn't have to pay me what they owed me. You know, and I was like, well, hold on a minute. Anyway, they ultimately had to, but I had to assume to get my, whoa, get my scratch. Yeah. And I was like, what's the problem about that? So I couldn't. Not all right. So anyway, so that, yeah. So I did go on that thing. Um, there, there, there were, there were some noble motives behind it or motivation rather. Just to have some dough to, you know, keep everybody housed and fed. Right. Cause you have big tribe. Yeah. Yeah. Big enough. Um, and so bigger than average bigger than average. Yeah. I mean, that is a compliment. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and plenty of room at any, any, any stage of it and any, any, any table that, that we sit down at, there's plenty of room for everyone, you know, beautiful. Um, thank you. And so we get to Chicago. And so I go there in the morning and they're like, what are you doing here? The talent never shows up until five minutes for, you know, sound check or whatever. And I said, I just need to see, I need to see the theater. I need to feel the building. And I'm like, okay. And we're playing in Chicago, do you remember? I couldn't tell you at gunpoint. I have a theater probably. Yeah. Yeah. It was nice. It was vintage. It felt. Yeah. Yeah. That's a bit. Yep. So, so I basically decided that it was just going to be like with a moderator, right? Mark. Yeah. And, and I said, I just need two chairs, you know, just that the, you know, facing each other just behind the curtain. And I wrote this letter and I'm sure it's on video somewhere. And, and I wrote and one of the chairs just behind the curtain so I could come, I could walk out first, deliver this, this love letter to Chicago about, you know, what happened and to, and to try it. And the whole thing was a mislead about, you know, I, I've, I've fought in the jungles of Vietnam. I've, I've been through the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the hellscape of, of, you know, the volcanoes of, you know, just this whole like, you know, like mythological, just this thing where it felt like, and then the whole thing kind of ends with, and that was just opening night and Detroit. And I said, and then, then the whole place went nuts. And I knew I had them. And then the curtains parted and we sat in the chairs and we just talked about everything. We just talked about it. You had it, had it play. It played great. And then everybody, you know, all the glibnation guys and, you know, the ancient types, everybody was around. They were like, you rescued the show, man. Good for you. You rescued the show. Well, it's really good for you. No, it was, it was, it was cool. And so we went with that and then that kind of peter it out because it wasn't like at the, the energy level that everyone was. Because you weren't pivoting against disaster. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. And then that's, then a little bit later, they, that's when they brought Jeff in. Because we're like, okay, we got, we got, we got our, you know, we got, we got our bearings. Let's, let's ramp it up. But in a, in a, you know, just in a, in a sensible way, I think. What did you think of working live like that? Um, it was exciting. Yeah. It was exciting. Yeah. I made the decision to, um, start entering from the back of the auditorium. You know, like they're not from backstage, but from the audience side. Like from like the exit door. Yeah. Yeah. Just, um, I don't know why it just, um, it was just cool. Just everybody was expecting me there. And I, I would run up the aisle high five and everyone, you know, just to break it up, just to keep it. I don't know. Yeah. I've, I've seen the show as a, you've done it. Yeah. No, I love it. I hope that that whole form continues, whether I can participate in it or not. Sure. I think it's important for people to be physically present with each other. You seem really comfortable in those situations. Well, I like people. Yeah. But you do, I like to smell people. Yeah. I don't like, that's my main problem. The internet is I think it just, disaggregates people from actual people. Sure. There's no, it was like, there's a person there, but everyone's sort of reduced to it was dumb as opinion or most provocative opinion. I'm not against those obviously, but I think that's not the whole story about people. And it's just, I just like people. It's good to be with people. I like physical contact. I hate the COVID era because of its lack of physical contact. I just, I mean, these are not like groundbreaking ideas. But no, I just like being with people. Sure. Yeah. For sure. What's the point? Otherwise. Yeah. So how much are you partying on tour? Not. Yes. See that, and I covered that in the book also is that they sent the head of the network less moon vest to my house with the with the with the Warner jet like fueled up. cover that in the book also is that they sent the head of the network less moon vest in my house with the with the Warner jet like fueled up and idling on the runway to take me to rehab. Right after the ABC interview. Yes. And I said, I said, I appreciate it. It's also less not lost on me. This is the first time that the jets ever been made available to me during the whole run of two and a half. Right? What's the? What me in rehab? That's fine. Um, and I said, but I'm going to I'm going to do this at home. I'm going to do this at home. And then the look on his face was a man. I felt he he he was saddened. He actually felt for me. I could I could see the good for him. Yeah. And it had nothing to do with commerce. And I write that in the book. Good. I also describe him as a good dude and a fucking gangster. No one yelled at me yet about that because we're supposed to keep him right parked in the cornfield. Yeah. I mean, I think the assumption is in this business and especially in your part of the business, you know, you got to be pretty tough character to get to the top, right? Yeah. I don't think non gangsters run big entertainment organizations. Right. They never they never have. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. Not an insult. I'm not judging. Sure. Um, but yeah, no, I think it required I think it requires that too. See, never once we have. No, I I did a rehab at home. What's that? Not a rehab. Not a rehab. Well, there were no doubt there was no dogs. There was no actually. Yeah. There was girls. Yeah, there was girls and testosterone cream. That's the one thing I didn't quit. And that's that was probably the one thing I'm probably should have stayed on the coke and got gotten off the cream. Can you imagine like a doctor like recommending that? You know, that's so advising. I've never heard that before. See, you think the testosterone cream used at 40X recommended doses. Was worse for you than the cocaine? Well, yeah, I think it was doing more damage to my psychological state. Interesting. Yeah, because the focus is kind of predictable. Oh, what you're getting, you know, I was going to, yeah, how you're going to behave in certain situations. Yeah. Um, and that other stuff was just like, it was a trip to the outer limits, you know, really? Yeah. But like the really like kind of the angrier part of the outer limits, like the testier part, the more edgy part. Yeah, it's like the more than cocaine. Yes. Well, that's the most interesting thing I've heard today. Oh, the day's young. Fair. So you have definitely heard about eight sleep by now. People are talking about the well rested people you know we're talking about. It's a company with one mission, improve your sleep and is changing the way Americans get a good night's sleep and trust me, they need it. So we just received word that their team is launching a new product is called the pod five. The pod five is an original totally innovative mattress cover plus a blanket that uses precision temperature control to regulate your body's sleep cycles and give you the perfect night's sleep. It ranges from 55 degrees for the cold plungers among you to the 110 degrees for the sauna fanatics. That means no matter what you prefer, you're covered. And the bottom line is you sleep better, by up to an hour. It actually works. The pod also detects snoring and adjusts your bed's position to reduce or stop it. Whoa, beleaguered ladies across America rejoice as one. Everyone here can tell you there's no better way to be alert, productive and happy than by getting a good night's sleep and eight sleep can help. Visit eightsleep.com slash Tucker use the code Tucker to get 350 bucks off your pod five ultra. If you don't like it, it's returned it within a month, but you're going to love it. Eight sleep.com slash Tucker. So did anybody wow, that's I'll think about that. So I did I did stop. We can't have tested anyone ever say to you. You know, it's good to get off the, you know, the narcotics, but like testosterone cream when slathered in the amounts you're slathering is like pretty heavy. Did anyone ever say that to you? Yes, but but a couple months before that, um, do you know, Nick Cassomatties. He's a director. He's a writer. He's a friend of mine. He's the son of John Cassomatties. Yeah, Nick directed and wrote the notebook. Yes, everybody's favorite romantic. Yeah, comedy, right? It's not a romantic comedy. I say, uh, I love, love story. Um, so sorry, Nick, call this film a comedy. We want to cut that. Well, you laugh at the pride. Yeah, you laugh and cried. Yeah. So, um, he, we were in Palm Springs and I don't know at what stage in the, in that whole thing that that whole time it was, but he did say, Hey man, I noticed, um, that you, you're, you're using like a lot. You're, you're, they, they, they recommended like the, you know, the size of a dime and you had like five silver dollars in your hand. Yeah. And he said, you've just, um, just think about, think about cutting back a little bit. And I was like, you got it, man. Thank you. Good advice. I appreciate it. Just ignore, ignore. Um, so yeah, right? He, no, but you mean like in the moment in that thing while it was going on, did anybody say, yeah? Um, I didn't really broadcast what I was doing. I don't think people would think to look for that. Exactly. Testosterone cream. I mean, I didn't even really know that was the thing, but if I had known it was the thing, I wouldn't really think about it. You know, I think like the crack is the problem, but it turned out. So when you was it hard to stop using the illegal stuff? Yes and no, I, I, I missed it just physically for like a, like a week. You know, but I wasn't on any, any opiates. So the Coke D talks is pretty quick, you know, um, but it's, um, the other stuff gave me the energy and, and just the different mindset to just to not even think about what my body was feeling. Yes. You know, um, so then because you asked like how long. Yeah. So then that, that, um, but when I came back from the tour is when I, is when I went, I went dark. Interesting. Dark and stay dark. Yeah. Usually it's the other way around. And now when people are on the road. Yeah. No, it, um, I, I just wanted to finish it. Just wanted to honor that commitment. It's as crazy as, as that commitment was. I knew there was, there was, um, there were a lot of that there would have been a lot of consequences. I didn't want to deal with how I not done every city, every, you know, every leg of the tour. That did your job. Yeah. Yeah. So then you're pretty work oriented anyway, right? Yeah. Yeah. I have, I have that gear. Yeah. Yeah. You know, me too. That's important. It is. Yeah. But it was after that. I think I think that come down from it just finally like landing and, and sitting with the damage I've done to myself and my career and my, you know, and, and then, you know, how that affects my family, you know, um, yeah, I just had to just, just close the blinds turn off the phone and yeah. Yeah. Get back into the hard stuff. You know, how long did that last? About three months, four, four months, I think maybe longer, maybe six ish, but not six years. No. No. Because then a couple other things happen as a result of that dark place, you know, um, but as far as finally putting it down for real, um, it was, yeah, it was December 12, 2017. So I guess my core question is how, and I'm asking this not for brilliant reasons, but to inspire others, like how did you do that? Because I do think there are a ton of people who want to do that, but keep failing. Sure. I, I just, my body was really starting to send the kind of messages that that you either pay attention to or you die from. Yes. You know, I'd never had the shakes before. Yep. I'd never had the DTs before. Oh, did you get the DTs? Yeah. And what's that? Just from, and not from being off of anything for a week, just from like going to bed drunk and then waking up and not being able to function until, you know, I got a few pops. I mean, just to just real on my company. Yeah. Yeah. So that was, that was one. And then how scary are the DTs? Um, terrifying. Yeah. Terrifying. People die from that. they do. Yeah. And then, you know, and I, I've for the longest time, I thought, you know, I thought Nick's portrayal in leaving Las Vegas, Nicholas Cage. I thought it was over the top. I'm like, that's an exaggerate, an example of it. And no, he nailed it like spot on. Just the thing about you can't, you can't, you can't take a drink because you'll, you'll break a tooth. Yeah. And then, and then, you know, a couple of days later, if you can blood. So your body is like saying, hey, man, yeah, we have these, these, these built in warning system, these flashing red lights for these and, you know, um, and then, um, and what's interesting is, you know, I think people imagine that the deep delirium tremens are like something that 80 year old winos get, right. But you like weren't that old and you'd had a job the whole time, sure, right. So you're functioning. Yeah, actually, yeah, you still got them. Yeah. Yeah, it gets you faster than you realize. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And then you're the example of that you're the character in that story. You promise. You made a sacred value yourself that you would, you would never star in in that story. Yeah. It's just like, geez. So there's a lot of self-loathing. There's a lot of work here. But then, you know, by an athletic background and I, and I'm competitive. And so it was about a challenge of, okay, it's me against this thing. How, how tough are we? You know, how much tiger blood is really running through these veins, you know, the dawn substrate. Yes. And so, um, yeah, and there's a, there's a, there's a really nice moment in the book. Um, there was a thing with my daughter, Sam, you know, in a, in a car one day, just like it, it isn't like this grand event where I, you know, gotten a shootout with the cops and hijacked a blamp and wound up, you know, just a blimp. You know what I'm saying? Like, if you could hijack a blimp, I'd be impressed. Yeah, me too. Yeah. That's, that's a box. I've never checked, but it's not a bucket list moment. And that's good news for the blimp industry. Right? Um, yeah. And it was just, it was this really personal, um, very soulful, painful moment with my daughter that just made me realize in that moment, it was, it was time because there's a, there's a theme in the book about, you know, talkers and doers, you know, and, uh, it was time to, as I say in the book to, there was nothing left to say, it was time to shut the fuck up and get busy doing. And then that, like that night and the next day took a few volume, had a few beers. And then the next morning decided we're done. We're done for real. And it just happened to be Cassandra's birthday. My oldest daughter. Oh, it's just timed out like that cosmically. You know, that, that, there's, there's themes and tones in the book about that kind of stuff where, you know, certain circles close when they're supposed to, you know, and certain things align because they have to, you know, everything's about timing because that's just the way it is sometimes. Yeah, it's pre-written. Yeah, or feels that way anyway, sometimes. Um, what, so what was that? What, so it's one thing to decide lots of people decide, right, everyone struggling with addiction has made many decisions on Sunday morning. I got to shut this down. Sure. But then you don't, right, because it's awful. So was it awful? No. Really? No, it was, it was, it was, I mean, it was a little shaky for a week, but I knew that. I had enough experience with the, you know, star-stop, star-stop, you know, for, but bungee errors. So I, I knew, you know, what, what that path in front of him was going to look like, but it was, it was a really short path. Really? Yeah, I knew it wasn't going to be, you know, a long walk into the, you know, the end of the forest. No, it was like, it was like from here to the, that park bench right over there, you know, yeah. And I just, I just rewrote, I, I wouldn't commit to the same stories I'd been told to worship for so long. I said, I'm going to rewrite everything about this. What was the stories you've been told to worship? Hi, just the stuff in the, you know, in and around the rooms of AA that, you know, you're being did before. Yeah, I combined 21 years. What? Yeah. So it isn't a guy that just did a few meetings and why not? It doesn't work for him. It's a guy that really committed to it and did the steps like a bunch of dumb. You did? Yeah. Absolutely. I sponsored people. I was, I was deep into it. And, but, um, but it never felt like it was celebrating the victories. It was always, um, making everybody, just in my experience, yeah, making me rather be prepared for impending doom for the ultimate disaster that they have, I was always on a collision course with, you know, that it's long as you've got something some, um, um, you know, some disease on board that is, that is ultimately going to control your behavior. Um, I couldn't, I couldn't, I couldn't subscribe to that any, any longer. I couldn't do it because add to that that subsequently, you know, I have a legitimate disease on board that is life threatening. And, you know, I take medicine every day and it's not life threatening. It's as manageable as, as diabetes, right? Yes. But, but I mean, then the doctor said, if you don't take this medicine, you'll die. And that's not something that's not like you don't, um, there's no other version of that conversation, you know, that is, that's, that's undebatable, right? So you just, you follow that protocol and stay alive and live, you know, that happy healthy fulfilling life, right? Yes. But AA says, um, you know, you get some of the disease on board. If you don't go to these meetings every day or make that a party of your, of your, of your regular, you know, your, your, your curriculum, you know, um, then what, what, what's in you will, will kill you. So I took the pills, I'm alive, didn't go to a single meeting and I'm coming up on eight years. That's a, that's a, that's a, I'm just a rare example of a guy that that understands the, the, the, you know, the physiological reality of a disease you can see under a freaking microscope versus one that I think was born out of necessity to keep people aligned, uh, through fear. You know, and I'm going to get yelled at by a lot of people, but it's all in the book. Here's something you may not have known back in 2015, the Congress of the United States repealed something called the country of origin, labeling act. Now, why is this relevant to you? Well, it means among other things that when you buy beef at the supermarket that says made in the USA, it may not actually be. In fact, it could be, likely is from a foreign country. It means that repackaging foreign meat can be enough to get the made in USA designation. It's a lie. It's an absolute lie. Most people don't even know what's happening. So how can you be sure that the meat you're eating is from the United States and has been raised with the highest quality standards? And as the tastiest is truly made here. Well, it's simple. You can go to our friends at Maryweather Farms. Maryweather Farms is an American small business. It's based in Riverton, Wyoming. We know that people run it and they're great people, and they have great meat. They ship the highest quality meat raised free from growth hormones and antibiotics directly to your doorstep. It's delicious. We eat it a lot, including at this table. These are Americans. These are American made products. They're the real deal. Again, we eat that meat at this table from Riverton, Wyoming. They're the best. Maryweather Farms.com used the discount Tucker 10. And you get an extra 10% off. Again, that's Maryweather Farms, M-E-R-I-W-E-T-H-E-R, farms.com. It's worth it. It's interesting. I didn't get so worth A.A. either. And I always felt like I wanted to de-emphasize that part of me. Like why would I want to marinate in ugly things? Right. Don't want to stay positive. And forward looking, I like the A meetings I've been to abroad, other people too, really. I like the honesty and camaraderie of it. But I do think you're making a point that's impossible to ignore. You don't want to focus on, it's not healthy to focus on the downside all the time. No. And that's what you're reminded of. And it's drilled in any time you step in. And then if there's slogan is keep coming back, that's implies that you're going to be coming back because something else has taken control. And it was and it's what they call a no fault disease. It's just that it went bad again and it's not my fault. Well, I always felt it was all my problems have all been my fault. I'll put percent my fault. Likewise. Likewise. Thank you. Otherwise, it's like nothing to apologize for. Right. Yeah. Yeah. No, I just I never felt I never felt celebrated there. I always felt there was just a weird air of suspicion and expectation. Yeah, I don't miss it. I don't miss it. And you know, I didn't I didn't put down the bottle to then, you know, close all the bars or or, you know, convince others that this has to be their path as well. It didn't. It's not, you know, I got a guy quit drinking to to live in the real world. Yeah. Happily and successfully, you know, and like you on that. Yeah, there's a, there's a bar right behind you that I've never touched. But I like bars. I do take drunkenness, but I love bars. Yeah. Yeah. No, there's there's an energy and a bar you can't find totally everywhere else. Yeah. And in fact, in the decline of bars in the United States mirrors a kind of societal collapse where no one is with anyone else. I mean, again, I'm a sober person. I don't like I don't drink. I would never drink. I hate alcohol. However, I love the idea of people getting together and laughing and telling vulgar jokes and like hugging each other in sloppy ways. Like, that's a bar. I like that. Yeah. I already watched the big game 100%. Yeah. And like that's actually died. People have gotten less sober, but the same time everyone's on something. It's like to me. But there are no bars. Nobody goes to the bar. It's that's going away. I think so. I mean, a little bit cut off, but I it does feel that way. Interesting. Interesting. I mean, do you know, people like go to the bar, do you know anyone who picks up members of the opposite sex in a bar? I know when it's shared a story like that in recent memory. Exactly. Yeah. Interesting. So I'm not like endorsing, you know, bar hookups or whatever, but as compared to what? Like, I don't know. It's important for people to be together. That's all I'm saying. My agree. And that was a place to do it, which I always liked. But I, but I have to add that, you know, anyone that's doing a successfully and it's a part of their life and it's the reason that they can have the life that was given back to them or that they claimed, you know, reclaimed, then absolutely wonderful. Yeah. So many people. Sure. I completely agree with that. I mean, I'm always talking up a though. I don't know, not an a guy, but I, but no, I think you're making an important which is you don't want to alcohols the center of your life when you're addicted to it. And the goal is to make it not the center of your life. Right. Right. So I've always felt, I don't want to think about alcohol actually. I don't either. I don't either. If I'm, yeah, I thought about it a lot. I was drinking. I know. I was drinking. And I don't, I dis this idea that you have to identify as an alcohol. I agree. And it's like, how is someone still on alcohol? Like that, even though the guy doesn't, hasn't had a drink in 20 years. Right. I'd much rather be identified as a father or something matters to me. Yeah. There, there was a guy in one of our private groups. And I can't say who. Yeah. Super famous. Great dude. And he would, I dent, they go around the room. Hi, Dave, alcoholic Charlie alcoholic. And if you would get to him, I'm so and so human being. And he refused. And they were like, well, that's not how we do it here, man. He's like, you're not allowed to be a human being here. And like, no, of course you are, but it's important to identify with your disease. And he's like, I have no first and foremost, I'm here on earth because I'm a human being. Right. And in this room, I'm a human being. And I'm here to address some issues that I have. But I'm not, I'm not going to, just reduce myself to a label. And I was like, that guy. Yeah. Did he stay sober? I think so. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. An A meeting in Hollywood must be wild. It's awful. Why? It's awful because it's not just about that. And that second A is just that's they, they honor that as, you know, as little as possible. Oh, is that true? Yeah. No, it's hey, I heard you're at the sundowners meeting at, you know, fifth and Broadway or whatever. And it's like, yeah, but I went there because was supposed to be anonymous. Second A. Yeah. And yeah, there's a lot of, you know, people that want to give you a script. Actually, yeah, or want to hit on your girlfriend or just creepy stuff that you're not going to get at home alone watching a ballgame, you know. Oh, that's kind of, yeah. There was an element there that was just never felt just like scevy at times. And there were other meetings that were like, okay, all right, this makes sense. Cool. I like these people. And then at some point it turns. At some point it turns. And that's that this is just my experience. Wow. So you said when you did that interview, lots of people judge, you lost people schooled to you and you go on a tour and you bomb the first night, people judging and scolding you. Who were the people who were kind to you throughout all of the dark moments that you had? Family. Yeah. You know, you're close to your family. I was interested. Yeah. Max Wimes. Really? Oh, yeah. Yeah. They were very supportive. Really. Yeah. How'd you do that? Because, you know, kids with both of them, except for my first wife, Donna, but with broken Denise, yeah, so, you know, we decided early on, you know, after the after the splits that you know, our, our stuff is incidental is secondary. It's a high there. It's, it's, it's about the kids, you know, we have to have a children first north star, you know, yeah, lots of people set that goal. Yeah. And I'm saying that yeah, it would even run through pics and valleys, but, but when it's good and is good today, no, they're, they're really supportive. Really? Yeah. The whole time. 80% of the time. That's amazing. 70% of the time. Yeah. I'll take it. I'll take it. So, but your and your family was kind of do the whole the whole way. Yeah. Yeah. They, you know, they're a guy with my kind of history and, you know, the, the, um, you know, not, not so much a chronic relapsure, but a guy that would get some time and then just blow it all up. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, you know, it's the, it's the trust thing that you can't, you can't get back in a day or a week, yeah, months. And so, when I, when I decided to do was not make the big announcement, not say I've quit drinking everybody and they're going, here we go again, right? Yeah. And I was just going to just do it. And then as soon as someone made a comment about, Hey, you're looking like a little, you look clear. You look, you look content. Yeah. So, as I started hearing stuff like that, I would then volunteer the, the, the, changes I've made. You know, the soft branch. Okay. I like that. I like that. You don't do the media tour. You just start doing it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Much more effective. Much more effective. I think it's down the pressure. Yeah. A little bit. Do you think where people, like your work peers supportive, any, um, will, nice to you. I guess that's what I mean. You mean, like former work peers? Yeah. You know, people outside your family who you know, yeah, absolutely. So, you, they're loyal people. Yes. That's what I mean. Yeah. Because I didn't really, you haven't had the big job in, in, in, like this time, which is fine, which is actually probably better, which is good that I had all this time to gain some perspective and, and just work on myself and and be like a responsible, available father to all these kids, you know, and grandkids. How many kids do you have? Uh, five and three grandkids. It's amazing. It's pretty cool. Yeah. You're a biblical patriarch. Thank you. How about that? Is it like I'm always, I always wonder about, you know, the studios, the manager, the agent, even the account, the lawyer, you know, all the people around actors and in related businesses. And like, they have kind of a mixed incentive, like they, you know, you're not doing well, but they want to keep you working sort of like the athlete who gets, you know, the Novocaine rather than the surgery. Sure. Because he's got to play the game. Do you feel like they, any of them actually try to help, or they just kind of want to keep the money coming? In that, in that extreme example that I lived through, I think there was, there was a, a want to help from, from specific individuals. I don't think they knew how, or that I was, I was reachable enough to receive it. Yes. You know, so I think they had to kind of decide. Is it, is it, you know, kind of like, you know, weighing the pros and the cons, is he going to be at least, if he goes back to work, is that enough of a full-time thing with distractions and responsibilities that that that that will be deterrent enough, you know, or have we sent him just back into the lines then, right, just covered in fresh blood, you know. So yeah, I probably, I don't think I was ready to go back to work on anger management on the show about a year after the whole two and a half disaster. Right. And I don't think that was advisable. However, it's still, it, it comes down to me giving that final. Yes, I'll do this. So I do, I have to own that, that part. Well, yeah, you see, you said there were threads throughout this whole experience. Times, the timing of certain events that made you think there was a supernatural quality here. I mean, did you, how would you identify as that God? Like, what is that? Yeah, it's interesting. I got to ask this with Bill Marr and just last year. Oh, Marr asked you about God. Yeah, he did. Yeah. Really, what world is this? What is happening? Bill Marr is asking you about God. We. Bill Maher just last year. We asked you about God. Yeah, he did. Yeah. Really, what world is this? What is happening? Bill Maher is asking you about God. We had a brand new age. Yeah. No, and I wasn't happy with my answer. All right. Well, now you have a chance to realize that. Yeah, I just, most days I don't know what else to call it. That's what I should have said in that moment. Most days I don't have a better word or anything else for it. It is exactly that. And just whatever my interpretation of that is. But yeah, it just kind of caught me off guard. And yeah, I should have just leaned right into it. And I did a little bit of a tap dance. It's kind of weird. I mean, we're about the same age. Didn't grow up in a world where people talked about God at all. Right. Did you? No. Well, my dad devout Catholic growing up. And rather than that, he always let us know that that was his personal journey. And we were welcome to climb on board, but it wasn't anything that he was going to mandate. And so we did have exposure to it in our house, our entire life. Really? Yeah. Yeah. And it never... What did you think? I didn't... I saw some... I saw a lot of goodness with it. I saw other stuff I didn't want to align with. Yeah. And yeah, it's... I was talking to Lexi just yesterday, you know, some days I'm all in. I'm like, okay, then, sure. Well, can I describe it better? Do I have a better prediction? Yeah. And there's other days, I'm like, man, I don't know. I don't know. You know, so not... People will read the book and, you know, there's not a chance they say, like, guys, an atheist. Right. But there is a chance they go, oh, he's curious. He doesn't quite... He hasn't fully figured it out or... So you're God curious, you would say? Yeah, sure. Yeah. And then I don't think that's... And that's not me just wanting to say that in your presence. That's me having time to... In my presence, so... Well, because, you know, right, just to... I don't know. I mean, I'm hardly an authority on the subject. No, and I understand what it means to you. It's come to me now. Yeah, I mean, again, things are changing so fast and I don't have the answers to most questions, but I definitely have become convinced that God's real first year. Yeah, no, that's inspiring to see that level of acceptance. Well, don't you feel... What kind of... I do, but there's still... There's a part of me that, you know, you just still wants to be a science snob. I get it. Yeah. Because you were... For the last time. My whole life. Yeah, I mean, I'm not... I was always pro things about it. I like, but I mean, I would... I don't think I would ever say in public, I know God's real. Right. Because that's like freaky and also there are cultural connotations attached that are just different from the culture that I grew up in, like, really different. So, you know, it just sounded kind of phony or not really like me or whatever, but then things change so much in the world and I saw all this stuff and I blew my mind and I was like, wow, God is real. I can't believe this. And then when you say it, you're like, actually, that's not crazy. Everyone's always thought that. I can't believe I was like embarrassed to say that. So then once... I do think that once you say it, something in new changes, that's been my experience, not that I have a ton of experience or would feel qualified to give advice to anyone I certainly don't. Sure. Yeah. I don't want to get there and be wrong. You know what I mean? Yeah, well, you don't. There's the thing. I don't think there's the thing, but isn't there some... Aren't you allowed to wait until the last minute? I think once... You know, it's just... It's kind of like a lot of things you arrive in a place and they're like, yeah, wait, I've always known this. Interesting. I've always felt this and it's totally what I thought. You do occasionally feel that way, but things worse. Yes. No, I'm not controlling any part of all this. Right. That I know for a fact. Right. So, and it doesn't have the feeling of randomness, does it? Now, now there's too many signs. Now things are coincidences. Exactly. Yes, it's everything's connected. Exactly. And people are connected. Yeah. And how do you explain deja vu? Well, you kind of can't and then you realize that actually the real religious nuts or the science knobs were sort of desperately back-filling against the evidence. Like, well, what does that mean? We'll shut up. That's just like... So desperate to cling to something that is just absurd. I'm not saying that the physical world can't be measured in a lab, of course, it can. Right. And I'm grateful for that. And I'm grateful for it's byproducts. I don't know. Automobiles in penicillin. But I'm not against science. But the idea that science explains everything is itself a religion and really kind of the dumbest religion ever concocted. Interesting. And the people who espouse it know that it's dumb. And that's why they're so brittle and so given to lecturing you about it. There's no Mormon missionary who's ever been judgeier or more persistent than Tony Fauci. Trust the science. Wow. Does any Christian ever say that? Trust the religion. Not that I've ever had you. Not that I've ever had you. Or a heart too. Yeah. Yeah. The science religious wackos believe in conversion by the sword. Like, do we say we'll hurt you. That's not a religion I want to be anywhere. Me neither. No, no, that's bad. It doesn't sound loving. No, it doesn't sound forgiving. No, it sounds dangerous. Yeah, definitely. It does. It sounds kind of like al-Qaeda a little bit. So I just think in it's sad because who acts like that? Only people who know they're wrong acts like that. Interesting. Yeah. Right? Yeah. Yeah. There's actually a line in the book that I don't know where I read this or heard this, but somebody smarter than me described science as an ongoing historical series of corrected mistakes. Exactly. How about that? Yes. Yeah. It's just kind of institutional. It's a method for satisfying curiosity and understanding the physical world. And I'm totally for that. Completely for that. It's hard is skepticism and an acknowledgement that you don't know the answers to the most obvious questions. And so keep trying to find the answers. Sure. I'm 100% in favor of all that. Of course, but what has become is the medieval church, brittle, rigid, punitive, stupid, laughable. And the second you describe it with no emotion, any normal person's like, well, that's insane. I don't want to be part of that. Right? Yeah. Yes. Yeah. And, but I'm not going to try to solve the unsolvable. Right. And I'm fine being completely mystified by it. Well, that's the beginning of wisdom. You know, it's to be made. Yeah. Right. Because you're admitting you're not all knowing. No. Yeah. And yeah, for sure. Not all knowing. Well, speaking of mysteries, how did you wind up knowing Alex Jones? I don't know. I don't know what I know, I know, I'm Jones. He, this is early videos. It was his early documentaries. It was the stuff he produced himself like on VHS. How could you have seen that? I, I see it originally. You're like in Los Angeles making movies. Yeah. It's wild. I've always been a guy that likes to just needs to pick behind the curtain. Always been a guy that's done my own research. Always been a guy that just never not always satisfied with the official. About anything. Good. And, you know, and I, you know, I create fiction for a living. Yes. Pretty good. It's spotting it. Um, in, in. Oh, I just want to pause on that. I create fiction for a living. I'm pretty good at spotting it. Yeah. It's a good quote. Right. It's a great quote. It's true. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. Um, and so, you know, dad played both Kennedys. You know, when we were growing up. So we had access to JFK stuff that wasn't in the public sphere. Documentaries and, and, you know, on editors of Prudar stuff. And so we were, you know, I talked with, with, with Robin about this a little bit last week. And we were, you know, so we, we've always had a, we just raised to, um, yeah, you know, take, take a deeper dive. Um, look at things just with a more, just polished through a more polished lens, you know, or skeptical lens. And so, um, yeah, I, I, you know, be it, uh, JFK for 911 or Oak City or Columbine. We just did 911 doc. And it was an amazing experience for me to be involved in this because I not only bought the 911 story. I was very resistant to anyone who questioned it. Is it felt like disrespectful or desecrating the cra- I don't know why I had that incredibly embarrassing. Um, not at all noble reaction to people's honest questions about 911. So it took me a long time to, uh, want to rethink it. And then once you do, you realize like it's just tissue of lies. At what point did you start asking questions about it? Um, oh, four, oh, five, uh, whenever loose change dropped. Yeah. That was the first. Well, no, actually on the day, really on the day. Yeah, there were things, um, Emilie and I had it because everybody like rushed to Malibu. We were like in the city. I was in a high ride. I didn't know how far this thing reached. You know, like everybody just had to get the big get back to the folks house. Like, you know, let's reassemble at base camp, you know. And Emilie when I went out on the deck and I said, you know, man, you're parents. Yeah. Yeah. And I said, there's something about the way that building came down. I'm just, I don't know. And, and you know, by that point, we had seen different angles of it. And it was really, um, it was, you know, there was, there was a lot of content to digest, you know, horrific content on ad. Um, and we just, yeah. And then I just thought now, because that would entail. Of course, right. All of these things. You just shut it down and you have. Yeah. We talked each other out of it because that would entail. Right. It's interesting though that two guys in the business of like manufacturing images would focus on that image and say that or something about that. Right. Right. And so I kind of just let it, I let it, you know, just didn't, didn't go near it. Yeah. And then, um, you know, it led to what it led to. Um, the whole world was different. Yeah. It never returned to what it was. Yeah. It really hasn't. No, there's, there's pre and there's post. Yes. Um, and then I watched that documentary. I, I, I'd been, you know, a fan of Alex's early stuff. You know, um, and that's, you know, just him. So you knew who he was on the 11th. Yeah. How. How did I? He's my friend. I would mean no disrespect. I love him. He's come short in a month. But I'd never heard of Alex Jones on 9 11. And I was in the news business. I don't know how would you have heard of him. That's amazing. Um, just, you know, spending time like in those, on those research channels and in, in that part of the, um, you know, those subjects, you know, it's interesting that you, so you have long felt like you want to look at other sources of information. Of course. Yeah. And then, um, you know, other people, did you know other people around 9 11 who already were thinking like this, like maybe reality as presented to us is not entirely real. Um, the people would believe things only so far. Yes. And so I would back off and I say, you know what, we're just going to, we're just going to focus on two things. We're just, just two things. And if you can explain those, I will, I will, I will, I, I'll submit to the official story. I'll just say, all right, fine. However, you, however, you say it had to play out. I'm in, right? And I was able to explain these anomalies. Yeah. Building seven in the Pentagon. Yeah. Just help me out there. You know, I've got to believe that the Pentagon is the most protected and documented, you know, sort of video protected, surveilled, building in history in the known universe, right? Turns out not. Well, I'm saying one, we just have one video from the parking parking kiosk. Yeah. Yeah. So that's, that's the thing. And then, and then that is weird. Yeah. Yeah. And then building seven, it just, you can't, you just can't. You can't watch that and say that is the result of a fire that burned for five hours on two floors. You can't sell that to me. And, and, and, and, you know, that for years that was always met with that is disrespecting the victims. I don't like, I don't, okay, how, how was that disrespecting the fallen heroes? How if you're just looking for the truth behind what is clearly not what, how, how it was explained, clearly. I mean, that's three year old to look at that and know, you know, that looked like that hotel in Vegas that we watched them, them bring down intentionally, you know. So that's how I met Alex was reaching trust your eyes. You've always trusted your own perceptions. Yeah. And, but I did this in the middle of two and a half at its peak decided to, to be vocal about 9-11. And that we're going to do it. They're like, oh my gosh, there's actually a commercial because one of the advantages we had with that show, emotionally was the NFL. Because we were a Monday show all of Sunday, all the CBS football games on Sunday were just, you know, every 20 minutes. It's a commercial for us. And that is like a built in thing to keep the ratings of the man toward the eyes and all of it. Yeah. And it was a lot of great. It was the best tool you could possibly have. So they made a commercial like a promo and it's probably on YouTube somewhere. Someone out there is going to find it right. And it opens with Charlie has a lot of questions. And then my character would be, hey, Allen, you know, where'd you hide the beer? Hey, mom, where'd I leave my car? Charlie's really curious. Hey, yeah, you know, is that is that is that it's at a silk bra or is that polyester? Whatever like actual lines from the show to support Charlie's curiosity, Charlie Harper, right? Yeah. But Charlie in the world, like going into places that on a corporate level with a giant hit show, your lead actor is not supposed to be doing. So they tried to make it kind of like, hey, he's doing these things, but don't worry. He's still, he's still in our world doing them. You know, they just it was it was kind of a brilliant piece of propaganda. If he's thinking about it, right? I was just thinking that it's a general move. You take the energy and you pull it near direct right? Yeah. And I remember watching it and I was flattered that they like put all that energy into this thing that I'm sure was upsetting a lot of people. And I never saw it again. Did they ever say anything to you directly about your questions by 911? Kind of, but not really things like maybe it's not the best time to be doing this kind of research kid. Maybe, you know, take a little pause for the cause. Yeah, it was and yeah, they they, but they didn't like, you know, show up at my house. Right. Like they did for, you know, going crazy on dope. I already got a stostering on. But yeah, they were nervous. And so, and I did pull it back. I did organize this symposium in LA though. It's a three day event called a weekend of truth. Alex Jones is the key speaker in the middle of two and a half. Seriously? Yeah, I did. Yeah. Yeah. Did you feel that your job was at risk? Am I doing that? I thought the other stuff was more important than then my job. Really? Yeah. No, I it's just how many lead actress on hit shows put anything above their job. Um, cult of one. Yeah, none. None. Well, dad, my dad has at times gone heavily against a grain in the face of, you know, the same type of pressure. Yes. Um, but yeah, no, that was. And then, um, when Alex and I got together and. You know, send them an email. I told you about. Yeah, yeah. And my last line was zero hours upon us. So just for people who weren't at breakfast here. Yeah, you said that you saw something he did. And you just emailed him. Cult. I did. I said, I like some of fan for years. Perhaps you've heard of me. I said, uh, we have to talk zero hours upon us. Any, any called in 10 minutes. Amazing. Yeah. And then fled to see you. Yeah. Yeah. And then we thought, okay, let's build a secret weapon. Let's do something that like, uh, is unique and, and, and, and, uh, you know, let's do something within, in the media. Let's use the media to try to, um, I guess this would have been. Oh seven, oh eight. Yes. So we got together and we wrote this piece called 20 minutes with the president. And what it was, it was a fictional, um, uh, retelling of this 20 minutes. I was granted by Obama. And it was me sitting down with him, um, asking him 20 questions about 9, 11. And, and asking him that, that he based on, on these, this, that irrefutable bullet points that, that if, if he would consider activating, you know, reopening, um, a new 9 11 commission. And we put it online. And this was, you didn't actually get 20 minutes with Obama to ask. No, it was all made up. It was all made up. But the research that Alex and I, um, dug into that, that we, that we, because we, you know, we, we, we, we could have been 100. Uh, it could have been 100 question, could have been 100 minutes with the president. And, um, we, we, we drilled down into the 20 things that were really bullet proof, really bullet proof. And so, uh, we, we published it online. And, and we let it kind of marinate for about 20 minutes before we added, um, the following, um, it has, has, has not taken, didn't actually take place. But we're hoping one day that it, that it could or that it might or so we did let kind of that hysteria build a little bit that people thought holy hell man did sheen and Obama. They, they write the good thing actually happened. And, because we didn't want to prejudice it with it being, you know, a work of fiction right from send. And, uh, it was a little bit of, of a manipulation. Um, but so what? All right. I mean, did anyone from the Obama White House reach out to you? There's a guy, um, he was the deputy press secretary. His name is Bill something. Um, and Burton. Yes. Yeah. He called me. I got the memory. Well done. Thank you. Yeah. Cause I knew his name was the same two initials. Yeah. He called me. And I said, uh, how's it, yeah. Uh, thank, thank you. And he's like, yeah, that, that, that, that thing that you and your buddy wrote, uh, that, that, that, that, that meeting you're looking for, never going to happen. Those were his words. Never going to happen. I said, well, that's a shame. Cause it really should. And he said, okay. All right. Good luck to you. Have a nice day. It was like a 14 second phone call. Yeah. But anyways, so yeah. And I guess in then Alex said, look, when this thing goes out, they're not going to debate any of it. Cause we, you know, we told, uh, it was Bill O'Reilly, it was her old Rivera. We said, well, we'll sit down and debate you just on these 20 things. And nobody bit. And Alex said, look, they're just going to call you. Nobody bit. No. Nobody, nobody, nobody took the challenge. And you're at the height of the show's popularity. Yeah. Nobody took the debate challenge. You're one of the most famous actors in the world. And you're offering talk show hosts the opportunity to be on their show. Right. And they talk about something that is really interesting and controversial. And they say, no, they said, no, yeah. What do you think? Now what do you think that is Charlie Sheen? That's a little weird. It's a little weird. Having been in the talk show business. I can promise you. Yeah. It was usually called me, man. I would have done it in a second. Yeah. Well, I probably scolded you for your ridiculous questions, but I still would have done it. Right. Yeah. Um, our, our disrespecting of memory of the victims. Yeah. Yeah. Finally, how dare we find out why they were murdered is disrespect. Right. No, I know it's insane. And I'm, I always forced myself to admit that I had these views because I want to be less judgmental toward other people and reminding yourself what an asshole you are is a really good way to be less judgmental. But also because it's like, it's a feature of human nature that we don't want to know the truth about things actually interesting. Don't you think that's true? What's clear that's true for you, but it has been true for me. I don't want to know. Right. I want to know that. What, what do, what do we then do with that, with that information? Trust me, I'm not defending that attitude at all. I'm ashamed that I had it, but I just think it's more calm. And I think of myself as like one of those open minded people, I know. I mean, I am very, very open minded. I'll entertain any possibility because I've seen so much that you cannot entertain any possibility. Right. But, um, if I have felt that way, that means that it's probably just how people are built and you have to convince them that they should know what's true. Sure. That the truth does matter actually. It does. It does. But Alex said they're just going to paint you as, as crazy. Well, of course. But, and, and, and I said, really, that's like they can't get more creative than that. This is no, and they're just going to call you crazy. And smash cut to like a week later and it was, it was literally his bill. Or Ali and it was her all though. And they just dismissed me in one sentence. Well, Charlie Sheen's obviously crazy. No. Yeah. Yeah. Someone can find that clip. I'm sure handmaidens to power. Wow. That is. Yeah. That is. Then I saw Bill Riley outside of, um, Dr. Oz one day. I saw him in the parking lot. And he was just over there. I guess he was the second gas. Or he'd already come out or something. And I started walking right off to him. He kind of a big dude, right? He's huge. Yeah. He's, he's not going to punch me. Are you? I said, no, I'm not stupid. I don't want to get my ass kicked. He's like, war. I said, I just came over to get your handshake. So I shake your hand. He was like, oh, oh, okay. Well, good to meet you. I said, nice to meet you. And he's like, yes, sorry about the dogs. I said, I don't care. I care. You know, I get it. Showbiz. It's what it said to him. It's showbiz. What did he say? He laughed. And then we both went in and had a pretty good episode with us. So, but it was a trip. He was like, he was on his heels a little bit. Yeah. He's not as comfortable with human contact. Yeah, that's pretty disgraceful on all of our parts. And I wouldn't, I don't think I would have called you crazy because objectively, it's not crazy to ask about what the greatest tragedy the American history happened. That's nothing. I didn't think it was not. And it's still not shutting people down for asking sincere questions is, you know, very hard to defend. I think. Yeah. Well, anyway, that that's Dale X Jones kind of origin story. Yeah, I just wish I could tell you where I actually acquired the videos and it had to have been online like mail order stuff. So you really cared. Yeah. Yeah. And he just, the stuff that I'd seen, he just was a guy that was just on the constant hunt for, for the truth and just, you know, for the right reasons. Yeah. It's not to exploit it, but to expose it and share it and do something about it. I think that's all noble. And I, and I think that of him, you know, and I think by the way, he's been vindicated on by time. I think I don't think quite as many people mock Alex Jones as crazy anymore at all. They can't. Yeah. That's exactly what he called 911. Really? Did you call 911? Yeah, I did. Yeah, I didn't. Nobody did. No one did that. Alex Jones. Yeah. So right there, we know that he's worth taking seriously. In fact, it's worth asking how did you do that? I've asked him many times never gotten a straight answer, but we know for a fact he did. It's documented. So that's incredible. My dad spent some time with him. Really? Yeah, because we asked dad to read the president role, because we wrote it like a play when it gets to the thing about the actual conversation that we have. And we wanted to hear it out loud to see if it sounded like legit exchanges of dialogue. And he was currently playing the president. Right? So he and I played the scene. And he both had big shows at the same time. Yeah, on the same lot. We'd visit each other like at lunch. No, not often because we were both super busy, but yeah, they overlap by I think two seasons may be free. A Warner, the Warner Brothers like yeah. And then so dad spent some time with Alex and any time he'd leave the room, dad was like, I don't know man, I think I think this guy's ex CIA. I think he's too smart. He knows everything. I think he's, I think he's got a background that. It's like this thing. Yeah. Yeah. Which was him complimenting Alex. Well, it is the way that people talk now. It was not the way people talk then. Right. So that's just that's interesting. I mean, now that just sounds like Twitter. Right. But then people took things at face value. Right. I mean, do you remember? Well, obviously you were in a different world. So how did other people in Hollywood react to the, so you're at no boo and Malibu? And you say, I don't really understand how Tower Seven came down. What do people say? It's not, it's, there's more resistance to it than alignment. Yeah. Yeah. Not not not not so much anymore. But at the time in that moment when, you know, it's like the lone voice out there, at least in my industry. But it was a lot of support from, you know, architects for truth, pilots for truth, all of those various associates. Actual experts, you mean those guys. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you're just reminding me. How did the Senate, if you get started to set up in the first place? I totally forgot about this. Like you wound up at this table this morning, because why? Because I saw a promo on somewhere on, online, not even on YouTube, that Sean Stone had directed a six part documentary called All the President's Man and the only place that it could be viewed was on your platform. Yes. So I, I signed up and I watched it all six episodes in one day. And so I signed up and I watched it all six episodes in one day. Wow. Yeah. And had to sit down and have a conversation with myself about just everything that it goes back. It was a gear I was familiar with because it was a downshift. It made sense because it goes back to a guy that does his own research. And I hadn't done my own research for so long. And I decided that when the second Trump victory that I was not going to allow myself to feel how I felt during the first one, I just wasn't going to do it because it just wasn't healthy for me. It didn't, it didn't, no part of my life got better feeling like that every single day being told who I was supposed to despise and why I was supposed to despise them. You know, when you were on that list. Yeah. And was that a despised list? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's, and so, you know, apologies. I'm, but I've been so despised for so long. This thing has gone. Yeah. No, but I watched that documentary and it just I, I now I was armed with some fresh data. Did you know Sean Stone? Yeah. No, no sense Wall Street. He plays Michael Douglas' tiny child in the movie. No way. So, I'm known as he was a child and then I reconnected with him as an adult. And we had talked about a project here there. He would write a script and send it to me. I mean, he's a good guy. He's a great guy. Really smart. Really texted me right now. Really, I know it's strange. Yeah. And so I, you know, I would read a script that he wrote and say it's not for me, but it's really good. You know, and then I didn't talk to him for a while and then saw that he'd done this and done it brilliantly. And so it just, it created a desire to just, you know, embark on what I can describe as an experiment, an experiment who just changed in the channel. You know, I was listening to the course of nonsense that, you know, in the, in the, another thing that, that Twilight Zone that I was stuck in for. And it's just so dumb. Funny thing is that Sean did that series. We didn't produce form at all. He came to us with the series. I think I'm actually in the series. Yeah. Yeah. So he came to my house and I, you know, sat for it and everything. And I, like, Sean, a lot of really like his, I know his dad and I admire his dad. I do agree with him on everything. But like, I think he's an honest guy and I think he's a brave guy. And he's, by the way, earned the right to have his opinions as far as I'm concerned. Yeah. Having dropped out of Yale to serve in the infantry during Vietnam. And like he's a good man, Oliver is anyway. But he, I don't think he could get it aired anywhere. Mm. That's the crazy interesting. Yeah. Right. Right. That the level of open mindedness in the world that he grew up in has just gone. There's just no open mindedness. It's like here's the story deviate from it. We'll kill you. Right. It's like it's crazy rigid. Do you feel that? I do. I do. Yeah. But it just really, it brought me to a place to continue with further research into some of these subjects, you know, and to, as I said, change the channel, you know, and, and, you know, like most experiments, the, the results are constantly evolving. Yeah. Right. But, but so far, I'm, I'm, I'm pretty happy with those results. It's kind of wild. You wind up talking to and agreeing with. Yeah. Isn't it? Oh, yeah. Also, if you're, if you're told to feel a certain way about someone because of this specific set of examples of reasons or whatever, and then you decide one day, you're, you're, you're going to investigate on your own. Oh, yes. And, and then you, you come to something that is the, that exact opposite of how you were told to feel. Oh, yes. Because you decided to, I don't know, be autonomous, maybe. Right. And, and just exercise. Lib is a free man. Yeah. There's that part. Yeah. It's been quite liberating. The distance between what you're told, someone is and what you discover when you spend time with the person is, it's really vast. I had that experience with all of our stone, I'll be honest. I mean, I always thought Oliver Stone was a coo, could conspiracy not. I was told to believe that I accepted it unpartically years later. I wind up at Oliver Stone's house in Los Angeles alone. Just mean Oliver Stone about something specific. I'm like, I can't believe I'm Oliver Stone's house. Like, wow, you know what I mean? That actually you've had this feeling? Sure. Maybe you have it right now. I'm having it right now. I am. So, sorry. And I'm like, and have been for the last hours. Yeah. So I'm like midway through this conversation with Oliver Stone. And I'm like, Oliver Stone is a really nice man. A courtly man. Very smart. Yeah. And has thought through everything that he's saying. And by the way, I agree with everything. I've heard him say, I don't agree with the things I've heard said about to him. Right. Like, those are bad. Sure. But what he's actually saying to me, I'm like, I completely agree with you. And also you're a decent person. And so I'm like, why did I? And then I really felt misled, I guess, is what I'm trying to say. Yeah. I have been lied to. And that's not the only case where I've been lied to. And right uncritically, except those lies. And so then you feel stung by that. Like, what you lied to me? Because you didn't want me to have this conversation. I don't know who I'm referring to when I say you, but like the media environment that I grew up in and that my views were formed in was dishonest, really dishonest and probably intentionally so. And probably part of the design was to prevent me from ever talking to people with whom I might share common ground because that would be a threat to the people lying to me. Of course. Yeah. Yeah. No, you're telling my story too. Well, it's just I wouldn't have had this experience if it weren't for my job. There, you know, the one upside is I can talk to a lot of people. You know, you can have people's phone numbers. You can call them. Sure. Why is he calling me? Okay, I'll take the call. Like you have the chance to actually meet people that you hear about. But I think for most people who have normal jobs, like how would they ever wind up at Oliver Stone? Sounds they wouldn't know. Right? So they would never know that they not only that he's a good guy and a worth listing to, but also that they've been lied to. They have no idea because they're never going to get that within a thousand yards of Oliver Stone or whatever. Right. Right. So the deception is really subtle, incredibly effective for, but it's, it's, you know, what it's taught me is just to go, just to, you know, trust going back to basics. Yes. And not until I have an experience with a person that, you know, that I can't rely on the opinions of others because of, you know, just how, you know, however they've chosen to see the world. Exactly. Or experienced the world. You got to spend the weekend in Moscow. That will make you as angry as you've ever been because not because, you know, I'm not rushing. I'm not moving to Moscow. I want to live in my country. I don't love Russia for some weird reason. I just, I was angry because I was like, this is nothing like I thought it was. I've never been here. It's very hard to get there. You're not going to go there by accident. You have to really try to get there. Probably won't even succeed. I did succeed. And I learned like, oh my gosh, they've been lying about this. And so then I tried to say, you know, we've been lied to about what it's actually like. You can make your own judgments with the politics and Putin and are you crane or whatever. It's totally up to you to decide what you think about that. But the physical reality of that city is undeniable to anyone who walks through it. And so I say this and it's like, shut up Putin's dude. She was like, no, no, no, I'm not defending Putin or maybe, you know, whatever. It's nothing to do with Putin. Look at the city. This is insane and you lied about it. And I'm mad at you. Shut up. It's like that will blow your mind. Don't go there. Okay. Yeah, because you don't, you don't need the aggravation. Okay. No, no, no, no, no trips flam there anytime soon. I was there in 94. Oh, when it was tough, right? Yeah. Yeah. And we shot it was bad. I mean, not the worst film, but it should have been a great film. And it wasn't it was a disappointment. It's called terminal velocity. The skydiving thing with Nastasia Kinsky and what was she like she was pretty cool. She was pretty cool. Yeah, she's sexy and fun and what happened to her. She's still around right? I mean, I don't know. I think she was dating Quincy Jones at the time. And so they, their relationship was a little bit bristly, you know? Yeah. So she'd be on the phone with him and her trailer and then she'd come out of the set and at times, you know, we're still carrying the tail end of that conversation into the scene. But I had a terrific time working with her. I hope she's doing well. So we went there just for like four days or myself, Chris McDonald. Yeah. Anyway, and I get to the airport and Chris and I have just on the way there. I mean, how long is that flight? Fourteen. Yeah. We're hammered. And I'm in the airport and there's a guy before I can even like find my bags who's not in my face screaming taxi taxi taxi taxi, right? And I don't need a taxi. I know there's a car waiting for me. I don't want to speak Russian, you know? And I'm like, I'm fine. I'm fine. No, no, it's like taxi taxi taxi taxi. And I'm just at some point it somehow got to fuck off. Right? I bet pretty quickly. No, it did about two minutes. I was trying to be patient, but I did say fuck off out loud. But it wasn't like fuck off. It was just fucking off. Fuck off, man. I just kind of threw it to the to the to the clouds. And I guess fuck off there means something a lot different than it means where I come from. And the guy lost this fucking mind. He's pretty tough here too. Yeah. I would say even in English. Right. But he he he started repeating it. Fuck off. Fuck off. Fuck off. And he tried to go. He tried to get to me. And so whoever with us had to get between the two of us and like keep this guy from like really doing some damage, you know, at the airport. Yeah. So I after that, I only saw the hotel and I saw the set where we shot and my trailer. That was it. Yeah. I was like, okay, this is the rules are a lot different. Well, 94 was kind of a famously low ab I think for. Right. Yeah. That's my Russian air flux. It kills. So you were you're on a media tour for the book and the doc and you were doing Rogan last week when Charlie Kirk was murdered. Yeah. You were actually in the middle of the interview. We were. Yeah. Yeah. And like we just had the bathroom break. I said to Joe, I said, I mean, is it cool? Can we pause so I can hit the hat? And he says, yeah, we can wrap it up pretty soon. And I said, well, let's just cover, let's just do a couple more minutes at the end to just cover one more thing. And then we can wrap it up. Like you got it. And then so they think the producer pauses. And as soon as he as soon as we're clear, he says, Joe, there's breaking news and it's and it's and it's really bad and it's everywhere and it's really bad. And Joe's no, he says, Joe, don't look at your phone. And Joe's like, tell me he's breaking news really bad and Joe says, what's going on? And he says, Charlie Kirkman shot, then he's clinging to life. And it was just it was suddenly everything was different for all the wrong reasons. It was just awful and awful. And then we like 30 seconds later, we go out into the lobby and one of his security guys says to Joe, he just died, Charlie's dead. And then it's went from bad to just as awful as it could have been. And it was I hate to say it felt surreal. Yeah. It always does. I don't want to be disrespectful. That's not just respect. That's the experience that every person has with something that shocking happens. He sit together and then we couldn't really get the details. And we went, we finally went up in the bathroom. And Joe said we need to talk about this on the air and I said, yes, we do. And so we came back on and then I guess what they've been playing a lot is us coming out of that moment. And for me, it was, it was, I immediately went to fatherless children, husbandless widow. And it was just that part of it breaks my heart. Yeah. And it's just and for what and for what. You know, I mean, I, I, I, I, I've been as mad and as in, in, in, in, in complete disagreement, is the absolute total, you know, nuclear frustration with people. And have never thought like, well, now this is, this has to be the next logical step. This is the thing that I now must do because of how they've made me feel with their words. It's just that that that's where we've arrived. It's where we're at, you know, if, if, if that's the case, we can't stay here. No, we can't. Um, and, um, what, what his wife said at his memorial, um, pretty powerful, you know, as a, as a, as a, as a, if you thought you were going to silence him with that, this will be my, my, my cries, my tears will be, will be the battle cry. Yes. That, that you'll hear around the world. It's not wrong. No, she's not wrong. That happened in the first hour. Yeah. Um, but yeah, you just take the politics out of it to take, take all of it out of it. And it's a, it's, it's, it's a father. Yes. That, you know, that loved his children and his family and his wife and just, you know, I mean, and was committed to, to the things that he, you know, was so passionate about. And all he asked people to do was, you know, just, just debate me, you know, and, and he set the example of showing up that prepared, you know, and, and challenging others to, to, to be equally as prepared, you know, and even if they weren't, even if they stumbled or fumbled or didn't, couldn't get their thoughts or, you know, didn't look the part or whatever. He never, he never demeaned, he never belittled. He never criticized. He didn't do any of that stuff. He wasn't there to make fun of people. He was, he was there to inspire. He was there to, you know, maybe just create just a, even just the tiniest little spark of something for someone to maybe feel something a different way and, and, and that cost him his life. Really? You don't want to live in that country where that happens. I mean, no. Um, and it does, you know, it makes people that are in the, you know, that, that have to be in the public for their professions, you know, it's like, do, you know, it did, I'm sure a lot of people are feeling that, you know, that there may be a little more censorship, you know, personal censorship, you know, yeah, like, whoa, that's, that's what the deep end looks like. Now I think I may better just stay in the kitty pool for a minute, you know, there's no question. Yeah. And, and like everything else bad, it divides people from each other. So all of a sudden, you know, people don't want to be near each other, you know, causes physical separation, right, which is a hell. That's what we do to prisoners. It's what we do to prisoners. Interesting. I think, yeah, you don't want to be shut in alone. No, that's the worst thing. And this just divides, it makes people suspicious, makes them think their neighbor, everything about it is evil. And, um, I think it's just important to say that. All right. So I want to end, and I never do this, but I just really believe in it. Uh, I want to end on a product testing moment. Amazing. I want to do that because as noted, you know, I don't drink. And I'm happy with that. And I've discovered a product called athletic non alcoholic beer, which has convinced me that non alcoholic beer can be amazing. I discovered the same product. Athletic. So I just, there was such a stigma, you know, 23 years sober. I never had it on alcoholic beer because I'm straight. And then they sent me this and I was like, wow, that's incredible. Just the taste. So now I'm like all about non alkal, sure. Like the greatest thing ever. And it doesn't make you as fat as other things that I like actually. Right. Right. Yeah. For sure. Not. Yeah. And, um, so you have a non alcoholic beer. I do. I do. And I'm not a spokesperson for this. I'm a co-founder and a consumer. I assume. Yes. Yeah. Because, um, you know, quitting, you know, booze eight years ago, that, um, you know, I always love beer, still like beer. And you know, tried like, like you did pretty much all the non-alics that were out there. Um, and I'm not here to shit on any of them. But they taste like you're in a lot of them. Not that I would know. But, um, but, but the good ones are, are, are good. They're not for me. They're not great. And I thought, well, how can I, how can I affect this? How can I, you know, how, how can I make this better? Not just for myself, but for the world at large, you know? Yeah. And so, um, I aligned with, with, with, with three companies, but in, in partnership with, uh, silent spirits with Ryan Perry, who's the gentleman who's with me today. Yeah. Great guy. Um, with the, um, our brewery partner is harpoon at a Boston. Wow. And our distribution is, uh, is, uh, zero proof. Yeah. Um, but unlike, you know, just being like invited into a, a, a, a finished product and being the pitch man, which would be the normal thing for celebrity to do or sorry, an actor, right? Um, I, I've, I've been working on this as long and as passionately as I have, um, with, with the, with the book and the doc. And it was interesting because kind of the mantra in my house, like my kids and excited about the things I was doing. It was always, it was always book doc beer, book doc beer. These three things were happening at the same time and were, and we're evolving at the same pace. And then we didn't, we didn't realize until, um, this tour actually started that we got to a place where we can start taking orders like first week of October and shipping, uh, through e-commerce, uh, a couple of weeks after that. So this isn't like because it has no ethanol, you can ship it. Exactly. Yes. And this is something that I was, um, I was in on the development of this and in on every stage of building the recipe. And I'm not a beer expert. I'm an expert on what I like and what I know to be, you know, the, the, the different levels of quality, you know, um, so, so, and they were, they were really relying on me as not just a co-founder, but a consumer, you know, and it's, it's, that there's another thing that's kind of cool is that, um, just during this, this eight years, the amount of people that I'll see at a restaurant or a ball game or, or just on the street, they'll come up and say, man, I, I, I, I always wanted to have a drink with you. And, you know, I'm glad that you're sober, but I'm sad that that, that we can't do that. Now we can. I love that. Now we can have a drink. I feel that way. And so I'm going to taste it. Okay. Cool. This is wild AF. I guess you can fill in the acronym as you so desire, alcohol free or whatever that might stand for. All right. Now you can tell I've been off my game all because I totally screwed up the head. It's all right. Some of this can be some, there's going to be some foam slurping. That's right. That's all right. That's all right. I'm barely German. So that's great. Thank you. It's excellent. Thank you. Um, one, that's just tastes like beer. Well, it is beer. Yeah. It's actual. No, I mean, it's, it's actual beer just without the alcohol, you know? So what you realize when you have it is that an eye drink beer, you know, in the morning for years and really enjoyed it. But it was the alcohol that I was looking for, but it was also the alcohol that made it not that great. Right. Right. So when you take the alcohol out, the hops really come to the fore. Sure. And hops are just an amazing plant kind of a strange. I think they're relative of cannabis actually, which I don't smoke, but still aren't they? Hop's related to things. So Marahuna. Yeah. Well, whatever it is, they have this really flowery, interesting taste that's a little bit biting that offsets the inherent sweetness of them all. But they're kind of like overwhelmed by the ethanol and the normal beer, but they come out in this. Do you feel that? I do. I do. And, um, it's, you know, it's a, it's a craft logger. Yeah. What I, the model that I was urging, you know, not to get deep into the science of it, but please do. Well, I don't have the, I don't know the science. Just make it up. Oh, no, I was like, you know, you're using nuclear technology for the first time ever in the brewery process. That's what we're doing. Yeah. No, it's just like, you know, what, what like our target is, you know, like what's, what's a great beer that is commonly served at a ball game, you know, and I want, I want something that, that, that, that, you know, that, not, not mirrors that. Obviously it clips is that is more, it feels a little, just a little more, a little more full. Yeah. Full. Yeah. You know, um, and you'll not fit watery. Can we give it this manual test? What is it? Oh, the manual test. I'm just going to let them, I've got my spaniel square and I'm going to let them. Okay. So I'll go. Yeah. Yeah. It didn't did it. Yeah. She's gonna pass her a fail. No, no, that's a full pass. Now this is a legit groust dog. Okay. We want yesterday. Um, she's got an amazing nose and if this dog doesn't like something, it's immediately obvious. Oh, no, she liked it. Okay, good. Good. I have an ink as God knows where that tongue has been. Exactly. And also, um, you know, there's obviously a tie in with wild, with wild thing. That's why the badge is the, is the profile of of that character, which is kind of cool. But wild can also be, you know, connected to how people perceive me for so long. Why do they perceive you that way? Do you think? I mean, the little Charlie Sheen joke there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The, the universe of evidence perhaps. Yeah. Um, which fairly overwhelming. There wasn't much debate about that. Yeah. Exactly. Um, but yeah, it's, uh, it's, it's alcohol free. It's as, so when you drink this in the morning, you feel no guilt at all. None. None. Cause I got to be honest. I'm not, I legit enjoyed beer in the morning. I mean, it's just a, I did too. Yeah. I did too. For sure. Yeah. Yeah. But this is, this is a way to get your breakfast beer in with no downside. Exactly. Yeah. And I started drinking it and all I had to work with for the longest time was, was the prototypes. But they would send it to me as it kept evolving. And I was, uh, drinking it during workouts. What were the other people present thinking I wonder. There's Charlie Sheen. He's drinking beer during a workout. Why is he like a tiger blood thing? I was working out in my bedroom alone. Yeah. It wasn't like an gym. But I heard somewhere years ago that the German weightlifters used to chug beer. Of course. To get all the carbs and stay. First word. There did. I mean, oh, you did. Yeah. Okay. That famous movie of him from the 70s. He's like drinking and Chinese dining. You're pumping iron. Yeah. Wow. Okay. Okay. Yeah. So I just do it on a, on a rower. Actually on a rower. Yeah. I'm like an herb thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Not wall. I don't know if that and put it online. I mean, I didn't. I don't. I don't. I, I, I try to shoot a little bedroom video as possible. You know, this is the new Charlie. No. Um, but no, I, I, I think people are going to really, really respond to this. Well, I already have. Oh, good. So has my dog. So anyway, Charlie, she didn't thank you for taking all this time. This is amazing. It's been great. Yeah. No, it's, it's an honor to be here. It's an honor to have you. Thank you very much. Awesome. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a moral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.