You tried the other day to raise science-based questions about 9-11 and you asked a building 7 was never hit by a plane. Why did it fall down in exactly the same way the first two towers did? 156 witnesses, first responders saying they heard explosions before the buildings came down. There was never a steel building that ever collapsed because of a fire. The vaccine injured. So these would be American citizens who obeyed their government and took a shot that they were required to take. And then we're injured by or killed by that shot. Two date worldwide. There's over 38,000 deaths associated with COVID vaccine. 24% of those two date, either current, the date of vaccination, or within one or two days. We're right now burning about a half a trillion dollars a quarter just to get us by into next year. That should shock everybody. That's my whole purpose here. We haven't talked about the numbers. We haven't put this in context of the big mess we're in, the deep hole we've dug ourselves. I'm just going to force that to be. So you told me something. It made laugh at breakfast in a dark way, which is that none of very few of the people you work with your colleagues whose job it is to appropriate money to run the US government have any idea how much they're appropriating. They don't know what the numbers are. Can you walk us through a description of the ignorance of Congress when it comes to numbers? Do you want me through my colleagues under the bus? It was just like, what was it meant by what you told me? Of the Dallas A appropriate, they know that. That's only 25% of the budget. The story I told you at breakfast is a couple of years ago, this is after the COVID spending spree, but we continued on that spending spree. We were in the midst of an on-buss spending debate. And this is where McConnell is doing a deal with Schumer on a massive on-buss spending bill. And we're going to violate for the first time our conference's position on earmarks. Our conference positions, we do not accept earmarks. All of a sudden, the Republican Senate is going to be accepting earmarks. So I got up in front of the group. I'm generally the skunk in the room or the kid who says they're emperor has no clothes. If I assess my colleagues, hey, anybody know how much we spent last year in total? Dead silence. I went out to the Washington Press Library. I actually meant what we spent. I told you. The federal government. What the federal government spent in total? Nope. It's the bottom line. If anybody knew they didn't volunteer it. I went out to the Washington Press Corps. Ask them the same question. And one of the reporters said, it was over $2 trillion. Now that's just discretionary spending. That's about 25% of the budget. I mean, total spending. The answer is, I think, $6.3 trillion. Understand, the federal government is the largest financial entity in the world. We in theory are the 535 members of the board of directors. And nobody really knows in total how much the federal government spent because we never talk about it. And as that relates to the current weird thing not to talk about since that's your job. Again, that's how it's been set up. Discretionary, which we appropriate. And then mandatory. That just gets spent. It's on automatic pilot. So it's odd to cite. It's odd to mine. And it's completely odd of control. I asked how that works. So I thought the Constitution gave the Congress the responsibility, the duty to appropriate the money. So Congress has written laws like the Social Security Law. Then Medicare and Medicaid. And they've turned the call those entitlements. So it doesn't make, they're not annually appropriated. It's just you set up a law saying if you qualify, you get X number of dollars. So it's on automatic pilot. And there's no cap on that's been done. No, you qualify, you get it. So whatever is what has happened over the years is in addition to Social Security and Medicare and Medicaid, they slid what should be in my mind, discretionary spending into mandatory. And so I'm the guy that pointed out the conference again. You guys realize in 2019, other mandatory. Again, not Social Security, not Medicare, not Medicaid, other mandatory. Pretty well runs the gamut of other appropriation accounts. $642 billion. Last year, just because you're 2024, there was 1.3 trillion. This year it's a little over a trillion. And that's pretty much as far as you can see according to CBO, trillion dollars. So again, total discretionary spending is about 1.7. But they've literally slid about a trillion dollars now ongoing of other mandatory, or what should be discretionary into what they call not other mandatory. A trillion dollars. And I don't think anybody was really aware of that either. So what's right now for 2025, or let's say 2024, what did the federal government spend total? So in 2019, total federal government spending was 4.4 trillion. Yes. This year we will spend over 7 trillion. So I remember somewhere around during the Obama administration. But when I got elected 2010, 2011, we had our first trillion dollar a year deficit in 2009, you know, on these 1.4 trillion. And we stopped talking about hundreds of billions, which used to move the needle to now trillions. Yeah, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, just doesn't seem that much. 4,400 billion dollars spent in 2019, 7,000 billion dollars spent this year projected to spend 7,300 billion next year. Now, let's kind of bring this back to the debate that we're talking about on the one big beautiful bill. It may as well. One more bottom number. Okay. So we're going to spend over 7 trillion this year. How much do we take in in tax receipts every year? About 5.1. So we've got a structural deficit of around 6% right now. CBOs projecting over the next 10 years. 6%. So federal revenue will be quite in a CBO 18.1, even though it's about 17.1. But they're projecting that we're going to increase, I have an automatic tax increase next year. So they bumped that to 18.1. And federal spending is going to be about 23.4, 23.5%. So that deficit spending, where does that money come from? We borrow it or we print it. Okay. But we put this in even better historical context in 1930, less than 100 years ago, the federal government spent 3.1% of our GDP. State low government spent 9.1%. So that was pretty much the vision of our filing fathers. A limited federal government within the constraints of the numerated powers and most governing at the point of the states, you know, state and local government is where it's more accountable and more efficient, more effective. We've blown that up. Now the federal government spending close to 24%. State and low governments are over 16%. So now total government spending is about 40%. It's three times what it was back less than 100 years ago. And I would argue as government grows, our freedoms necessarily recede. Of course, because government has more claim on your income or the borrow money, which causes inflation, which is the silent tax. Do you, we have any sense of what percentage of the American population through 150 million or whatever it is in that range? Our net receivers get more from government than they pay in. I guess it's more than 50% in course. That's the, that's the death knell of a democracy is when the population, the voting public realizes they can vote themselves benefits at the expense of somebody else. And what they don't realize is it's cost them all because the massive deficit spending because we're not taking enough revenue to cover the, the expenditures. That's what his, you wrote the value of our dollar. That's what caused 40 year high inflation and that hurts everybody. So you think that most at this point your guess is most Americans receive more from the federal government from government. Again, I should even say because I haven't checked that figure. Yeah. My guess is probably more than 50%. And when you consider all the entitlements, whether it's Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and people say, oh, that's my money. Well, in some cases it is most people probably get more out of Social Security than they actually did put in. I'll surely do that out of Medicare. Certainly out of Medicaid and nobody puts any money into that. That all comes out of the general fund. So we have food stamps. We have all these trillions of dollars worth of transfer payments. Why is this not sustainable? You often hear it's not sustainable. What happens if it continues? Well, again, when I ran 2010, we've just experienced our first deficit in excess trillion dollars. We were spending about $3.5 trillion a year, 3.5. So by the way, more than double just since 2010? Yeah. Yes. We were 14 trillion dollars in debt. I remember I announced in April of 2010, I started my campaign and basically June 2010 doing parades. What I would shout is this is a fight for freedom. We're mortgaging our children's future. It's wrong. It's immoral. That was my campaign theme. Again, we were 14 trillion dollars in debt, spending 3.5 trillion dollars. Now we're almost 37 trillion dollars in debt. We're spending $7 billion, $7 trillion. And CBO projects over the next 10 years, we will add another $22 trillion to the debt. That's what our projected deficits over the next 10 years is, 22 trillion dollars. And again, that's assuming about a $4 trillion increase because of taxes are scheduled to automatically increase. If those taxes don't increase, first of all, I'm not sure you get the full $4 trillion. But again, take $4 trillion away if we extend current tax law, which is I'm in favor of that. I don't want to increase anybody's taxes. But I don't think this is necessarily time to do additional tax cuts, particularly when those things aren't focused toward economic growth. But anyway, just so we are projecting deficits for the next 10 years of a minimum of $2.2 trillion. And I would argue that is a rosy scenario. And particularly when you take a look at what they've done with the one big beautiful bill, they're not seriously reducing spending to what I've been calling for as a pre-pandemic level. Again, if the dangers sprouting out to me, to me numbers here, I just want to put this in perspective. You know, Obama over the course of his eight years, his average deficit was $910 billion. Over the last, I want to click do some accurate. Over the last four years of his administration is about $550 billion. So half a trillion dollar, a deficit over his last four years. President Trump came into office and his first three years, the average deficit was about $800 billion. So he bumped up Obama's four-year average from $550 to $800. Then COVID hit, and we had a deficit of $3.1 trillion just that one year. Now, what we should have done in 2021 when Biden came into office is we should have returned to a reasonable pre-pandemic level. The pandemic was over. We didn't have to keep... Now, we had unemployment spike up to, I think, 25 million people. Normally, unemployment's summer between five and six. But within a few months, it was around 11 and then returned to pretty much normal early in 2021. We didn't have to keep stimulating the economy. But Biden did Biden averaged $1.9 trillion per year in deficit. So Obama, when he left his last four years, $550, Trump, before the pandemic, a little more than $800 billion per year, Biden in his four years went up to $1.9 trillion. And now CBL is projecting, getting on a rosy scenario, that will be averaging $2.2 trillion over the next 10 years. So we'll take our debt from $37 trillion up to $59 trillion. And if we extend the current tax law, take away $4 trillion in revenue, roughly, that add another $4 trillion. The spending cuts are talking about their poultry. At 1.5 trillion, some of those are fake. Some of those are extended way out. They're all set for 10 years. Yeah. I mean, we'll spend the money upfront for the border, for defense. So that also takes away from that 1.5 trillion in spending. So at most, we're maybe cutting spending 1.2 trillion. Part of that, a few hundred billion, I think, is student loan forgiveness, which the Supreme Court will probably rule unconstitutional or not conspin it anyway, but the count that it's savings. So so much of the savings they're talking about in the one big beautiful bill is phony. It's fake. It's in the out years where if Republicans lose power, Democrats will just restore it. But no matter how you slice it, for my standpoint, CBO's $22 trillion of 10 year deficit is a rosy scenario. It'll probably be more than that. And what happens then is what's happening right now in the bond market. Interest rates are creeping up. You can't control that. If global creditors look at the United States, there's an uncreaded word. Our 50 year average interest payment that we pay on our debt is over 5%. So I think it's as high as 5.8. It's not the most exact figure. But right now we're borrowing probably about 3.3%. That's been the average over the last 25 years, 3.3%. That's kind of where we're at right now. If we increased that interest, if that interest expands increases to rate increases to 4.3%, add another $4 trillion in deficit spending. If it goes up to the 50 year average of 5.3, add about $8 or $9 trillion to the 22 trillion. So again, you go 22 trillion plus extending current tax law, add another close to 4 trillion. If interest rates start creeping up and they are, just 1 percentage point, add another 4 trillion. So you can see very quickly you go from 22 to 26 to $30 trillion add down to 37 trillion dollars to $67 trillion in debt. I don't think we'd ever hit that. I think something's going to happen. We'll have debt crisis. We'll have failure in our bond auctions, spiking interest rates even more. And again, we're spending more on interest this year than we spend on defense. Here's an alarming statistic. Only 12% of Americans are metabolically healthy. That means 88% are not. It's not a healthy country. Friend of the show in Donald Trump's Surgeon General nominee, Dr. Casey Means, is working and solve that crisis. She's got a new health care technology company. It's called levels. It's got an easy to use app, simple and effective programs. It helps you get a clear picture of what's going on inside you, inside your body. It helps you maximize your energy, manage your weight, exercise more effectively. And it works. We've heard a ton of stories. People on our show who work here, changing their lives, getting their cholesterol under control, improving their diets, making their movement much more efficient, their exercise, better. This membership comes with a 28 marker cardio metabolic blood test. It gives you a comprehensive view of your health and clear guidance for how to make it better. You can also get the extended panel, which gives you an even more detailed view with 100 plus biomarkers. We just received for that levels is offering this shows listeners annual memberships with an additional two months free through the website levels.link slash tucker. We're not sure how long this is going to last. We recommend you take advantage of it. The address levels.link slash tucker. You often hear the phrase debt crisis. What does that mean exactly what would that look like? Ken's where there's a chronic or acute crisis. I'd say we're already in a chronic debt crisis. That is what I would consider the devaluation of the dollar. I laid out and we talked about this. My pre-pandemic options going back to 98, 2014, 2019. So a dollar you held in 1998 is only worth $0.51 a dollar you held when it's devalued that much since I spent 10,000. When I ran 2010, that dollar is worth about 68 cents. A dollar you held during Obama in 2014 is worth $0.74. The dollar we held just in 2019 is only worth $0.80. So again, that is the devaluation of dollar. That's inflation. This is why everything is expensive. Yeah, that's the silent tax. Tell you spend $300 a dinner and you're like, I didn't even get drunk. Like how did that happen? That's the effect. Yeah. And that's why you had 40 high inflation. So that way I would consider the chronic debt crisis. It just continues. And it's the danger. We have not tamed inflation yet. We've tamed it, but we haven't conquered it. So I think that's always on the horizon, particularly if we continue deficit spend. Particularly if the bond markets start continuing to react as they are, keep driving interest rates up higher and you start increasing the amount of interest expense crowding out other spending. So an acute debt crisis would be where you have a bond market failure and like would have an increase. All of a sudden you can't sell your debt. So you either print the money which sparks another round of 40, 50 year high inflation, devaluing the currency rapidly. You know, we're not necessarily immune to high inflation. Other countries have experienced it. So failure to sell your debt in a bond auction. What does that look like? You just put out your bonds and nobody wants to know we buy some. So again, the advantage the US has over any other country is we are the world's reserve currency. So we can print dollars. So we can get by that moment except for your printing dollars and inflation is pretty easy to define. It's too many dollars chasing too few goods. So you just print out those dollars and again, the devalues the cost of your debt is lowered. It's a silent way of addressing these massive deficits. How far away from a moment like that are we? I don't know. I would have thought we would have experienced it by now. But we've experienced it instead is again, for your high inflation, the devaluation currency. I mean, I think that's pretty shocking when you take a look at that as a dollar just 11 years ago is only where 74 cents. You know, six years, it's only worth 80 cents. That's an amazing level of devaluation. That's not even close to hyperinflation where you've got inflation rates of hundreds of percent. But so when that crisis comes, what do you do? Well, you have a great deal of turmoil in your society. It won't be pleasant. It's just what we need to try and avoid. And by the way, why I'm not in a full-blown panic, people like Art Laffer, you know, economist at the Laffer Curve, he does correctly point out America has enormous wealth. I mean, hundreds of trillions of dollars worth of wealth. So 37 billion dollars in relationship to hundreds of trillion dollars worth of wealth, that's manageable. It's just like if you're a billionaire, but you don't work, you can have some pretty large mortgages on homes. But you still have to generate some income to service the debt. And I think that's kind of the point we're making. I mean, it's not irrelevant, jet debt to GDP ratio. And we do have massive wealth, but we need to manage the cash flow problem here too, as well as just the pernicious impact of all these transfer payments, providing encouragement for people not to work. There's a great article written, I think, 2017 by Nick Eberstadt, of American Enterprise Institute, our miserable 21st century, you're talking about how 20% of working-age men are permanently out of the workforce, on Medicaid, using the Medicaid card to buy opiate drugs to help finance their living. All kinds of all those pernicious impacts of a society where we literally don't require people to work, we actually incentivize them not to. That's to my mind. That's one of the biggest problems we have with the big wealth. It's a great thing to fill the gap. Yeah, somebody's got to do the work. And we were talking earlier when I first ended this political realm, going to dairy breakfast. The first issue I heard in Wisconsin was we don't have enough workers. I come from manufacturing background where for 20 or so years you couldn't find enough people to work in a manufacturing plant, which is why I always kind of scratched my head. Listen, there are certainly products that we have offshore that we need to reshore, things that are strategic that impact our national security. But right now I think our biggest problems, we don't have enough workers. If you bring all this manufacturing back to America, who's going to work the factories? And we certainly shouldn't be bringing back highly of a content product. I think you need to diversify your supply base. You can't be so dependent on an adversarial like China spread it around. That would reduce your risk. So what you're saying, like the numbers you're describing are the bottom line numbers. This is not like higher math. This should be obvious to everybody. What's the reaction been? Well, they just ignore it. Again, one of the reasons I'm digging my heels in as the one big beautiful bill comes over the Senate is we haven't had the discussion or the debate. The only number you heard about in the whole House debate here was $1.5 trillion. Which sounds like a lot, right? I mean, $1.5 trillion spending reduction. And of course, they're focusing on programs like Medicaid. The main problem with that is Obamacare, which is now called Medicaid expansion, along states to gain the system, putting it risk Medicaid for the truly vulnerable. But that's all you really heard about. You don't ever put that in context. You know, $1.5 trillion compared to $89 trillion spending over the next 10 years. It's barely a rounding air. We haven't been talking about the massive annual deficits. You don't talk about the debt. Why is the, I mean, when you were describing the progression of debt accumulation, it feels like it's been really rapid in a short period of time. Like the federal government spending almost twice what it was just the other day. Where's all that money going? What did that happen? What is that? Well, again, it was really sparked by the pandemic. Yeah, I'll give the Tea Party movement a fair amount of credit. I ran because we were more than a judge, kids' future. We were running deficits for, I think three years and row over $1 trillion. But once we got to town 2011, we started having these budget debates. We had divided government. Obama didn't get everything you wanted. We did something called the Budget Control Act, which literally reduced discretionary spending for three years and row until we learned how to weasel around it. So we pretty well flattened out federal government spending at about 3.5 trillion for five or six or seven years. And then the last couple of years of the Obama administration started creeping up. And then Trump went from about $4 trillion to 4.1 to 4.4. And then it went to 6.5. And we've never looked back. And the analogy I used there is I don't know of an American family if they had an illness illness and they had to borrow $50,000 to pay for the medical bills. If that family remember got well, you wouldn't keep borrowing $50,000 and spending that level. But that's exactly what we've done. And like nobody other than, you know, I'm the first guy who wrote the Walter Journal article about we really need to return to pre-pandemic levels. It doesn't seem radical. And then I've laid out options, you know, Clinton or Donald Trump. And COVID pandemic, this is just like years ago. So I mean, what Biden should have done and we had, we overspent in 2020. And we first of time about that CARES Act is like $750 billion, which I knew we had to do something fast and massive. So Marcus went and collapsed both in like a week or two. That went up to like $2.2 trillion. We sent out direct payment checks to 166 million Americans three times way late, way after unemployment had already returned from the 25 million person high again, 25 million people unemployed, but normally you're at five or six. We sent out direct payment checks to 106 million Americans three times. So we way overspent even in 2020. So you had trillions of dollars sloshing around the economy as you come into 2021. The economy is coming roaring back because you have all this pent up demand and all these dollars sloshing around. The last thing you should have done is add more fuel to the fire. The investment Biden Democrats did. Again, on average $1.9 trillion of deficit spending over the next four years. We never went came down off that 6.5 trillion dollars. You had a little bit 6.2, 6.3, but then started going back up again. And that's really the moment that's when a bass boat suddenly cost $100,000 or your car costs $90,000, you know, brand new suburban is 80 grand or whatever. That's when the country became obviously unaffordable, I think. Unless I misread. Yeah, well, your meal deal at McDowell is obviously in jump from five to ten bucks. Go, when did that happen? Yeah. I don't understand why there's no will to fix that. I mean, that seems like pretty basic macroeconomics in the Congress, no bass. I haven't heard McConnell say this, but I've heard the quote attributed to him. And this is one thing I agree with him on. Show me one member of Congress we ever lost because I spent too much money. Yeah. There just isn't public pressure. There's not public awareness. We don't educate our young people. The news media doesn't connect the dots that why people are can't afford things is because of massive deficit spending, which sparked four year high inflation devalued the dollar. I mean, to me, it's pretty obvious, but normal Americans, they just get all certainly about it. Okay. Well, then let's meditate for a moment on the consequences of it. I asked what happens when there's a debt crisis? Why haven't we had one yet? You said we probably should have had one. I don't know why we haven't, but we're going to get one if we keep doing this. I said, what will the effect of that be? You said massive instability in the society? What do you mean? Like what will that look like? Maybe it would awaken people to the threat if they knew what would happen in a debt crisis? Well, so if you're living on different transfer payments or different types of welfare benefits, you may not get those. You can't borrow money, so you're going to have to take what money we spend on other government programs and we'll have to service our debt. You have to pay it off. Well, so we want to go into full default. That's where you just say to Japan and China and Germany and everyone else has bought those bonds that we're not paying. Which means you'll never float more debt. But you can't, other than print more money, which then creates even more hyperinflation. So now people can't afford anything. Yes, if anyone ever defaulted any country ever defaulted on debt and just said we're not paying, come and get it. I'm sure they have. I'm not. That's not common. I think it happens enough. But what always happens is companies, countries like US, go in there and we help them restructure their debt. I think that's happened numerous times. But no one's going to come and help us restructure our debt. Nobody can. We are the, again, we will lose our position. The world reserve currency and will lose our ability to print dollars that people accept. I mean, it's a marvelous thing that we just print dollars. We can send them overseas and people will produce products and ship them over here. High quality products are pretty low cost. And these are one of the reasons we've been able to keep inflation in check producing all these massive deficits over the last couple of decades is we do import a lot of products. We've got billions of people either un or under employed around the world. We provide the capital. They produce the factories. They produce the goods. And then we just give them paper. It's fiat currency. We print it. We keep printing it and it's been working out pretty well. At some point in time that that gravy train might stop. And then I mean, then you have like a total collapse of the current system. Yeah. I can't predict. I'm trying to avoid it. It'll be painful. And who really suffers our people at the lower end of the income spectrum that have no safety net. They don't have any kind of hard assets that will inflate with inflation there. They're just. who really suffers our people at the lower end of the income spectrum that have no no safety net they don't have any kind of hard assets that will inflate with inflation there right they just they just be destitute. A lot of them in a country that has no kind of organizing principle or national identity where people are not as united as they were in san nineteen twenty nine. I had my comp staff put together a video I asked them to find all these republican leaders that have talked about balance in the budget. You know we we have a spending problem starts out with the president trump saying in say the union we're gonna do something we haven't done twenty four years balance federal budget then. Every republican be leaders some form of we don't ever revenue problem we have a spending problem. In those clips we have Elon must sing if we don't fix this. There won't be money left over for anything nothing that's pretty accurate statement so how many people can you really trust if you think about it probably not that many let's see you've got. Twenty thousand instagram followers how many of them would show up at your house to help you if you had a crisis. Maybe about eight that's a high number the same is true on the internet who do you trust with your private information. That question has never been more relevant data brokers record every single detail of everything you do online. Then they sell your digital profile to scammers and invasive advertisers make a living off of harassing you if you're getting harassed that's why probably are. Express VPN can end this cycle express VPN is a very simple and cool product the tech is sophisticated the interface is easy. They have a us express VPN it's an app that hides your IP address and re routes a hundred percent of your online traffic through secure encrypted servers. That means no one can see it no data hawks internet providers big tech conglomerates can see what you do online. It's fast it's easy to use it works on every device you've got your laptop tablet phone your television smart TV anything that connects the internet. You get an extra four months for free when you use our link scan the QR code on the screen right now or go to express VPN dot com slash Tucker get four extra months for express VPN for free. That's express VPN dot com slash Tucker does this bill get us closer to fixing it. No, it exacerbates the problem. How can that be? Because we're not serious about returning to a reasonable pre pandemic global spending we we've picked a number out the air 1.5 trillion totally out of context. There's you know it's not really related to the the moment. It's it's it's missing the moment. Can I ask you put who came up with that number like who's lie is that? I think my best guess is conserved is in the house who I love. Didn't want to be blamed if this thing failed. So they said, well listen in order to in order for us to accept a $5 trillion increase in the debt ceiling. We've got to get at least 1.5 trillion dollars in savings spending cuts. I don't think they were looking at the big picture. I think they just pulled a big I criticize them at the time. Privateers listen you set the bar way too low you guys. This is completely inadequate. They set the bar way too low that it should have been easy to meet it quite honestly. But even that was difficult because they didn't go through what I would consider the right kind of process. So maybe we can shift in terms of what we have to do what I'm trying to accomplish here in my digging my heels in. Do issues kind of shown us what we can do here. We've never had a process to control spending the federal government. We don't have a balanced budget requirement. I didn't realize this just found out. Do you know they established the appropriation committees because the authorizing committees were big spenders. So the appropriation committees were supposed to be the control on the big spenders. Well that didn't work. The budget control act of 1974 didn't work. Simpson-Boles didn't work. The budget control act didn't work. It did for three years but then we weasel our way around it. So what process could possibly work to control spending? Well first of all, you have to know the numbers. You have to understand what would a deep hole were in and have a commitment to address it. But Doge is pretty well shown us how to do it. Now I come from the private sector. I think we proud I probably spent more time either analyzing my department head budgets or my own overall company budget than Congress and total spends analyzing the $7,000 billion budget of the federal government. So Doge is shown as if you go line by line contract by contract. You will discover and uncover spending that if the American public saw they'd be outraged by it. If you eliminated it, my guess is most Americans wouldn't even know it's eliminated about the only people that would know would be the grifters. Yeah. Who have been sucking down the ways for on abuse. The NGO. So you have to go step by step. So that's why I've always been supportive of a multiple step reconciliation process here. I was always recommending three steps. First step, give a president Trump the funding on the border. Defense bank $850 billion of real savings not make believe. You know, now in Lindsey Graham agreed to this 85 and a half billion dollars each year for four years to pay for the four years worth of spending. And then extend that out 10 years. That gives you 850. That's more than half of what the house budget reconciliation supposedly gives us. Second step, I would just extend current tax law. If we would have been smart enough in 2017 had something like Chairman Crapo who really came up with this idea of let's just use current policy for taxes. Then we can make this stuff permit. You should never pass on my mind tax tax law that automatically expires. Just creates all these fiscal cliffs and puts all kinds of uncertain uncertainty in the economy. Why do they do that? Because we so this gets in real budget walkery, but for spending to score it, you use current policy, which means if a spending program ends, if you want to extend it, you just you score it based on what was going to be extended anyway. So it doesn't cost anything for taxes, though. We use current law. So if the tax cuts are ending and you want to extend them, well, you're going down the fact that they are going to end. So now to extend them is going to be a trillion dollar score. So then you got to pay for it. It's hard to pay for it. And so that's how it was all scored back in 2017 where if we would just use current policy, if we use current policy now, we just extend current tax line. There's no score. And so that's that's really what we're doing now. But we have to recognize when you're comparing to the CBO budget, CBO budget is assuming it does taxes do increase and bring in by another $4 trillion worth of revenue. So that's why I say the $22 trillion in projected assets is probably a rosy scenario. I mean, it seems like the core problems are just so familiar. One is short term thinking. And the second is the misplaced belief that you can see what the future will be. And both of those are like silly and unwise. Maybe are we bumping up against the inherent limits of the system? Well, I would say we're missing the focusing on the right thing. We had folks on spending. You'd be spending. And the reason I say it is spending is pretty certain. Again, who knows what revenue we're going to bring in? It's hard to predict. Spending, that's that's pretty easy to predict what that's going to be. Plus, I personally voted for President Trump because I wanted him to defeat the deep state. Yeah. You don't defeat the deep state by continuing to fund it at Biden's levels. Yeah, I know. So again, when you start talking about the control of the deficit, well, you can control the deficit by tariff revenue or sell in the gold card, that keeps funding the deep state. You have to focus on spending. And we've just gone through an unprecedented level of increased spending. Other than World War II, just quick aside on that, we entered World War II, spending 11.7% of our economy of a GDP on federal government, 11.7%. That got ramped up to 41% during the war. But by 1948 because we had responsible leaders, the greatest generation, that actually went down to 11.4% of GDP. Can we return to pre-war level? We had a massive recession too. That means the war is over. Let's return to a reasonable pre-war level spending. We didn't do that during the pandemic. And that's what we have to focus on. It's such a reasonable thing to do. It should have been done in 2021. We didn't do it for four years, but now we're just pretty well accepting that. We're accepting the fact that Obamacare, now called Medicaid expansion, is putting it risk Medicare for the truly vulnerable, even though we all ran on repealing or replacing that. And obviously failed in the first Trump term. But now we're all okay with it. Now we're not going to touch that because they renamed it. Are you kidding me? Well, this is how it works. Like in 20 years, we'll be like, well, of course you have to protect trans kids. You know what seems crazy at first becomes accepted and then it becomes the hell to die on. It's just like your expectations change, right? So again, I'm trying to force the discussion over the real numbers. Okay. And again, 1.5 trillion in abstract seems like a lot, but we've really ramped up from 2019 to this year. That's over 10 years. That's 29 trillion dollars of increased spending over 10 years, 29 trillion. And we're talking about cutting out 1.5 of that. Yeah, it's a joke. It's a joke because people don't want to cut it out. And so I guess that's my question. You said that the problem with democracy is once the majority figures out they can just steal money. Then you're just like headed to the cliff and there's no pulling back. Are we there? Well, again, they're not stealing it. They just don't realize that how it's financed is by printing money. And they can't afford things because of other people's money. Well, sure. I mean, they point of a gun. They've called theft. They try and tax it, but we're not taxing anywhere near enough. Right. No, right. So we're going to have to borrow 2.2 trillion dollars for the next 10 years every year at least. If that's effectively a tax because it devalues journey in your pockets, pay in 10 bucks for a big Mac and a Coke. Yeah. Inflation is a silent tax. Yeah. It's it's really nasty. Do you have any hope? I'm not the world's greatest optimist. Yeah. I mean, how can you be? You know, I fear we've passed the point of no return. The reason I'm digging my heels in and Tucker, I don't want to. I bet I really don't. I mean, I'm not looking forward. Listen, I love what President Trump is doing. He is such a unique individual, unique political figure, unique president. He is doing things that only he would do. Nobody else would do it and things that have to be done. Okay. So I'm so, you know, so supportive of most of what he's doing. But this is a once in a lifetime opportunity here. We've never had such an unprecedented level of spending returning to a reasonable level is just so common sense and not that hard. It's not going to be easy. But what I've done in laying out those pre pandemic options go back to Bill Clinton, 1998 when we actually had a surplus for the first time in 1969, I don't think we spent too little in 1969 or 1998 Obama in 2014 or Trump in 2019. There are three options. Leave Social Security, Medicare and interest as they are. Spend what you need to spend. But if all the other outlays, you just increase them based on population growth and inflation, a very reasonable control, right? You end up summers between 5.5 and 6.5 trillion. Now I would go back to Clinton recognizing that 9, 11 happened after that. So you probably have to plus up defense. Although I'd like to hone how we spend our defense dollars. I think we talked about that earlier. I don't think we spend them well. But you know, somewhere between 5.5 and 6.5 trillion dollars and then I've printed out the budgets, you know, a couple thousand lines and then go through those budgets line by line. You just ask the question, well, this is what Clinton was spending fully inflated. Why was Spain this much more? Or this is what Obama spent? Or Trump? Why is it so much more? Explain yourself. Well, I said in business this would be simple. Yeah. I just said, I tell my manager that I said you could increase your budget space on inflation and number of customers you serve. You're tempted to stand above that, cut it. Kind of like, I don't care how you do it. Just do it. Get back down to that level. You have to do it as, you know, so it doesn't harm our business. So it doesn't harm people's lives, but just do it. Because we were spending 1998, 2014, 2019, and then it's probably pretty adequate. And by the way, if you go through it line by line, there'll be lines I think you look at, scratch your head and go, we probably shouldn't be spending anything on that. I think Doge's ton of stats. So again, we were sure Trump and I think that it was brilliant. What Trump and Elon did with Doge, but we haven't realized what savings yet. I think we stopped spending on contracts. But unless we set up and pass a recession package on the discretionary end, unless we take whatever they discovered in mandatory and eliminate that through the reconciliation process, those money will just be sitting out there unobligated and some democrat, Congress and some democrat president will spend it without even having to appropriate. Perforated. To ask about the defense budget. So it's in the neighborhood of a trillion dollars. We face no invasion threat. We never have. We're separated from the rest of the world by two large oceans. Our standing force is not that huge, actually. It's not like all that money's going to pay for soldiers and Marines and airmen. Why are we spending that much on defense? We haven't won a war in 80 years. I'm a little, and I know that all Republicans are required to take the Liz Cheney position. That's just great. Defense spending is just by its nature inherently good. But what is that? What's all that money going to, exactly? We did not heed Eisenhower's warning. I think the military and desperate complex has way too much power. I would love and we should do this as we should go back, at least as far back as Vietnam, and analyze each one of these foreign entanglements, each of these foreign wars. And ask ourselves and gather some basic information. First, what was our goal going in? Secondly, what did it cost in human life hours and our enemies? What did it cost in terms of dollars? And then the final question is, did we accomplish the objective? I think if you do that, and I hate to say this because it's true. I mean, this is, we're filming this on Memorial Day. Yeah. The finest among us? I agree with that. People who love this country, who step up the plate willing to serve and sacrifice more than a million have paid the ultimate price. So I don't, I don't even like saying this, but the fact of the matter is, if you did that kind of analysis, you wouldn't walk away very satisfied. Well, but doesn't our respect for the men who died in military service require us to do that? I think it does. So if you would to do that, I was just recently in Hanoi a couple years ago, what wonderful people. Yeah. They love Americans. Right. I mean, after even what they love America because they're entrepreneur, they're hard working. They want, like most people in the world, they want what we have. They respect the values of America, the principles of freedom, individual liberty. We never should have been to war. Then we never should have bombed those people. But followed all the way through Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria. I mean, so I mean, what have we accomplished with the Ukraine war right now? We have actually solidified the relationship between Russia and China and North Korean Iran. Yes, that's completely opposite of what our goals ought to be. Yeah. So it's just not working. I mean, we have not accomplished these goals. They've been miserable failures. How many people died in Iraq based on that false intelligence? Yeah, the best book I read on Afghanistan is written by special ops folks. And they basically made the point that we pretty well accomplished what we need to accomplish in Afghanistan before Tommy Frank ever put a boot on the ground. Yeah, we said, you listen, you guys Harvard, al Qaeda, don't do it anymore. Kind of punched the Taliban and that's probably where we should have left that. How many Americans lost their lives? How many, you know, Afghanistan citizens lost their lives? What did that cost? Can it's almost incalculable. So neuroport what you may not have seen because it was suppressed shows the abortion pill is 10 times more dangerous than the FDA claims, not just dangerous to the baby that it kills, but to the women who take it. 11% of women who take the pill experience, quote, serious adverse effects. Why is it still on the market? Huh. Because it's abortion related in our leader's love abortion, they'd be easy to turn that figure into a rant about abortion, but there's another angle to this debate that's not talked about enough. And that's what a blessing babies are. People scoff about children like there's some kind of plague, but in reality, the exact opposite is true. On your death bed, you'll care only about your children. They are a gift unlike any other gift. They are the supreme gift. Our friends at preborn understand this and they're working around the clock to save as many unborn lives as they can. Their ultrasound helps guide thousands of future mothers to choose life through knowledge. And that's possible because people like you support them. To help simply dial pound 250 say the keyword baby that's pound 250, the word baby, or visit preborn.com slash Tucker. We are proud to partner with preborn. Well, given all of that and given that no one has ever been punished, no high ranking military officer. I'm aware it was ever been punished for any of these failures. The withdrawal from Afghanistan was humiliating and costly and it was disaster in every way. And the only guy who's punished is to Shiller, who's a Marine officer, who points out that it wasn't a success, but the architects were rewarded. So given all of that, why are we sending these people even more money against the military and desperate complex? And there are some just basic metrics people use, like presented GDP spending on defense, where we're kind of a low level and we should be, we should be, I mean, we've got right now, you know, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, McConnell, they want to dedicate 5% of GDP to defense. So where are you going to get that money? Now, I realized we're kind of down to historic low levels, but it's still a trillion dollars. Where are we spending it? That's why I would love to see in some of you like Eric Prince who wrote an excellent article, Too Big to Win, come to Defense Secretary and really take a look at how are we finding these wars? What do we need to do to defend America? Somebody said to me that the other day I was talking to an informed person about this grousing about it. Like if you don't want to war for 80 years, why does your budget keep expanding? And this person said the real reason is America's industrial base is overwhelmingly military now. So actually, the only real thing we make are weapons. And so that's what that money does. Yeah, I don't think that's necessarily true. You know, there's there's still me again, you still have that industrial base. You know, you spend a trillion dollars out of a $28 trillion economy, $29 trillion dollar economy. It's a pretty good chunk, but it's not the majority of it. We make a lot of stuff. And I think that's kind of a mistake in notion as well. Industrial production continues to rise here. Yeah, we don't have again, we become more and more productive. That's a good thing. Again, right now we don't have enough workers to be manufacturing a whole lot more stuff. I mean, the last thing we should be doing is trying to attract high labor content product back to the US, which is still not enough people to do it. Interesting. So that that's probably like a Raytheon talking point then. I don't know. I'm just putting the basic numbers. I mean, that's interesting. So what happens to this bill? Well, again, what I'd like to do is split it in two parts. Do the, the, you know, quite honestly, what has to be done now. And that is provide the funding. I think they're asking way too much. I'm by pointing this out with Christy known there, they're looking for 46 billion dollars for the fence, right? Or for the wall. Oh, the first Trump term, I can't remember these exact numbers. They've seen some 485 miles. We spent 6.6 billion. So that's like 14.4 million dollars a mile. No, they want 46 billion. Because built built over 3000 miles. So I asked her square that circle for me. And she really didn't. She was actually saying they're projecting 12 million dollars. I was willing to give her 14.4 even though I was in Israel when I was chairman Homeland Security, they built their very effective fence for less than 2 million dollars a mile. But lay that aside. So provide border funding. The price you have to pay for that is more to sound spending. Bank, was savings we can. You know, take the good work. The house is done. Bank that savings, extend current tax law, take an automatic tax increase off the table, provide that certain to the economy, bump up the debt ceiling for a year to keep pressure on us to come back and then do the big beautiful bill. We'll consider present Trump's tax proposals. This is not I'm all for no tax on cash tips. Can't collect it anyway. So why even try? And that keeps currency circling through the economy as well. I think that's a good thing. I don't want to go to a government backed digital security. So that's good. I mean, the other tax proposals, the promises to me in the campaign, they're not pro growth. They're just going to reduce revenue. You know, no tax on overtime. Yeah, I ran a continuing shift operation. I think the one time and a half or double time is more than enough incentive. You know, we all live under taxes. Some income is income. Why would we increase the regulatory burden on people that Mr. payroll to corn off some of the overtime to don't tax. I mean, just be paying the butt. Why doesn't everyone just pay the same rate? I don't understand that. And then everyone has skin in the game. Everyone has a better sense of what their government is spending and on what if it's coming out of your and and that suggests a kind of a quality under the law that would be sort of nice. If everyone was held and I mean, nonprofits too, I should get rid of all nonprofits immediately. Why isn't Harvard's endowment paying taxes? Like what is this? Why not just the the same rate for everybody? Labor capital, same rate. One rate, you can be a nonprofit by not making a profit. I've done that too. If you're a university church, something like that you bring in revenue, you spend it. You get kind of profit. You're nonprofit. Yeah. So no, the other reason I want to split this into two parts is, you know, we need to take the time to go aligned by line to do a doge impact on the entire budget to find to find the outrageous spending, eliminate what people won't even notice, but also to simplify and rationalize their tax system. We have a grotesquely complex tax system. Everyone's out of compliance. Everybody's committing a felony unwittingly. Every single person. You meet every other American. So simplify it. Again, using basic principles. Don't try and socially and economically engineer the tax code. We're terrible at it. You can't, you're not that smart. So raise a revenue you need. Try not to do any economic or social harm. So that that would imply a very simple tax system. They always say, lower the rates, brown the base. But fair, I don't personally have, I've done well in this country. I don't mind having a progressive, progressive tax rate. I really don't. Certainly exempting certain amount of income. So, you know, people can live without having pay tax and stuff. But, but within those, those confines, keep it as absolutely simplest possible. Now, one thing I know, there's nothing simple about simplifying the tax tax code. I mean, everybody's got their, their little tax break. And, you know, even right now, I wonder if it's, I'm not looking forward to this ordeal. It's going to come about over the next couple of weeks as I dig my heels in is, you know, the, a lot of people that support press and Trump have supported me. They want no tax and overtime. They, by the way, if, if all you live on is social security, it, the, the chance of you paying a dollar tax and that is almost infinitesimal. So, we don't tax social security right now. But, what, let's face it, if you have social security in the income above that, I mean, why should you exempt some of your income? I think us oldsters have stolen enough from younger generations. I mean, you see the wealth transfer. I used to have a chart on this, but the transfer of wealth from young to old over the decades. It's, it's literally immoral. It's immoral. So, let's notice, let's not exacerbate that problem. It's disgusting. Again, if you're good, if you can do something in tax, again, I don't think this is the, I don't want to increase people's taxes, but I don't think this is point in time to be cutting taxes that aren't incentivizing growth. Again, I don't, I'd rather not be incentivizing. You know, again, try to use the task or to try and come up somewhere to incentivize growth. Just keep it simple, uncomplicated, rational income is income. You know, basic principles like wherewithal to pay, I mean, design approach all of these things with with principles. Because the big problem in the house, what was the goal there? I would think the goal of this Republican budget reconciliation would be to reduce the deficits. Seems like in the house, the only goal was to pass a one big beautiful bill by Memorial Day. Great. You achieved your goal, but you didn't solve our fiscal situation. Do you even come close? Yeah, I mean, I'm not impressed by the people managing this in the house. I'm just going to say, so I'm not surprised, but, but it of course needs to send it as well. So well, it needs, it needs presidential leadership. But, and he, and he needs to get behind fixing this problem. Now, he said in the state of the union, he's going to balance a budget. Fine, but I know in his mind, he thinks he's going to balance a budget with tariff revenue. I'm sorry, tariffs are a tax. We're not quite sure who pays them, whereas the foreign companies, the foreign countries, the U.S. consumer. Again, the instance of tax is never particularly certain, but tariffs raise the cost of goods. For what? Again, I there's no doubt there's certain products, high end summit conductors, pharmaceuticals, rare earth minerals. We got to be basic in those. We have to produce these here just from standpoint, national security. Is there a better way of doing that than just generalized increasing of attacks, which is what a tariff is? I would argue there probably is how about, how about this? We just give you a tax holiday for five or 10 years. Again, you've got a high end summit conductor playing different country. We're not collecting the tax on it anyway. It's no skin off our, you know, what's to just, well, come on over here, produce that here. We'll just give you 10 year tax. Talk to the people who are going to invest in it. What's it going to take? How long a tax holiday? What's reasonable? incentivize it that way. But don't don't incentivize it by mucking up our tax code or, I say, even worse, things like the chips act where you pay money to grifters that don't really fulfill their end of the bargain. Again, we're just not good at doing these things. The free the free market's not perfect, but it is the most efficient allocator capital. So I mean, you provide somebody tax holiday. I think you can bring those things back. You're pretty good. Plus, permitting we feel reform. If you want to do pre-occursive chemicals for pharmaceuticals, I mean, you got to permit the refineries. You got to permit the mines if you're going to mine rare minerals. And if you're going to refine those things. So again, we have to look at this, but it requires presidential leadership to go make the case the logical case. And that, from my standpoint, in terms of me digging my heels, and I'm a reasonable guy. But you're not going to sell me just by saying, you got to pass a one big beautiful bill. I'm, I'm tighter the rhetoric. I'm not prone to slogans. It's like lay out the case. If you can lay out the case that we are promoting growth and this is what the revenue is going to be. And this is how we actually shrink the deficit and this is how we avoid a debt crisis. You know, I want to be on board. I want to see this presence succeed. How many of your colleagues in the Senate have your position on this? Well, it's interesting. There's a fair number that are coalescing around the number. And I've never really laid out options, but I've never dug my heels in on a number for a pre-pandemic level spending. But I've laid it out, I think logically enough. Most people are, you know, there's pretty big groups say that it should be no more than $6.5 trillion in the next fiscal year. So that implies about a $800 billion difference between what we're expensive to spend, which would be about $8 trillion of spending. We'd next fiscal year. So that implies about a $800 billion difference between what we're expensive to spend, which would be about $8 trillion of spending reduction over 10 years. It's a long ways from the 1.5 trillion. Again, what I've always said is I need a commitment to return to a reasonable pre-pandemic level spending realizing we have to get the votes. But maybe even more importantly, a process to achieve and maintain it. And that's that's that line by do the work. But it'll take time to do the work. But we need a commitment. I can't do it. I don't have access to all the information. We really need and why I proposed one of my Wall Street Journal columns was a budget review panel made up of senators, house members, staff of the OMB, awesome management and budget. I mean, those are the guys that know their stuff. And then have this as a review panel and bring up just like in business, budget review meeting, bring up the department heads with their budget grooves and stuff and explain it. Go line by line. Again, why are you spending so much more than a fully inflated bill Clinton level or Obama or Trump? I mean, explain yourself. Why should we be spending even a dime on this category right here? So you got top lines, then the federal government more than 2000 lines under each one of those lines is probably hundreds of lines between all those. So you got a lot of work to do. But it doesn't get done. You'd be trying to rush this thing through now by July 4th is what would be the goal for the Senate. So I want to break this up in two parts to give us the time to go through that budget line by line. Will you get it? Right now I think I've got at least four that will dig their heels in and say, again, we want to see succeed. We want to pass this. We want to pass something. We'll pass what must be passed now. Again, we've already set this up in the Senate with our budget resolution to provide the defense and border funding plus $850 billion in savings. Tack that onto the house where we extend current tax law and increase the debt ceiling. By the way, that's going to be a massive amount. This should shock everybody. What we're going to have to increase the debt ceiling for just to get us by another year, probably two to 2.5 trillion dollars because we have to refill the extraordinary measures that the bucket they've taken from to extend the debt ceiling. What we're right now burning about a half a trillion dollars a quarter. So you're talking, you know, if you extend in next year, five quarters at half a trillion dollars, it's $2.5 trillion. Just to get us by into next year, that should shock everybody. That's my whole purpose here is we haven't we haven't talked about the numbers. We haven't put this in context of the big mess we're in, the deep hole we've dug ourselves. And I'm just going to force that to be. I'm not trying to be obstinate. I'll probably be accused of grand standing. I don't want to do it. I'd rather not do this. I'd rather have the house having really succeeded and the president totally behind. Again, return to pre pandemic level spending, but somebody's got to do it since we launched album had four flavors, but we are proud to announce Alp has a brand new flavor. One of several will be rolling out for the next year or so. And it is sweet neck. I have personally tested this product two at a time and it's excellent. Sweet neck are the new flavor out from Alp really, really good. We've been ordering in both by the palette if you want. I have strongly recommended sweet neck. Stay tuned for one of the places. It's interesting if you pull back a little bit. So as with the defense budget, you don't want to war for 80 years, but you keep getting more money. A primary driver of the deficits and the debt is health care spending. Is the country getting healthier? No, we're getting sicker. And again, that's shifting gears into really the failure of our health care system of establishment medicine of a pharmaceutical driven medicine. They call it rock failure medicine. This is where I've been so supportive. Why do they call it rock of foreign medicine? He's really one that really pushed, you know, pharmaceutical drug companies. Way back when I don't understand the full history. But yeah, began that. So, you know, touch chemical based, you know, chemistry based and you know, rather than really focusing on health, it's all, we've got a pill for this. Here's an example. And I think this is true. But there was a debate in terms of what caused heart disease. You know, is it too much sugars at cholesterol? Yes. From pharmaceutical industry standpoint, they had a drug to lower cholesterol. Stands. So guess what they chose? cholesterol. The winner. You know, the winner because we've got a drug to manage that. Now, there are all kinds of emerging serious side effects of stans. One that I read about was sudden hearing loss. Guess who lost their hearing just like that? Me. Two weeks after I turned for Moscow, I just lost my hearing just just like stepped out of the shower and I lost my hearing my balance in an instant. Like all your hearing in my right ear. So you start researching all this. I mean, you know, NIH reviewed me because it thought might have have anacindrome. Yes. But as I got involved in the whole COVID and I got to meet all these doctors who had a second opinion that weren't going along with the narrative that were they had the courage and compassion actually treat COVID patients that took seriously the vaccine injured. It just connects you to just alternate opinions, you know, alternate thinking. And one of them, you know, laid out the listed side effects of stans and one of them's is sun hearing. A lot of people are thinking could be a main driver of Alzheimer's. But again, they'll never admit it because that's a multi-billion dollar industry right here. I think it's possible that stans are responsible for dementia. People are saying that I don't know. I'm not I'm not a doctor now in medical researcher, but my eyes have been oh, that's really scary right there. If that's true, that's it. I mean, that's a, I mean, people are making are positing that. I will I will say since I took myself off I've had a number of health conditions. It's just just improved as a result seriously. Yeah, I was complaint for years, quite honestly. So they put me on statins when I went in for a CT scan and they saw calcium build up on what they call the winner maker. But that's external. I can always bust through the arterial wall and cause real problems. But I had a heart catheterization a couple years ago. I woke up from that and go, man, I wish my plumbing was as clean as yours. So I don't know. Was it because I was on stands on those years, but I know I was going being treated because I was having pretty severe dizzy spells almost point a passing out frequently. You know, going up a step, whatever, took myself off statins. I hit under doctors care. That's gone. I'll give you I'll give you another one. This is so I also, this is very personal. This is strange. I'm getting into this, but it's a safe space. So I've always had acid reflux for years. Okay. And so I design everything. It was anti-ac and pyrocyc and then next to them, which by the way, were great in terms of leaving the symptoms, but also have some pretty nasty side effects. So again, you know, reading these alternate opinions on stuff, hydroxyl clark, no, hydrochloric acid has been known for decades to be just evade the theory behind what causes acid refluxes you don't have enough stomach acid. You're not, you're not digesting the food properly. You're not providing the signal to the, I guess, it sphincter muscle, whatever that closes your stomach off from your esophagus. So what you do to solve it is you introduce more acid in the, you know, in the form of a natural vegetarian based product. And that's called the hydrochloric, hydrochloric acid. So I take one tablet now before my evening meal, I miss it, probably at least half the time. I don't have it anymore. So I don't take, I don't take any of that stuff anymore. This worked far better. It's just completely natural. It's completely, it's completely opposite of what all these other patented, patented drugs do for you. So it's just, it's just HCL and they call that baiting or something like that. But it's just over the counter supplement. And it's worked great. I mean, you would think, given what I will get all kinds of guff for talking about this stuff, it's just because that's what, that's what they do. This is the, well, you just described your life improving health improving and that's somehow a thought crime. It will be because the, the pharmaceutical industrial complex, again, it's all about drugs that can treat chronic illness, which is why you can't talk about these things, which is why they completely sabotaged the treatment of, of early treatment of COVID using things like hydrochloroquine and, you know, particularly Ivermectin, which I heard story, because yeah, I was the tip of the spear. I got all kinds of people calling me what doctors treat this. And so I heard the, the amazing stories of recovery recovery that Ivermectin. You know, we will hold a hearing on this. There's one attorney that got called into Sui Hospital because somebody's loved one was in the hospital and they were begging them to use. Ivermectin, the hospital just refused. So this lawyer went in there and sued was successful, saved that person's life. So in the end, because he did this, I think he had something. This is a rough number. Something like 200 families that he went to court for to force the hospitals to use Ivermectin or be decenied or some of these other drugs, right? He went about half the cases of those hundred cases. I think he lost two or a couple of patients. Otherwise they all survived of the hundred cases he lost. They all died. Whoa. So you take look at these highest hospital protocols. There's a great documentary Vax three that really goes through this and just talks about the hospital protocols using Ram Dessivir, which the nurses called Run Death Death is near. The anti-fautious, this is the, this is the treatment even though they whatever study it was. They changed the end point from death to just days in hospital, which I don't think he that was true. The number of conflicts of the people reviewing that that were associated with Gilead. I mean, the who recommended against using her best of her and yet we still use it. I mean, you see what happened during COVID, thoroughly corrupt. And yeah, we just had our hearing on the signals on myocarditis, which they completely downplayed a hit for months on the COVID injection. So why are we giving any money to a system that not only fails to improve public health, but actively conspires against it? I would say the primary reason at this point in time is because in 1997, Clinton through regulation allowed pharmaceutical companies to advertise. And you look at those ads. You don't have any idea with those drugs. But that's common around the world, right? Most countries now that we're only only America and New Zealand. I knew the eyes. I know you know, a vote for that. So only the United States and New Zealand out of every country and planet earth allow drug form of companies to advertise right? I'm telling them. And so you take a look at those ads. I have no idea what and those drugs are treating other than they allow dogs to jump higher and people to play around the pool and make your life hotter. Yeah. I mean, they just they look wonderful. And then if you listen to these side effects, you know, spoken to possible death, you know, like again, I sold plastic. I'm used to marketing. There is no way anybody would spend a dollar a dime on an ad for a product where you got to list all the horrible side effects. Why do they do it? It's not to sell again. You don't know what the drug is for. They're not selling those drugs. No, they are buying the narrative. I worked in the media my whole life. And that is and that is what we saw during COVID. I mean, that's what completely opened up. They're paying NBC and Fox News and CNN and FCBS and everybody else not to criticize the COVID Iran in 2010 after I've given a tea party speech and two things I said, which like campaign guys never say that again. Because I defended big oil and big pharma. It's what I have the only guy that likes to gas station every corner of this of the pound because I run it down to empty or you might be only one that wants a life saving new drug. By the way, there are wonderful drugs. For sure. There are that we need, particularly in acute care. But we do need and this is what, again, I give Bobby Candy and Trump so much credit for laying aside the political differences, joining an alliance to focus on a problem that they both need to be solved as chronic illness. Bobby Candy says 75% of our health care spending is on chronic illness. So I just laid out, you know, I had a chronic condition. You know, acid reflux is good and kept treating with all these pharmaceuticals and weren't cheap. You know, private sickness and they're not cheap. Leave the symptoms, but didn't fix it. I go to the something that just is far cheaper. I think works better. I don't have to even take it every day. I think I've probably replenished the acid in my stomach, which declines with age. And just so I mean, every other day I take one, if I remember is like, even me on pretty well solved the condition. I've, I have cured a chronic, I'm not treating it anymore. I was treating it with private second. Next, I'm pretty well cured it. Now I still take this because it's a just a fade. It's like you eat the right stuff. Why can't if Clinton allowed pharma to advertise a lot of formative body media, which they did, I can verify that since I worked there. Why can't that be undone as easily? Well, it can. You have to use your influence with President Trump to make sure he supports Bobby if he decides to do that. But we should do that. And again, I'm a free market guy. I mean, I'm, but we couldn't even have a debate about the most obvious things during COVID because the media wouldn't allow it. And again, I can verify that firsthand since I worked there. And you just couldn't, they did not want in any way to criticize pharma companies period. So that's where it started. We're not criticizing these people period. And it's because they pay all the bills. So if you ended that, what you could do, I think with the stroke of a pen, you could have informed consent again. People would have a chance to know what they were being prescribed and decide whether or not to take it, right? That would be the hope. Yeah. Yeah. I had a public event and it's really based on your interview with Casey and Kelly means. And so we put that together. Bobby Kennedy showed up and we had a bunch of social media influencers on nutrition. And one of the witnesses specializing, he's a psychiatrist specializing in nutrition's impact on mental health. I think probably the best little snippet of testimony said, you know, they don't want to know the root cause of chronic illness. Again, who's they? I remember listening to us at two is what's that gathering? Uh, wit or you just know, oh, wonderful, wonderful woman. Yeah, exactly. You asked her who are they? Yeah. I asked that on my time myself all the time. My guess is they attend doubles whoever they are. They're there. They're not invited to my house for dinner. But I thought that was very interesting. Kind of they don't want to know, of course, the root cause because if they find out it is some pharmaceutical product or some pesticide or some herbicide or some toxin in our food. That's going to disrupt multi billion dollar business models. And those businesses are fully engaged in lobbying. They're fully engaged in having and have captured our regulatory agencies. The time about. So you listen, government is power, right? That's pretty good definition of government. It's power. And it's Lord Actans, aptly stated power corrupts. And so what has happened over the decades is these businesses have a great deal of sympathy for them being over regulated by big government, right? But they're smart, especially the big ones. They got smart people there. So not only do they figure out how to survive with over regulation to learn how to capture it, of course. And then they promote it. And then they capture it for their benefit to the developmental detriment of their competitors, particularly smaller competitors and detriment of the American public. And that is what has happened. I would say across the board in government, whether it's pharmaceuticals, whether it's military and Delta complex, whether it's our big food, that's in my mind. That's the hope that that's what I want to see Donald Trump defeat. And you first defeat it by exposing it. People have to understand this is what's happened. But certainly what I learned, you learned Bobby Kennedy learned during COVID. It is very difficult to defeat back then when I called the COVID cartel. There's a powerful group of interests and they're not going away. Let's start with a really easy one. And those are the vaccine injured. So these would be American citizens who obeyed their government and took a shot that they were required to take on pain and punishment. And then we're injured by or killed by that shot. They've received almost no attention to your literally what the only lawmakers who ever mentions them, you've had a bunch of hearings. You know, they personally describe the scale of the injury and death from the the COVID shots, if you would. Well, just on VAERS alone, I think we're over 38,000 deaths, associated with the COVID vaccine. VAERS is the federally vaccine adverse event reporting system. Yes. So that's a, that's a government reporting system. Now it's some conditions are mandatory to be reported, but they're still not. The two complaints about or hits on VAERS is it does improve causation, but it also dramatically understates the number of adverse events because people just don't report them. Sometimes you don't connect the dots. So on VAERS system, two date worldwide, there's over 38,000 deaths associated with COVID vaccine. And 24% of those two date, either current, the date of vaccination, or within one or two days. Wow. Yeah, I know someone who was killed, but we saw all these athletes dropping like flies on the field. You saw newscasters just toppling over from their, their anchor chair. And like, that wasn't reported. You, you'd get a, you'd get it through social media. You might have a local news story, but there's no national news me that hopped on and say, what is happening here? Because that was real. It was, it was all denied. Yeah. It was all denied. A lot of 23 year old soccer players have heart conditions that turns out. Yeah. Yeah. That's, it's all that exercise to do. I don't know why I'm laughing. It's horrible. So, so 38,000 globally just on VAERS, is anyone keeping track of the injuries and the chronic illness caused by those shots? I think they're primarily calling it long COVID now. Okay. That's, you know, that, that, that's their excuse. And even those that are actually an injured want to think it's just so on COVID. I mean, no, nobody wants to admit that they maybe should have taken a little more time, gotten a little more educated about this experimental COVID injection. They don't want to think there may be a taking time bomb in terms of turbo cancers. And, but again, more and more evidence is coming out that in tumors, there's, they find this spike protein, the spike protein as long as, as well as the modified RNA. It's not true mRNA that does degrade very rapidly, circling the body for months possibly years. Again, they're finding the spike protein in hot, top seed hearts and tumors. You know, we know from people like Kevin McCurning that there was DNA contamination. It can't integrate in the cell. Could cause cancer. Again, there's so, yeah, I mean, hate talking about it because I know 70, 80% of Americans got vaccinated. They don't want to hear about it. No, no, no, they don't. They want to just move on. That's why it's so difficult to hold people accountable for this. Well, here's an easy way to do it. So if I sell any product, a food product, for example, and it turns out to kill people, it's suit. Exactly. So only the Vax makers have this exemption granted to them by Congress, the shield. And I've never heard a real argument for why they should maintain that or why Congress continues to protect them. Why? By the way, so I talked to Barbara Lofish, who is the mom who really pushed that thing through that law itself does not provide liability. This is the 1986. Yeah. It was regulations kind of the wink, wink, not not to get it passed that they implode, you know, promulgated regulations and actually provide that liability protection. Again, it wasn't, it wasn't just for the three vaccines. I think at the time they were on the schedule, it exempted all future vaccines, which has led to an explosion because again, the greatest risk is no downside. Yeah, I mean, you just keep cranking these things out that they aren't tested in a true plebiscuit, placebo controlled trial. Sometimes the trial period is meager. It is only last for a week. It's just it's shocking. And this was Aaron's series, testified at our hearing last week. And he's expert at all this in terms of the American public would be shocked at how little testing these vaccines actually receive. But you have this, it's almost a religion around the safety and efficacy of vaccines. I mean, I understand that it's such an elegant solution, isn't it? Just a 100% safe shot in the army. You never have to worry about this. Maybe there's just not true. Well, but let's say it is true. They're super safe. Peter Hotez is like a legitimate physician. He's telling the truth. He's not deranged. And okay, then prove it. Then hold them to the same standard that every other product that you buy, certainly every product is mandated by government is held to. And that's one that's backstopped by the courts. Right. Tort law. Like I don't understand like why would there be this one thing that's exempt from a process that every other thing is subject to because there were so many injuries manifesting themselves before that law was passed that those manufacturers are going to be suit out of existence. And again, the religion faith that these vaccines are just so crucial, even though you read a book like dissolving illusions, you realize the main reason most of these diseases were eradicated is because we no longer live in squalor. We have sanitation. Right. Okay. So, I mean, you see the chart coming down here and then the vaccines start occurring here and yeah, the tail goes out. And we, you know, vaccines may be eradicated to some of these disease. I don't deny that. But the main thing is we, you know, we actually improve sanitation. And what we are ignoring now is treatment. And that came out with COVID. It's like, I mean, I couldn't, you know, the reason I got into this is I'm chairman Holmass Curity. I'm the only guy holding hearings on this stuff because none of this stuff makes sense. So why are they just pillowing something like hydroxychloricine? I mean, if it works, give it a shot. I mean, what's the harm? It's incredibly safe. I have a remectin. But that was completely sabotaged all for the purpose of forcing this, this injection, what they call the vaccine on everybody is a solution. Why, why don't we talk about treating disease measles? Why aren't we focusing on treatment? Yeah, I'm, I'm telling these doctors generally very treatable disease just about any disease disease can kill you. Okay. But a lot of these can be treated. We ought to be focusing a lot more from my standpoint on treatment as opposed to loading up our children, our infants with dozens and dozens of doses and not even asking the question. So okay, have these been fairly tested? I mean, have we tested giving multiple vaccines at the same dose? I mean, every time you put a vaccine in some of these arms, you're messing with your immune system. Why do we have all these autoimmune diseases nowadays? You know, what is causing autism? I mean, we're just not able to ask the question because to get back to my witness in that last event is they don't want to know. And they attack anyone who asks, including you. And I mean, watching what's happened to you has really been the greatest of all we can calls for me because I would say of the senators I know, which is most to them here like the most temperamentally moderate and a count number based like not all outside radical at all at all. And there are some crazy people in the Congress. You're not who the opposite budgets and stuff. So if they're calling you a wacko, they discredit themselves. That's just as an observer my observation. Again, but that's what they do. You know, so during COVID, I have a quick story here. I was on a telephone tunnel. And this is when on the crime was ramping up. And this is already by the time we've got a person split on COVID. I mean, Republicans don't wear masks, Democrats do, you know, we're Republicans aren't free dealt by it. Democrats are. But again, I'm talking to these doctors. I know they were very concerned for the, for example, in Delta, that variant. It was more difficult to treat. They had to like double and triple the dose of Ivermectin to have it actually be effective. So, you know, nobody knew what was going to happen with home a crime. I think people were thinking it looked like it was going to be more mild. I'm on a telephone tunnel with my constituents product couple of files. And say, listen, take this seriously. COVID can still be a deadly disease. So whether you're vaccinated or not vaccinated, you know, there are things you can do, vitamin D, you can gargle, you know, that helps reduce the viral load. Within 10 minutes, my comps team were being contacted by national news outlets saying, what's this that we're hearing Johnson saying that list screen would replace a vaccine. Now, of course, I said nothing of the kind. I just said, you know, there are things you can do to help protect yourself, you know. And they actually went so far as to go up to the governor of, uh, I guess, this is New Hampshire knocked on his story, Republican governor and said, Hey, what do you think about this whacko Republican senator says that vaccines can, or let's read and replace the vaccines. Well, when bad shit crazy knocks on your door, slime the door in his face, something that was the, so again, what that was what's in an instant. Yeah, what they do, what they do, what they do, one of the worst people, what they do is they discredit people. So then once they've done that, you know, whether as falsely as they discredit you, now you discredit it. So now next time, next thing that comes up, that is true that you're talking about things, all this. He's thoroughly discredited this guy's discredited. He's discredited. He thinks list arenas. That is, that is what they do. Just like, you the CIA used the conspiracy theorist. Um, just call somebody conspiracy theorists and then don't have to listen to many more. This guy's obviously in that case. So no, I, I've, I live this up close in person. The problem is that it does, it does make everyone into a nihilist. It's, it's happened to me. I've tried and fight it. It's like, it, it feels like everything's a lie. So you don't believe anything. And, you know, you just like, don't go to the doctor, for example, which is where I am or I know a lot of people like that. And that's, you know, you should probably go to the doctor. I mean, you know, get a checkup. That's okay. But they so devalued their own currency. They've so discredited themselves through lying. And just the most evil kind of like blaming you for their problems that it's, I don't know. It's had all these effects on our society that I don't think we've even grappled with. I try and tell established members of the medical profession that they ought to be concerned that a very large percentage of American people simply don't trust them anymore. That's all. And that's not good. That's not good. Yep. I think they're evil when I was chairman of the European South Committee on Foreign Relations, we had an the Gary Casparov coming in and talking about Russian disinformation. Yeah. And I thought it was interesting because it's, they're not Russia is not trying to convince you of something with their disinformation. They just want people not to trust anything. That is the whole purpose. They're disinformation. I feel like Albert Burel had did more to achieve that in the United States, the head of Pfizer than like any Russian ever could. You know, Joe Biden did that. Susan Rice did that. I mean, all these people, they just lie right to your face. And there's no recourse. So is there even conceivably a chance that Congress would repeal the protections that the vaccine and the vaccine makers enjoy? That would probably be a stretch. The case is where's the trial bar in this? The trial bar has kind of like wrecked America by encouraging lawsuits for like the most frivolous possible. I could suit all the time by people. Like I don't like what you said, I'm suing you and you have to deal with it. They come to your house, process servers. But and that's because the trial bar has gotten rich from this from them to back. shoot all the time by people. I don't like what you said. I'm suing you and you have to deal with it. They come to your house, process servers. And that's because the trial bars got enriching them. From the tobacco asbestos, all these shakedown, these totally fake money making operations that they Morgan and Morgan with the ambulance chasing and all that. Where are they pushing for the repeal of the protections that vaccine makers uniquely enjoy? That's a really good question. Yeah. So as somebody from the private sector, I avoided lawyers in the judicial process like a play. Me too. So it's not, you know, I'm not overly enthused about saying, but we need to expose vaccines to that check and balance. Okay. And we do. I would say we have to we have to cap awards. I mean, there's got to be something because we do need pharmaceutical companies. You know, I want those life savings. You can't be opinion out of party for lawyers. But but it's got to be based on style science. And that's why I really think the root cause. I mean, the thing that Bobby Kennedy must address is we have to restore integrity to science. You know, this is Eisenhower warned us about this in his farewell address doesn't get as much coverage, but public financing of science and research would lead to a scientific intentional technological lead to drive public policy. I would view that you corrupt it. So when you pay for science, you get the result you want whether it's climate change, whether it's vaccines, whether it's drugs and that type of thing, we need to restore integrity. You know, peer reviews are joke peer reviewers are basically volunteering. So you'll get peer reviewers who might have a different paper themselves and they just discredit that. So what is truth? So you have to restore integrity of science. There's got to be like everybody from opposing sides have to be the table. You've got to make your data available. So some of these studies are published. No, we can't see the data. So that I think is is the first step that Bobby has to accomplish is trying restore integrity, particularly for a government funded science. Will you tried the other day to raise science based questions about pivotal events in American history 24 years ago, 9 11. And you asked a question that I think any honest person would ask like building seven was never hit by a plane. Why did it fall down in exactly the same way the first two towers did that shouldn't be verboten. See, you asked that question. I want to read the response from he Republican in the house a new member called Mike Lawler. I guess from New York. And he said this. I don't know if you know him. You probably don't. You just got there. Quote, Senator Johnson should stop peddling conspiracy theories about the worst terrorist attack in our nation's history and one that forever alter the lives is so many of my fellow New Yorkers crap like this, dishonors and disrespects the innocent lives lost are brave first responders and all families and survivors who still carry the pain of 9 11 each and every day. So I think Lawler was like in high school when 9 11 happened. He doesn't really seem to represent New York anyway. But whatever. The point is why would he attack you personally for asking like the most obvious question ever one rooted in science, which is how did this happen? Like what is that? I don't sure. Her my feelings. I know you don't care. But I just thought why Mike Lawler who literally just got there? Well, what's got a lot of problems in New York. Why is he mad at you for asking that? He would want you to ask what is so off base about that is the only reason I'm looking at this is because the then chairman of the perm subcommittees investigation now I'm chair, but you know, Senator Blumenthal, he he want to do this investigation on sowry's negotiation with PGA. And you know, he's doing because he's from Connecticut and got 9 11 families. They want to know what sowry involvement was fair. I didn't agree with that. I thought this is a private sector negotiation. You know, let them take care of that. Okay. But he did anyway. So leading up to a pretty well publicized hearing, I started getting 9 11 family members seeming the hallway that they would literally in the hallway in congress and they would have a heavily redacted document they got from the FBI in terms of what sowry's the sowry involvement was in 9 11. What we knew. And they asked me, can you please get this unredacted? We want to know what the government knows about these things. Now this is 20 some years after 9 11. It's probably about time. So in the hearing, you know, I asked Senator Blumenthal, would you join me in requesting from the Biden administration this information in 9 11 family. So yeah, so the well, he had to. But the bottom line is I got down this road because the 9 11 families want to know the answer. And once I opened up that inquiry, now I start getting all kinds of information. But man, I had things still redacted from 9 11. It was 24 years ago. It changed country completely. Every American has, I mean, law is right in the sense that it really affected every American. Why would our government continue to lie about it? I can't answer the question to all I can say is it raises my suspicion. Yeah. And then when you start getting, again, I'm just as prone to everybody else going, that's whack on this. But then you start getting the information and you start going, wow, is that weird? Billing number seven, you see it come down and we've all watched because it's cool to watch. These buildings being demolished, boom, just free fall. Well, the only way that happens is if you remove all of their supports at the same time, you blow them all out so that a building can really free fall. If it's collapsing something else, it's like, you know, you build like a fire and it collapses off to the side or something. Right. So that was pretty strange. But the more documentaries I look at this stuff, the more information I receive, you talk to guys like Richard Gage, the head of the architects for 9 11 truth, they feed you information and you start asking a lot of questions and you realize there's, there's a lot here that simply has not been answered. So, you know, the firefighters want to know, there was never a steel structures building that ever class because of fire. Especially building seven, we don't get a lot of buildings that, you know, commercial airliners run in two seats, it's building our own house. But building seven was not hit by anything. It's actually quite a distance from the other towers. It's not right next door. It's 100 years away, I think. And debris hit it in a caught fire and then the whole thing collapsed as we saw on camera. That was not even included in the 9 11 reports. There's no mention in building seven. So like, anyway, the point is you also have people because they never explored explosions, but their, you know, guy named Graham McQueen researched this, he dug up, you know, footage filmed at ground zero, 156 witnesses, you know, first responders saying they heard explosions before the buildings came down. So what is, I mean, there, there trust me, there are a lot of unanswered questions. I mean, things he just can't explain that. So I'm not sure where it goes. I know you had Kurt Wellden on, yeah, he's got a lot of information on kind of the before and after. Because he's connected to the firefighting community, the firefighters want to know. So there are, there are some very legitimate questions. A lot of them that remain unanswered. It all swept under the rug. I mean, they were, and you look at this, news reports were time explosions by the next day. Nobody was. There is, there's a lot of, there's a lot of power. I'm interested in your evolution on this. So you said before Blumenthal, your colleague, Senator Blumenthal, from Connecticut raised kind of raised this in a different way. You were not wondering what happened in building seven. No, never, never, don't think I've ever heard of it. Really? Yeah. I figured the Twin Towers came down. Again, I'm not a New Yorker. Yeah. It affected all of us. We all saw them come down. We said, the world has changed. Yes. This changed the world. They did. Oh, more than any of them did. Not for the better. No, not at all. This is, this is a seminal event in our, our lifetime. And the fact that there's so many unanswered questions that the Bush administration was so resistant to even a 9, 11 commission, the commissioners claimed that it was set up to fail, that you have got a Bob Carey who's, you know, since past said this is a 30 year conspiracy. It's, I mean, I could go, I could sit in front of that. Yeah. Of Nebraska. Yeah. The comment comment. You know, he's a Medal of Honor and Vietnam by kind of walking away. Go, this is a 30 year conspiracy. What do you mean by that? Nobody ever found out. So again, that's, I'm just throwing out little snippets. But as I said, it's, it's, it's, it's amazing. The questions that you see, the legitimate questions have been raised that remain unanswered. That's all, that's all I can say right all I have is questions right now. I don't have any. I get it. But I just, I feel the exactly the same way. I have no clue. I have no theory of everything in this at all. But my question is you just came with this cold though. Yeah. No, this was not something that I was, you know, hankering to delve into one of the questions. Kind of like Bobby Kennedy, how he got involved in childhood vaccines. Yes. He was giving all these speeches on the environment and all these moms would show up with their t-shirts and, you know, he kept him at bay of course some time till one of the moms found out where he lived came with him. It came to his house with a stack of science, which he knew how to read because he was an environment lawyer and said, I'm not going to leave to read this into his credit. He sat down and read it. And further to his credit. Once he read it, once his eyes were open, he couldn't close him as much as he probably wanted to as much as he realized the morass he was stepping into. I can't close my eyes. I can't. And, you know, particularly with childhood vaccines. He's just bad enough of the COVID vaccine. I mean, the earnest from Maris, you know, losses son. I mean, it's just, it's just heartbreaking. I mean, Facebook dissolving these groups that were the only lifeline for some of these vaccine injured and they started committing suicide afterwards because they lost that connection that they didn't have before these groups. But you, I mean, you look at the, the documentary just vaxed and you see these parents had a, and they have the video of a perfectly normal child and they take them in for a well business. They get a vaccine that night they spike a fee or have a seizure. I think I had a 26 year old son who is extremely autistic, can't verbalize, acts up as, I mean, it's just, it's horrible. And you see the stats where you go from, it's hard to verify the 10,001. But I mean, we know by CEOs, CDC's own hundreds to one to now 30 something to one. What's by the way, while they've actually narrowed the definition definition of autism, that they didn't expand it. They narrowed it. What's causing that? And you know, after the makers of vaxed went on road trip with a bus, premiering this thing. And other parents would come up to the boss bus and so they started videotaping their stories. And they got some like 10,000 stories of parents, almost identical. It's like perfectly normal child got the video to prove it. Go in, you know, within that night or within days, you start looking at the increase in seeds versus the increase of the, you know, vaccine schedule. Yeah, I'm not a doctor, not a medical researcher. My eyes have just been opened up to how so much true, so much information. So many questions probably the best way to put it. Who just been suppressed. You can't even ask them. Anybody who does gets marginalized, vilified, discredited. And that's how they, that's how they battle this. They don't battle with the truth. They don't, you know, in my public events, I always invited the federal officials. I always invited the executives from the big farm and you come in and defend yourself. This is an open forum. I'll give you plenty of time. I'll be very fair. You know, speak your piece. I want to hear from you. They won't do it. They, they will, I mean, Peter Hote has famously, you know, Mr. Vaxine pusher, get suffered what was final offer two points, some million dollars. Sit down it and argue with not a doctor, a lawyer. Yeah. You know, just well, debate RFK junior and he wouldn't even do it. What does that tell you? He's just calling people names. So back to 9-11 for a minute, you never really thought about it. Like most people, me too, I yelled at anyone who asked questions about it myself. So I'm sympathetic actually in some ways to people who don't want to hear it. But now that you've looked into it and you said you don't have a coherent theory as to what it was, but you've got a lot of questions, which questions trouble you the most? Well, it starts with billing seven. Yes. We look at that and it just, yeah, I mean, this, this is really weird. You know, it does come down just like a, you know, billing demolition type of project. You get a documentary of this, so I ask an structural engineering professor that does a a four year study on it, pretty well, the bunk's nists now analysis. Again, again, you don't have to be a structural engineer to say this doesn't, this really doesn't make sense. When you start putting together at what temperature steel melts, they had molten steel in the, the twin towers and I'm not sure we had it number seven. But if one column, they said one column expanded, one off kilter and that's what brought the whole thing down. Well, it wouldn't come down so symmetrically, you wouldn't have a free fall. Then you get deeper into it and, you know, there's a things, his name was Barry Jennings. He was there, went up there. They'd already cleared out building seven, even though he went up there to their command center and some because get out of there. It was predict, I mean, literally predicted to come down, even though again, a steel structure building had never collapsed due to fire because they're protected that way. He heard explosions. He had to got down to the six flight, the six floor and had to go back up to eight because something had been blowing out and it's again, what, what cost of building was not hit by an airplane. No, I mean, they did, it was damaged. But even NIST says, you know, not significant damage by the, the twin towers falling. So again, there's just so many things. I mean, you could spend quite some timing. I mean, the ash contains residual of both burnt and unburnt thermite, which is used to to demolish buildings and it's military grade and there's nanoparticle thermite and you have always these metal spheres that you only get these iron spheres with extreme temperatures and again, Jeff fuel burns that below, I think a thousand degrees of Fahrenheit and get nothing's adding up. I mean, engine, you know, just structurally just basic engineering, basic physics, it doesn't make sense. So I would like to, you know, NIST took years to conclude the report to just a layperson. It doesn't make sense, particularly when you listen to the, you know, structural engineering professor just, you know, nuke the, the explanation, they can, they never looked at a plausibility of some kind of control demolition. They never put in their report all these reports of people saying there were explosions. There's just so much ignored. I mean, in fact, the Bush administration dragged their feet, obstructed, setting up on a 9-11 commission. Again, I could go on and on and on and on. I don't have any answers. I just have a, a host of questions. Then if you were upset, if you were Congressman Mike Lawler, and you were upset that someone was a conspiracy theorist, and if you were sincerely bothered by that by conspiracy theories, okay, I understand that, then you would know the only way to end a conspiracy theory is with an explanation that makes sense. Why is there no effort to provide one? Why isn't there a study, a government study of building seven? And just let's put this stuff to rest, like defeat it with the truth. Why isn't there? My guess is because they are very effective at marginalizing and discretting anybody who would answer questions. But why would they want to hide the tried? You'd have to know exactly what they're trying to hide to be able to answer that question. I can't. Of all issues for Mike Lawler to be upset about this one, it's really caught my eye. Like, why do you, why are you mad about it? Can you just got there? And you're attacking as, you know, a senior senator who's like thoughtful and sober and asking totally real questions? Who are you covering for exactly Mike Lawler? And by the way, it was like I went out of my way and had an interview just on this. I mean, I was asked a question probably wandered into a space I maybe shouldn't have wandered into. But again, I was just describing all the ways the federal government has lied to us. Yes. And yeah, I've been part of the federal government. I've been targeted by the FBI's misinformation campaign on Hunter Biden's computer. May I, you know, they've given me BS briefings to throw me off the trail. So I've seen this. I, you know, again, I didn't run for the US Senate because I want to get involved in investigations. I ran because we were more in a church or a kids future because I knew bomb, bomb care wouldn't work. But you come, become chairman of Homeland Security. Yeah, within, immediately you got the Hillary Clinton email scandal. That's in our police jurisdiction, federal records, plus really oversight me. So we start doing those investigation. And just one investigation, just more than another, the same cast of characters, the FBI that wrote the exoneration memo for James Comey transfer and crossfire hurricane to, you know, the group that, you know, vinman and the impeachment inquiry of of Trump. You just see it all. And your eyes are opened up to the total corruption of these federal government agencies. And you realize we've just been lied to over and over and over and over again throughout history. At least, you know, history that's recent in my past. I wonder why you haven't just ignored it like everybody else. I met you right in early 2011, right when almost 15 years ago when you first got there, your business guy from Wisconsin very closely divided state. You didn't win by a huge margin. You never have won by, you never won by 30 points. So, you know, whenever you talk about something in public, you're taking a bigger risk than say the senators from Utah or South Dakota because you could lose an election. I never in a million years thought you of all people would be the guy to like ask questions about 9 11 or the Vax or January 6th and a whole bunch of other issues. And yet you have been the only guy in a lot of cases to ask those questions. Why? Why are you doing this? Would it just be easier to talk about tax reform or something? I would ask you the same question. Why have you been so instrumental in branding the overton window on some of these things? And of course, all the time window is all about this is what you can discuss without trapped or without risk. But you got to go beyond that. So, because I was part of the cover up and I feel guilty about it. That's why I'm trying to atone for my previous sense. That's the reason. In my case, I have a responsibility. Yeah. Yeah. I was chairman of the Senate oversight committee. So, again, you start there. Hillary Clinton has a female scandal. That's my committee's jurisdiction. That has to be investigated. I can't turn the blinds eye toward that. And then like Bobby Kennedy, once your eyes open to this, you also can't turn a blinds eye. But but I think it's just the empathy you have for them, the vaccine injured. Again, I didn't reach out to them. You know, because I was holding hearings, because nobody else was on early treatment when I failed the chairmanship. People start reaching out to you. And then you become aware of these people that are completely being gaseled or being ignored. I mean, I could not believe in that Milwaukee event I held in June, 2021 where I met Breandry Dreslin and Maddie DeGare and other vaccine injured Cheryl Rutgers. Again, I was hoping there would be some measure of sympathy expressed by the news media. They would ask them their stories. Tell us about your experience. Now, the first question was, hey, Ken Rutgers, you just want to try and make money off of a lawsuit here. Is that what you're doing this? So you develop, you develop an empathy for these people. And then, listen, I'm not in New York or I wasn't impacted any more than the world was by 9-11. Not anywhere like the firefighters who lost their loved ones or the 9-11 families. But then they come up to you and they're literally begging you, please, I just, I want some closure here. I want to know what happened. The government's not being honest. You combine that with the fact that I know the government just frickin' lies to their teeth to the American public all the time, which is outrageous. It is outrageous. Okay. So, you know, my eyes are opened. Somebody's got to do it. I actually have responsibility to do it. Now, I'm chairman of the permanent subcommittee investigations. That's responsibility. Now, you have to pick your targets. I've always said I'm like a mosquito and a new discolny. It's a target-rich environment. But I guess I'm focusing on the things where there are legitimate questions by Americans who are grieving, who are suffering because they don't have an answer because their vaccines aren't being taken seriously. So we're not providing the research for it. So they're not getting treatment. They can't be helped. So you take up their cause because nobody else is doing it and you have responsibility to take up that cause. So now, I mean, my life would be a whole lot easier if I just ignored this stuff. But what do your colleagues think? It's such a rebuke. I know you like them and they like you and I'm not trying to cause any problems. But kind of a rebuke to them. It's like the vaccine injured show, but their office is too. Yeah. That was actually, I encourage the vaccine injured to go because I like my colleagues. It's collegiate place. So I said show up. Request and be pretty insistent. Meet with a sender. Meet with your house members, whatever. So they showed up in Mass and I really felt bad afterwards because they were treated horribly in many cases. Seriously? Yeah, horribly rudely. Staff only met with them treated rudely. It was, it was not a good experience with the vaccine injured. Again, I didn't, I didn't witness it. I just heard the stories. I felt long and say, I felt terrible having encouraged them to do that and it ended up being such a bust and such a negative experience in so many cases. And their only crime was following instructions from the US Congress in the executive brain and just like doing what they were told. I mean, they were accused of the most absurd charge level at them that their anti-vaxed. I mean, many to Gary, her mother signed her up for the trial. Brianna Dresson, she signed up for the AstraZeneca trial and what happened to him. Brianna Dresson, I mean, close to suicide. I mean, she, she couldn't be touched to me. She was sensitive to light. She has all these neurological problems many to Gary has a feeding tube. She was in a wheelchair. I mean, horrible. And in her case, the drug company said that she is a stomachache, basically. Because that's how they reported it to their government reporting. That this girl who'd been in the hospital dozens of times, her, her young life, I wouldn't say it's over, but it's not normal anymore. No, these people suffered horrible industries. I mean, Ernesto Ramirez, single parent, this, this his son, I think 16 year old son, somewhere around that age. It says life died suddenly. Boom. And you just heard this again, you saw that so many times. And it's still, it's still being covered up because nobody wants to admit it. I mean, if you're a doctor and you push this or recommend it to your patients, you, you don't want to know that something you recommended to push on your patients might have killed or resulted in permanent industry members of Congress who cut videos, you get to max. You know, our federal health officials, the news media who read latlessly. I mean, Stephen Colbert, you think he'll ever admit to vaccine injuries every, does his little skits with the little, you know, hyperderm, hyperderm needles on background. So no, I mean, that's the, the whole promise there's you've got an entire society that doesn't want to admit they were on, including people who got the injection that don't really want to think about it. Just move on to life. And by the way, to provide some comfort, I think they were definitely hot lots. I've written oversight letters on this. It looks like probably about 5% of the 4% of the injections created about 80% of the adverse events. I can't remember these average engines, but really. Oh, yeah. No. And so I write to the CDC that don't repite reply back, but it's just to me, manufacturing, this is a process out of control. I mean, you got, you really do. I mean, I don't have the stats right with me, but it's obvious they were hot lots here. What should provide some people comfort? I think about 75% of the vaccine lots of very few adverse events associated with it all. You know, I won't speculate why, but they're hot lots, but you write about them. You lay out all the stats and the response to get from the CDC is what else any hot lots. We know, it's just like, we don't see a safety signal. Well, if you're not looking for it, you're not going to see a safety signal, but these people are in charge of public health. They're supposed to care. You know, they were, they were fully vested in this facts in this injection. This was the solution. They pushed it. They ignored the safety surveillance. I mean, the V safe system. This was set up specifically to track the safety of the COVID injection, 10 million people volunteered on this on their mobile device. Now, the questions they asked were pretty mild. They really weren't designed to really expose serious adverse events. They had a list of kind of mild symptoms. You know, irritation in the arm, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. The second part was a little bit more serious. Did you lose a day of work or school? Did you seek medical care? That's a serious as a guy, okay. But the results were shocking and even more shocking, they hit it from the public for two years to Aaron's Siri two years soon in the government to release the results of the online mobile application V safe data. The results were 25% of the people of the 10 million people, 25% lost a day of work or school because their adverse event was, you know, they felt bad enough. 25% 80% I think 7.8% sought medical care. And I think more than a majority two or three times. That's a reasonably sick because I know people with adverse events that suffered and they never sought medical care. Well, we'll get over it. You know, of course, that's what the officials told us. Oh, that just shows you it's effective. Your arms burning up. You're numb. You can't you can't you can't walk. Well, that's just it's working. Yes, to make use of work in medicine. So well, you remain cheerful and single minded. And I think underrated in many ways as you a center. So I'm grateful that you spent all this time. Thank you. Well, thank you. And again, I've been watching you. You know, I appreciate what you've done the risk you've taken your career. I mean, all the issues, you know, going to Russia questioning what happened on January 6th. I mean, all these things. I mean, you are, and this is important. You are expanding the overton window. You are you are helping expand what is can be talked about. And the harm done because we haven't even able to ask some of these questions. We haven't been able to discuss this. You know, we haven't had the type of debate that that we should have in this country. You're a big part of that. And I thank you for what you've done. It's been easy and fun. But I appreciate thank you, Senator. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it. A way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's just subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.