Go, Roman, find him. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe, Rogan, podcast, by night. All day. Terrence Crawford, what's it like to be the fucking man? Man, it's great. I feel like I always been a man. I think you have been a man for a long time. But I think two weeks ago, everybody realized it. Yeah, everybody gave me my recognition around everybody giving my flowers. So it's one of the things that I had to fight to get everybody approved. Well, it's tricky in boxing sometimes, because sometimes it's difficult to make those match-ups happen in a dream match-up like that between two undefeated world champions and for you to dominate the way you did. Because a lot of people had that like a pick-um fight. Like a lot of people didn't know how to call it, but you just fucking ran that fight. You ran that fight. That was amazing. Yeah, you know, that's the fight that we've been on for years. And to finally secure the fight and perform the way that I performed, it was a great moment for me and my career. It was beautiful, man. I mean, just the way you control, the way you switch things up, the way you control the pace of the fight, the defense, your defense was on point. Those hooks that you were landing in close were magnificent. It was a brilliant fight, man. I mean, I'm sure you appreciate it. I'm sure you watched it a bunch of times. But man, that was like a real, because it was such a mainstream fight, such a huge fight where everybody was paying attention to it and talking about it, even casuals, that they got to see you perform that way. And you know, now it's like there's no dispute. You're the number one pound for pound guy on earth. Yeah. That's something that I got to credit to my coaches, because we drill everything that you're seeing, fight night, we drilled it, time and time again, time and time again. So it was, it was, it came natural and easy for me when the fight came, you know, like I said, only thing they kept saying, uh, how he's going to beat me is because he's bigger and he's stronger. That was it. You look stronger. Of course. Yeah. And I was just like, how do you know he's stronger than me? Right. He might be bigger than me, but big, no meaning stronger. But he's just taller than you. You look more muscular than him too. But it was just the technique was what really stood out. It's like you just were a master in there. It was a master class. That's something that they wasn't giving me credit for as well. How? Because they say it's like how will they not? You know, I don't know what it is with me. They just always try to diminish my accomplishments and all well who I was fighting. They say, oh, well, you wasn't fighting nobody. And this guy, Aerospanz is the most fundamental, least sound fighter in the game. So that's why everybody was picking them. But I was favorite in Vegas. So Vegas must have had it right. Yeah. Well, the wise people picked you as a favorite, you know, just just based on your accomplishments. It's not like Aerospanz wasn't a great fighter. He's a great fighter. But it's so interesting when you watch a great fighter against what I believe is an all time great. It's just that there's just levels upon levels upon levels upon levels. And right now you're at the top of the fucking mountain. Yes. Yes. And I'm enjoying it. I'm enjoying it. Beautiful. You deserve it. That's when you plan for that fight, you knew that you were probably going to fight him like for the last few years, it was something that was on the table. But not really. There was a point there was a point in time where I was like, you know, I shifted gears and I shifted my mind off of Aerospanz because I didn't feel like the fight was going to happen. But once I left Top Rank and we started negotiating, I was like, oh, well, maybe this fight will happen. Then once I fought Avennesian because the conversations and everything that we was talking about to get the fight done, it wasn't lining up to what I wanted. So I decided to take another fight. And I came back to the table and like, hey, listen, let's get this fight made. And at that point in time, things wasn't going how I would have liked it to go. I just hit up, it's like, hey, listen, man, if me and you're going to fight me and you going to get this done because there's a lot of people that block in the fight. How was it blocking? What was the whole thing? But just business wise, I just felt like I was worth X amount and they felt like I wasn't. And they wanted to do the deal a certain way. And I wanted to do the deal the fair way. And Aerospanz seen it. He was agreeing with everything that I said. It was like, yeah, we can do this. We can do that. And he probably felt like he gave up too much at the end when it was all said and done. But I felt like everything was fair. Was it in terms of the purse split? Everything. We talked about everything. And so this fight had been discussed for like how many years now? Five years. Wow. That's crazy. That takes that long for someone just to happen in boxing. When I came to the, what's the way division? I called out all the champions, except Sean Porter. I called out all the champions. I went up the mall at that time. And I wasn't able to get in the ring with any of them. And at that point in time, there was called an Aerospanz, the boogeyman. And my reply was how is he the boogeyman when I'm chasing him? You know, I just wanted to prove to the world that I was better than what they said I was because given the fact that how great I looked against each opponent, they say, oh, well, he wasn't nothing or he was this. He was that because how talented I am. So they didn't want to give me no credit because I passed all my teses with flying colors. It was great to get in the ring with Aerospanz Jr. and do the same thing if not better than I did for the past opponents that I faced. No, you were on fire. It was sort of the same thing that Roy Jones Jr. faced. Like everybody's like Roy hasn't beaten anybody. Like yes, he has. It's just he's so much better than everybody else that he was making everybody else look like they weren't any good. But those were world championship caliber fighters and Roy was just lighting them up. Right. Sometimes when a fighter eclipses everyone else and reaches the pinnacle, that's the criticism they face until there's an undeniable moment. That was your undeniable moment. Like everybody's got to shut the fuck up. And that's what my feelings was. A lot of people like me and I look too happy. You know, after you won, after you won, I didn't see the excitement in you. I was like, man, I was happy. I was happy just I had to prove myself, you know, to the world how great I knew I was. But at the same time, I was kind of disappointed at the same time that it took this long for me to get my recognition for me to get a big marquee fight of this status at 35 years old. Especially after chasing it for five years. Right. And I was chasing Manny Pacquiao for probably five years probably before. So it's like I've been champion for nine years going on 10 years in March. So I've been doing this game for a long time. You know, and I've been at the top since I've been looking for all the biggest challenges there is. And some of them I was able to capture and some of them went the other way. And I'm just blessed to be able to be the first man to be undisputed in the junior world's way division, the first man to be undisputed in a world's way division in the four-bell era, the first man to be undisputed in two-weight divisions. So it's a blessing. It's a blessing. It's a huge blessing. It's an amazing accomplishment. You look, Tappy. You're a dancer with your mom. You have a good time. I don't know why people thought you weren't happy. Because you know when you're going to back room, everybody want to see the excitement. I was just like, huck. I got that out for my back. What did you get inside of relief? Was there anything unusual about that fight? Is that exactly how you expected the exchange is to go? I'm sure you watched a ton of tape on him, right? Actually I didn't. Really? A lot of people always ask me, do I watch a lot of film on my opponents? And I always tell them no because I have a different style. They're not going to fight me the same style or the same way that they fought their previous opponents. They just not, you know? So I already knew how he fought. I just watched probably like two fights of his just to get a feel for what he liked to do, but he don't like the things that, you know, I can capitalize on. And that's it. Like I don't watch too much film because I'm going to make my adjustments on the fly inside the ring. So yeah, I don't watch too much film. That's interesting. What is the general consensus on that about watching film? Do most champions watch film? Is it just on an individual basis? No, some people like to watch film to where they feel as if they know what they opponent is going to do when they're going to do it because they got certain habits to identify when they're going to throw a punch or when they're going to back up certain things that you see as a top athlete, you start noticing, okay, I noticed that he's doing this when he's doing this. He's doing that when he's doing this. And you pick up on that. And so you put it in your mind like, okay, we're going to prepare for this. When you do that, we're going to do this. So you try to capitalize on it. But me, I never was that type of person. I let my coaches, they do the studying and then they come up with a plant and then they shoot me the plan, the plan to win and we just go from there. When you switch, because you're in my opinion, the best ever at switching from Orthodox to South Pole since Marvin Hagler, you're the best ever. When do you decide, do you just feel it? Do you go out there of South Pole sometimes and say, I'm going to fucking switch it up? How do you make those changes? Well, I think I made the change to fight South Pole in the backdress room. Really? Yeah, because I was like, man, how should I come out? Because in my mind, I was just so filled with the energy from the winds, the press conference, the moment. So I was like, man, I just want to go out there and everybody's saying I'm too small. So I went to Pro Room. Everybody was saying he was going to walk me down. So I was just like, man, they just don't know. I just had that chip on my shoulder. I just went to go head on with the bull and just go fight them. And it was like just box. I was like just box. And then I was remembering. I was like, you ever fought too many South Pause before? And then on one of the occasions, he got hurt real bad by a hood. So I was like, I'm coming out of South Pole and we don't box just to start off. But at the same time, I'm going to get my respect out the gate. I'm not going to be doing all that moving. So the plan was never to move and everybody when you interview them, they was like, oh, Terrence got to be slippery. He can't stand in front of his pants. He can't do this. He got to get on his bicycle. I'm like, you know, Terminator, I'm like, man, I'm going to be right there in front of him. Like I always do. You know, I'm going to make a miss and make them pay. And I'm going to fight my fight. So I feel like that was the key for the victory because he wasn't used to fight in South Pause. Do you feel as comfortable orthodox as South Pause? Do you feel like you're better in one stance or is it just depending upon that opponent? I think it's depending on opponent. You know, I feel I'm equally as great in both stands. I'm very powerful in both stands. I hit just as hard with my left, probably even harder with my left than my right. You know, but I think it's the opponent. They were talking about it in the broadcast. They said that when you were a kid, you hurt your hand. And so that's why you started practicing South Pause. Yeah, that's when I started actually practicing it. You know, that was something that when I when I had the cast on, I was like, man, I love the gym so much. I'm like, man, I'm not leaving the gym. Like I'm going practice with this left. And that's when I got the left stronger because at first, when I go South Pause, it was only, you know, my right, my right, my right, then when my hand got messed up, just started working on the left and it started getting stronger and stronger. And I started getting more accurate because at first, just thought it just to be throwing it. And then, you know, it just got to a point where they both my left was actually way stronger than my right, but then came back. So I had to get my right back stronger. That's great. It's crazy that you have that option because that's such an amazing advantage. To be able to fight justice comfortably from Orthodox or South Pause. Oh, yeah, definitely definitely. You know, I look at it like you can't go nowhere. Like you track like you move to your left. I can go South Pause and cut you off. You move to your right. I can go Orthodox and cut you off. So and then it is great that I can pack a punch in both hands as well. Because a lot of people when they switch, they give up something. I think when I switch, I gain something in both stands that I probably don't have an other sense. So it's great for me. Did anybody ever try to discourage you from switching up that much? Of course. Did I? My coach used to always. He used to gain mad. Like you need to focus on one stance and doing it right before you start switching. and you got the Orthodox stands down. Pay all the way and then you trying to go South. I'm like, alright, alright, now go Orthodox and then in the fight. I switch then I switch back. You know, stop switching. And then I win a fight like what? When did he stop telling you to stop switching when I was winning? He was like, alright, since I can't stop you from switching, we just going to train that way. So yeah, if you do four rounds, you're going to do two rounds, South Paul, you're going to do two rounds or the docks. That's just how you start training. Well it's amazing how it turned out and four spins, you know, who always fights South Paul, like to see you as a South Paul too, like probably created a little bit of an adjustment for him. Yeah. Yeah, especially given that he wasn't fighting too many South Paul's and his whole career. Right. That much. Like after you dropped him in the second, right? Somewhere in like the middle of the third, you started to turn the heat up. Then you start closing the distance and you were like smothering him. You know, like somewhere in the third it seemed like you picked up the intensity. Is that when you felt like you started to get to him? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I felt like I was in control the whole fight. You know, the first round, neither one of us really did anything was kind of just filling each other out. The second round, he kind of started picking it up a little bit. And I caught him with them two shots. I felt like that's what led me to get more control because I felt as if I caught him off going. He wasn't expecting me to punch as hard as I did. So I could see on his face he was kind of like, oh, you know, and then the rest, you know, I was in control. Yeah. And then we were in control. It's an amazing performance, but now that you've accomplished this and now that you're the first man ever to be undisputed in two different way classes, like what are the offers now? Because I hear all this talk about Jamel, I hear this talk about Canelo. Like where are they at right now? Well, you know, Canelo and Jamel is fighting. I wanted to fight Jamel next since he was 154 pound underarmuted champion. But as you know, they're going to strip them for his belt once the bell rang when he fight. So your goal was to go up and become undisputed in three different places. There you go. Wow. Something that never man done before. Right. And you know, it's greatness. Like I said, this is my error and I'm taking it and nobody will stop me. So now I'm in shift gears because I know I want to fight Jamel, but if he lose to Canelo, I wouldn't always say, man, that's a big step. That's a big step. But for a person to go up three way classes from 147 to 168 in the win. Yeah. And become undisputed. Wow. What can they say? They can't say nothing right now. But what can they say? Well, then then you're in like the greatest of all time discussion. I'm already in them. Yeah. No discussions. But I'm saying, but what would they say though? Three time undisputed champion and a smaller fighter that went up three way divisions to conquer one of the baddest men's besides itself that's been doing it for probably longer than me. So you said 68, but you, you mean 54 right? No, 68. You want to go up to 68. So, so who would you fight a 68 Canelo? If he, yeah, if he win or a child alone with the winner, that would be crazy. I want to be three time undisputed to jump up like that. 21 pounds. Yes. What do you walk around that? I don't know. You know what I'm telling you. I don't know. I don't know. You know what I mean? But how much time would you need to prepare for something like that? Would you gain weight? Would you do it for that? I would definitely have to gain weight. Yeah. I just believe in my abilities. You know, Canelo's not a big guy. You know, he's 5-8 fought at 52 in the club. Yeah. Yeah. He's winning fought for it, rather. He's big, like muscular wise, but for us like height right now. So yeah, that wouldn't be nothing that, you know, we have to see that would be insane. For you go from 140 all the way up to 168, that would be, that would be, whoo. I think we can happen. I think that's to be honest. I think that's the biggest fight in boxing. He beat Charlon, Terence Crawford, Canelo. That's the biggest fight in boxing hands down. No other fight fighters could compare to that, you know. No disrespect to Charlon, but he's not a superstar. He's not, you know, on Canelo's level. Now he got a chance. Don't give me wrong. Like he's going to do well in that fight. And he got the tools to win. You know, it's just about preparation and what type of fight he fight. Now Canelo and him are fighting at 68 and what are they fighting? Is that September? Yes, September or 30 of nothing. So when would you like to get back in? Like, what would be good for you? Like how much of a turnaround? It probably, if I in September it'd probably be next year. But that gave me time then, you know. Boke up. Yeah, give my body right. What kind of strength and conditioning routine do you do now? Because how much is it difficult for you to make 47 or is it pretty easy? No, it was a little difficult. Yeah. It was a little difficult. Yeah. I had to wear the little plastics and sound of suits this time. But, you know, I don't know what it is. I go up and wait and then the weight be going up on me. Ha ha ha. It's the body of that. Yeah. It's like he likes to get thick. Right. So it's cool though. That's cool. So when like a normal camp, what is your training routine consist of? Like, do you do running? Do you do strength and conditioning workouts in a gym? Like what do you do as far as like physical preparation? I do at all. I run. I swim. Strength and condition. Pliometrics. All that. You do swimming. Yes. A lot of people are doing swimming now. I've been doing that in my whole career. Really? What do you like about swimming? I just think, you know, it helps on your breathing. It helps on your breathing, your endurance. It's better on your joints because we don't run every day. Right. So it helps tremendously. And do you lift weights? Yeah. But not heavy. We live probably like, you know, it's a good thing. We live probably like 20 pounds, like some light. Mm-hmm. Just a lot of endurance. Yeah. Yeah. The little quick twist muscles. So if you have a fight where you're going to go up to 168 pounds, how much time do you think you need to get ready physically for that? I'm ready now. You ready now? I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm the type of fighter that I just believe in myself. You know, and I don't think a lot of people think it's all about weight, but I think this is about the skills. You know, I got the power to make anybody respect me. I don't care what, what your weight is. If I catch you in the right spot at the right time, you're going to fill it. You know, and I just feel like it's called boxing for a reason. I'm out thinking. Yeah. Well, you show that in that fight. I mean, just the defense, everything man, it was a masterclass. That's what I love about boxing. Like if I wanted to show someone a boxing match, I would show a fight. Like that. Like this is what I love about boxing. Like this man is right in front of that dude. He's rolling with every shot. He's picking off every shot the other dude throws out him and he's countering with like split second timing. Yeah. And that's hard to do. That's hard to do. And you got to be comfortable enough to have confidence that you got to take chances. Yeah. Like when, when I, when I dropped on with the uppercut and the hook, I got hit in the left hand, right? Yeah. I got hit while I was throwing the uppercut, but I knew that going into it because I baited them in and set a track. So in my mind, I'm going to take one to get this, get this off and then come back with something else. And that's how I got the, the drop, the second drop. Yeah. That uppercut was genius. It was just inside tight. Oh, per turn. How hard to spend it? Oh, he didn't hit the hard. He never caught you that clean. It was probably the best shot he landed. No, he caught me, he caught me a couple of times. But, you know, I was surprised at how hard he didn't hit really, given that everybody said, oh, he's a big puncher. He's just, I think he's just a volume puncher. I think he just wears opponents down, just wear them down. I don't think, you know, he has a one punch knockout. He has power, but it's not like, you know, boom, sleep. You know what I mean? I think it's like, boom, boom, boom, boom. And then he just wears you down. Right. Yeah. That is a difference, right? Because if you look at his career, you never see him like knocking your body out with one punch. You never see him, you know, dropping nobody with one punch. You already see him like wearing him down, wearing him down. That's why he goes so, so hard to the body because he want to wear you down. once, once you get tired and once your body started, we can, everything started, we can. And those little punches that wasn't hurting start hurting. Oh, so. Well, that was probably your most anticipated fight. But what do you think was like your most difficult fight? I would think gamble, really. I would say gamble because they experience at the time, you know, you gotta understand. I came from fighting six round fights, you know, to 10 round fight on HBO when I got the greatest pair of sky fight. So then I fight him, then I fight another guy for an intern, the N A B O. And then I fight for title eliminator and clean off. And then I fight Ricky Burns. And then I come back and fight gamble when I become champion and gamble was labeled. The next floor he made, whether he was on the pound for pound is, you know, everybody had gamble at a high rate. You know, so he's limping gold medal. You know, he had to experience over me. And so I think I learned a lot in that fight. And that's what made it, you know, hard because that was something that I never experienced in the fighter before. So it was a great learning experience. That's one of the most interesting things about watching a very talented fighter is seeing how they respond to the next level of opposition and the next level of challenges. Like you're saying, going up from six rounds to eight rounds to 10 to 12 and seeing the different caliber of competition. You know, when you look at like a boxer's career, it's interesting because when they're kind of at the end of the line in their late 30s, it's the time when they have the most experience. They know the most, but their body doesn't really perform as well anymore. Like this is kind of balancing act. And the guy who beat that better than anybody was Bernard Hopkins. Because Bernard was world class up until like he was fifth, which is so crazy. Like how the fuck did he do that? Think because his body was more preserves than when he was in jail and he didn't have a lot of wear and tear on his body. You know, my guy Stephen Nelson, he's, he's another one. He's 35 years old and he's still moving like he's, he's young because he never did no sports. He started boxing that like 18. Oh, so no injuries. He just had an injury about a few years ago. He tore his Achilles. He was out for two years, but he back like, nothing happened. That's a big one. Yeah. Jamal held the UFC light everywhere champ, but just Torres Achilles. Mm hmm. That's a rough one. Definitely. Jamal told Torr it plant basketball. It's just crazy. He tore his sparring, moving backwards. Yeah, he was just moving backwards. It wasn't nothing crazy. He was just moving backwards and it's just pop. He said he thought somebody like hit him. He was just like, he looked down. Like man, he thought it was me at first. I'm way on the bag. I'm like, what? He's like, man, I fucked up. I'm like, what? He was like, man, my Achilles. I'm like, how you know? He was like, man, I heard it pop. It's all like everybody getting around them. I'm like, man, you gotta go to the hospital. Let's go. Wow. Two years. Two years out the gym. I'm at the rain. That's a long one. It's a crazy injury to come back from. Yeah. Cause it's such a thick tendon when it pops. It's just a disaster. Mm hmm. Have you had any like significant injuries? No. That's amazing. Yes. Thick tendon when it pops is just a disaster. Mm-hmm. Have you had any like significant injuries? No. That's amazing. Yes. So when you say like for Bernard like he preserved his body, I know you're very disciplined and I know that you like, do you ever take time like after a big file like that where you go off the rails and eat pizza every day and go crazy or do you stay disciplined? Well, I'll eat beef or pork, but you don't eat beef or pork. Or pork? Really. Yeah. But my eating habits is not the best. You know, I still drink pop here and there and I still, I didn't like nothing. I used to eat tons of candy like every day. Well, I used to eat tons of candy, but you know, are you fighting? Yeah. And camp too. I don't know. It was just something that, listen, I'm going to do this. I'm going to make way. I'm going to get everything done. But I'm going to have my candy. And I like it. Look at the candy. I just liked it, you know, the Jolly Ranchers, the Chewy ones. Just Chewy, Chewy candy, the Starburst, the Gunnies. I used to just always eat them with them. Well, when you're training it a lot, it's not bad to have a little extra sugar. Yeah. Like Floyd used to drink sodas after trained. Yeah. And everybody's like, why would he do that? And then I talked to you in nutritionist and he's like, it's actually after a very hard workout, like sparring and hitting the bag. It's actually a good way to replenish glucose. Yeah. That's probably why I always was drinking it. And cutting weight. I don't know why. When I'm cutting weight, I'd be like, all right. Even though water, I mean, even though pop, it's going to make me more thirsty. I'd be like, I need a spark. I need a spark. A cold spark. And they're like, what? I'd be like, I just need a spark. How come you don't eat beef or pork? I don't eat beef. Pork is this. You know, bad for you and someone healthy. And I think when beef, I stopped eating beef, probably seven years ago, probably more than that. Real? Yeah. I had big problems and I was like, man, my back was just hurting so bad and I didn't know what it was. So I went to the hospital. I went to the emergency. And so they did the MRI and CAT scan and stuff like that on my bag. And I had backed up shit all up my bag. What? backed up shit. Really? That was a little dirty. All beef. So since I cut out the beef, because they said beef is harder to digest, and harder for your body to break down. So I stopped eating beef and I never had none of them issues ever. That's crazy. I've never heard anything like that. Yeah. So what do you get your protein from? Chicken. Just chicken. Chicken. Fish. Fish. So chicken turkey fish. Yeah. That's great. I've never heard anybody have it. I eat mostly meat. Yeah. It's like that's the most of my diet is meat. You probably got a lot of shit in. Nope. Nope. I know. I've veggie. That's cheating. You might not do it. But you got shit in MRI. No, maybe you should do a colon cleanser or something. Do you do colon cleanser? No. Do one and you're going to be amazed. Really? I swear. I don't think it's anything wrong. I did one. You know, I was doing one in this camp. Yeah. And it was crazy. Like, you know, shit that come out of you. You'd be like, damn, I had to do a colonic. No, I just, you know, clogs rough. Yeah, I was in your house. Yeah, I ain't going there. Yeah, I ain't going there. What did you do? What did you take? No, I just, you know, take, you know, just little colon cleansers, dietary. You know, I like supplements or stuff like that. Like this stuff that's like fiber. Yeah, fiber that makes the shit come out. And it just, whoa. Yeah, I did that before camp and stuff. And I was like, damn. So if you own, do you have someone that prepares your meals? Yes. Yeah. So you got like a meal prep. I got a nutritionist. I got a chef order. And you're also, I saw, are you a part of that snack thing too? Yeah. Yeah. So that's what that is is, is that, um, the dude from Balko? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So Victor, he was on the podcast back in the day. So he's a guy that busted, or he got busted for, with Barry Bonds, the clear, whether they were giving them that undetectable steroids. And now he's on the other side of it. Yeah. And nobody knows better than him because he cheated for years. Yeah. And they, and they hate it. They hate it because you'll see a lot of people like, oh, man, this dude was a cheater. This dude was this, this dude was that. And then, you know, you can't get in on a past. Well, he was a cheater, but, you know, just because the guy was a cheater. It looked first of all, that's the kind of guy you would want being involved and cheating and catching cheating. But he's trying to clean up the whole sport. Yeah. It's not like he like, oh, I will, you know, I'm sponsoring you. You represent my brand. He's trying to clean up the whole sport. So, you know, he's like, why isn't it like more transparency? Yeah. Where's the transparency? Like, where's this? Where's that? Why can't the world know what's going on? You know, with the test that's going on. Yeah. The public should know, you know, if these fighters is clean or not. Right. Every month, there's fighters coming up positive for steroids or band substance. Well, look at the Anthony Joshua, Dylan White fight. Yeah. It's canceled two weeks out. Huge heavyweight fight. And Dylan White Pops. Yeah. And that's not the first time. No, he's popped before right. Yeah. Yeah. So it's sad for Anthony Joshua to, you know, go through those things that I'm trying to for this fighter and he popped down bone. I'm hit with it. Right. Got to prepare for somebody else. And I'm the worst ones when they come, you know, at the last minute. And they ready. Right. Because some people just train just waiting for that call. Right. You know, you never know. Also him fighting Heleneous after Deontay starched them. That's like, because everyone's going to prepare, compare you rather. Because Deontay, Deontay hits so hard. It doesn't even make sense. He hits so he hits so different than everybody else. Definitely. Doesn't make sense, man. The Helene is fighting. He's like moving back. And he went like that. Blah! Yeah. He got to just shut off. He blessed with dynamite. And that right hand. Like nobody before. Nobody. Like nobody. Like nobody. And the history of the heavyweight division, we have some giant Pontius Ernie Shaver's George Foreman, Mike Tyson. But I put Deontay at the top of the heap. Right. Hey, I don't know. I don't know, man. Because those guys, you know what I mean? There was tough and snails back in the days. Yeah. But I think Deontay water, man. He hit you a couple of times with that right hand. Yeah. If you ain't Tyson Fierre, you're going to sleep. Right. He's the only dude. He's the only dude. The first fight was bananas. When he catches him with that right hand and the left hook as he's going down and Deontay goes like this. And he thought it was over. And this motherfucker rises like the undertaker. Because I was like, there is no way. There's no way. And then he starts out boxing him. Like how? He beat him. I mean, I thought he came back and wanted to rest it around. I think he did. And then he took that strategy into the second fight. He realized that Deontay does not fight as well when you're going after him. And so then he just dominates the second fight, dominates the third. But in the third. When he got rocked once so hard, you could watch the ripple, the shock wave go down his body. And it was jiggling his fat. Jiggling his back fat from the shot. Just boom. I don't think there's another person in the heavyweight division. I would have ate that shot like Tiger Spitt. I think I told everybody both fighters won that fight. The first fight. And I said because Tyson Fury, I don't know if you made the count. But any other fighter, you get dropped like that. They was going to call it off. Because dude literally, boom. Yeah. Looked up. And it was just like any other fighter they would account it out. And I feel like Tyson Fury won on points. Yeah. He was winning the fight. He got up still winning. Second fight, Tyson Fury hands down. But the third fight, the outta tell Wilder could have made it a better, interesting fight. But he got tired. He was working real well. But he got tired. But Tyson Fury's smart. He started putting that weight on him, started laying on him. He's incredible. That's the experience. He's incredible. He's incredible. He's incredible. And he's such a character too. Such a fun dude. Yeah, he's funny. He's so funny. He got so mad at me because I said John Jones would fuck him up. And I said in a fight, it'll fight. It's like no man would beat me. Oh, no. Lock me in a room with any man and I'm coming out alive. No, John. John, he's a dangerous dude, man. Y'all better leave him alone. Leave him alone. Yeah. Listen, I believe firmly that if Tyson Fury learned wrestling and learned Muay Thai, when he was younger, just like John did, he'll be a world champion. Yeah, but he's not being John now. No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no one's beating John. Yeah, even if he was to train when he was little, he's still not being John. He'd have to be a great wrestler too. The thing about John is he can do everything. Everything. And he's the most, he has the highest octagon IQ. He's the best at like implementing his strategy and utilizing his reach and just figuring out how to get a hold of you. He's the best. He's gonna find a way to win. Yeah. That's my God. He's amazing. He's amazing. But like when it comes to heavyweight boxers, Tyson Fury is one of my all-time grades. I have two favorite all-time fighters. Mike Tyson is prime, which was just like a cultural phenomenon. Yeah. Like when you would watch Mike Tyson fights back in the day, they were executions. Right. Like you were just paying, and you were hoping it lasted a little, because you're paying for the pay-per-view. Like I hope he doesn't knock this guy on 10 seconds. Yeah, and you wanted to see something. And they were literally like two rounds one round. It was amazing. People forget. Like when you see him in his prime, and he was bobbing and weaving. I was talking to the guys last night at the comedy club, and I was talking about the Marvis Fraser fight. And that to me is the most terrifying version of Mike Tyson. Because Marvis Fraser really didn't have a chance. His father was propping him up. His father wanted him to fight Tyson, because Joe Fraser would have wanted to fight Tyson. When he was in his prime, he was like, I'm going to give my son out there. Do it. And Tyson just came out, guns blazing. This was Tyson before he won the title. 24 wins, zero losses, 22 knockouts. And a heavyweight like nobody had ever seen before. Moved like a lightweight. The way he was bobbing and weaving and coming in close, he was so fast. But his punches were just ridiculous angles and accuracy. I fucking love this fight. Yeah, nobody was like, especially in the heavyweight division. No, it was a totally different thing. You see him set up the uppercut. He Paul Paul with that jab. Yeah. Boom. It was incredible. In his prime, I feel like I would have loved to see him against any of the greats, any of the greats. Joe Lewis, Muhammad Ali, any of the greats I would have loved to have seen Tyson in his prime against those guys. Yeah, if they could take a punch, then it would be interesting. The punches come so fast. The thing about Tyson too was the speed. Yeah, that's what I said. They could take a punch. The speed was a good hit. Tyson got hit a lot. Yeah. He's willing to take a hit. He's powerful hit off. Well, he also had that neck that started at the top of his ears. His neck started up here, man. Yeah. It's a crazy neck, man. He could take a punch better than anybody, better than anybody. So what's your thing? I mean, actually, what's your question? Okay. So what you think about the business side of MMA and boxing? In what way? In like, you know, the way of the fighters getting, you know, not getting what they deserve. In MMA? And boxing. Well, you know, it's tricky, right? Like this whole thing with you and Spence, like trying to negotiate a proper contract. You know, there's a lot of vultures, there's a lot of weasels. The one good thing about the UFC is that there's one organization that controls it. The one bad thing about the UFC is that there's one organization that controls it. So you got good and bad. So like, if I was a manager of a fighter, I would want fighters like your career where tested and you're facing ever increasing challenges, but it's calculated. It's calculated and you get lessons from each fight and then you build up to a point where you're ready to challenge for a title. Like, John Jones fought for the title when he was 22. I mean, it was a last minute fight. Rashad Evans got hurt and John Jones went in to fight Shogun. John was just so fucking talented, so above everybody else that he dominated that fight and walked away the World Champion and destroyed Shogun. He opened up the fight with a flying knee. 22 years old, first title fight opens up with a flying knee. Who the fuck does that? Nobody does it. Everybody would be nervous. Everybody, but John's just so loose and creative in there. But in MMA, a lot of times fighters get fights that are really not ready for him. And I'm not talking about that aspect of, I'm talking about the business side of it. Well, the business side speaks to that as well because for a fighter to get to a point where they're undefeated and they have a big name, then they start getting the big money. And then they're the headline of the card. And I think there's a lot of good in that. There's a lot of good in preparing a fight or properly. Like you see a lot of fighters when they fight for a title. They might have like 16-1, 16-0, like people like undefeated records. It's very rare that a UFC fighter gets all the way to a title fight without some losses. Definitely. And I think that also speaks to the styles, differences, the wrestling, the kick box, all the different things that you might face inside the oction and having to prepare for that. That's one thing I like about MMA. You know, those guys, they still, great fighters, they still get praise. You know, even though they probably got five losses. You know, one loss don't define how great they is, you know, compared to boxing. Right. You know, look how the media and how people with fashion, aerospace, like he's not great. Crazy. You know what I mean? Just because he loves to all-time great fighter in myself. You know, that's all the fighters that I didn't fault. And once I fight them and, you know, I dismantle them, they say, oh, well, those guys are weak. Those guys are not great fighters though. Those guys is tomato cans. They washed up. They bombs. I'm like, dang, how can you disrespect this man? And he didn't work to ask off to get to the level that he is to even be able to challenge me. You know what I mean? Can I just be that good? Why they got to be bumps? Why they got to be tomato cans? I mean, they're just a lot of noise though. There's a lot of people, their opinions are stupid. There's a lot of people, their opinions suck. But if you look at my whole career, that's what was always said. Terrence Crawford, I haven't fought anybody. Terrence Crawford, you know, only fought. Washed fighters. Terrence Crawford is Terrence Crawford that. But now, after the spins, that's why I shot the fuck up. That's what I said. But don't listen to those people. Listen to Andre Ward. Not any motor van. You know what I'm saying? Oh, they do. They motor. Okay. You like David Goggins? Yeah, I want to see this. I want to hear it. I want to see it because that light staff fuel. Right. And then I just grab my teeth and be like, well, one of the most crazy stories about your career is your mom. It's about how your mom just never gave you any praise. It was like, nope. Not good enough. She was tough. She was tough. You know what I mean? I love my mom and the deaf. That's my heart. It's my girl, you know what I mean? But that was just her way of pushing me to be great. You know what I mean? And she just knew that her son was so competitive. She was just like, all right, let me see how competitive you is. Come here, little kid. You would pay people to try to beat you up. Yeah. No, we have gloves. We have gloves. You know, I come from my family was all into boxing. My dad's side of the family. My mom's side of the family. So she was always tough. So she would get the little kids in the neighborhood. Five hours if they can win. We'll be in the front yard. And you know, I beat them all up. I beat them all up. And I be like, now, you give me the money. You know, it's amazing how it worked. I mean, it's not something like, I think a psychologist would recommend for raising a child. Right. But sometimes they're wrong. You know, and it depends on the person, whether they can rise to that challenge. And obviously it made you great. Yeah, I think that's why I said, you know, I love to hear the doubters, the naysayers because I think it's something in me from my past trauma with my mom. You know, me trying to prove her wrong. You know, me fighting for her, you know, approval. So, you know, it goes back to when I was a kid when, you know, she would say, oh man, you ain't going to win it. And I go up there and win. I come back with the belt. And she'd take in pictures with the belt. Look at my son. Look at my son. You know what I mean? But then, you know, when it just me and her, she's feeling she didn't win. Next one. You know, I really saw eye laugh and stuff like that. That's amazing. Yeah. So it was just, you know, my mom knew what she was doing that. For me, out of young age, she was instilling, you know, mentally toughness because, you know, do anything that's going on in my life. I'm always focused. No matter what it is, it can be a loud room for the people. It can be 50 people in the room, and I can be fighting the nays day. And the average person would be like, man, what is you doing, dude? You got a big fight tomorrow. Like, you need to be focusing. You need to be resting. They need to be out the room. You know, I'd be sitting there and I'd be like, I'm good. I'm not doing nothing. They just sitting here talking. What's wrong with that? Because I'm so locked in because once I'm focused on something, that's not going to distract me. And I think that comes from my upbringing as well. Have you ever worked with a sports psychologist or anything? No. Nothing. But I used to have to see counselors and stuff like that when I was little. If you're getting trouble. Huh? If you're getting trouble. No, I used to get in trouble. Yeah. I used to have an anger problem. I used to be mad at the world. And I used to tell people I don't know why I was so mad, but then as I got older, I was realized that, you know, my dad was gone. And I wanted my dad to be there. Yeah. And like, my mom, like, everything, you know, I do wrong. I was getting a woman for her. So it was like, that's all I know. You say something on light on whoop your ass. You say something on like a whoop your ass. So it was just like everything that I was getting at home for getting in trouble. When I go out into the real world, I was, you know, doing the same thing that my mom was doing to me. When I get in trouble or say something or do something that she was like, I was going to whoop it for it. You know, not listening and giving it to me. So if I put like, do shut up talking to me and you still talking to me, you're not listening, now we got to fight. I got to be true ass because now you're not listening. Now you're not listening. So, you know, I used to get in trouble a lot. I used to get in trouble a lot. Well, it seems like with all great fighters, they've overcome some serious problems when they're young. Yeah. Like every great fighter. It's very rare that you have a great fighter that had this like perfect upbringing where nothing ever went wrong. Everything was fine. Got everything they wanted. Anything they needed. You know, it seems like every fighter has to come. They have to overcome people downing them. People dismissing them. They have to overcome that. Oh, yeah, definitely. From school to everywhere. You know, a lot of people. I don't think nobody but my family members thought that I was going to turn out to be the guy that I am today. Like when I see people that knew me when I was little, they just, you know, like they just want to cry. They just like, but I just can't believe how, how of a man you grown into. I would never believe this would be you. Like you talk so well. You ain't in trouble. You don't want things for the community. I'm just, I'm just in disbelief. Like I'm just so proud of you. And I just like thank you because nobody thought that I was a good fighter. Nobody thought that I would turn out to be who I am today. You know, and it just goes to the show that it don't matter how you started, always matter how you finished. Well, it's also your composure. You know, you have this ability, like you can talk shit in the middle of a fight to someone who's sitting ringside. It's kind of amazing. You're just always composed. I think it's because you've overcome all that shit. But because your mind is centered. You can't see when we were talking about cars earlier when I was showing you the back. You're like, I don't drive any of my cars. I drive my truck. You're just listening to all these cool cars you have. You just stay low key. Stay low key and keep it together. Stay composed. I got it too. That's just me. You know, I never, I never want to be not the other than myself. Like I remember my family members, you know, a couple of my friends, they're like, man, you need to talk more shit. You need to be like me, whether you need to do this. I'm like, no, I don't. I said, that's him. That's not me. I mean, you see tank now. You see all these fighters, you know, browner them. You see, that's how you get the money. That's how you get the money. You got the money. You got to entertain. You got to show the money. You got to do this. I'm going to be myself. And I drive on that, you know, because when it's all said and done, when all the money go, when all the fans done, your name, now who you really is. Now you got to search and find the real you. But if the real you been there all along, you're going to be happy. You ain't going to have to, you know, go through therapy. You ain't going to have to be behind your friends. You ain't going to be having to stay in the sport to hear that channel again. So when you walk away from the sport, you're going to walk away from the sport. When you walk away from the sport, you're going to walk away from the sport as a man, which is here high, and you're just going to wave. Yeah. That's beautiful. Yeah, definitely. Well, you have a rock-solved philosophy. I love that. It's just one of the things I really admire about Andre Ward. Andre Ward, Olympic gold medalist, two division world champion, retires undefeated. He's like, I'm gone. That's good. All my faculty is completely intact. And they even offer them a big, money fight against Kinello after he beat Kovla. After he knocked out Kovla, they offered money to Andre a lot of money. And he's like, I think a better surf boxing is a commentator, which is amazing for a guy who's still in his physical prime. Still, I mean, there's video footage of him working out, still on tip-top condition. Looks fantastic. Yeah, a lot of injuries, though. Yeah, the shoulder, the big, the knee. The knee was big, but the shoulder, the knee's on one arm fighter for most of his career, which is so incredible. He beat everybody with a left hand. Everybody went through the whole Super 6 tournament. Great. Beat everybody with a left hand. Great. Yeah. And then finally got a fixed and fuck Kovla up in the rematch with a right hand. Right. It's crazy. I always said I went through retire from boxing. I never went in boxing retire from retire from retire me. No. My goal was always to retire at 33. 33. Is it because the fights didn't come? No, I just spent fight or even before that. But why did you decide to keep going? I just thought. Oh, no. It's just like my body was just like, man, you ain't done. You know what I mean? Even though, you know, I wanted to retire, it was just like, you know, I done. Like you got a lot to prove. You got a lot to accomplish. You're still in your prime. So it's like, all right, keep going. Because I wanted that mega fight. I wanted that big fight to where it's like, no denying who Terrence Crawford is. You know, or what he's still for. Or, you know, the family man he was. I wanted the people still to know who Terrence Crawford was. And I felt like there was people that knew who I was and that followed me. But it wasn't solidified worldwide yet. But look, now even that it is, you still want the next challenge. Nah, I really don't have nothing to prove. I can walk away right now. And I constantly played it on that. You know, I do that every day. I wake up. Do I still want to box? Do I still want to box? Because I don't need to box because I done great with my money. I invested great with my money. I got a lot of great businesses. I got a lot of great things that I'm doing. So that's a generate money. So I don't need boxing. I'm doing this for legacy. So if it's not, that's why I said if Charlo moved up and weighed and they stripped on for his belt, there's no need for me and Charlo to fight because he's not undisputed. You yelled at him from the right. Of course. Of course. I've been saying that for years. I'm going to, we're going to whip smears. Then I'm going to whip you. And I made it. You know, but yeah, if he's not undisputed then, you know, that fight don't, you know, I don't know. It's not interesting to me no more because I'm trying to make all time history. Right. You know, if the canola fight fight come to fruition then, that's a fight that I'll be willing to take. just off the wrist. You know, that's being one of the all time greats that, you know, that that that's a fight that's the one that gets you going. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a fight because of the challenge. Yeah. I love the challenges. And I love I love the people that I hear them now. You're too little. You know, canola going break you. He's going to stop you. You come from one for you seven. That way too big. Listen to that. I can hear now. And that just excite me to go in there and just be like, okay, let me prove once again. That fight would be gigantic. If canola gets through Jamel and then you guys fight that fight would be gigantic. And it's crazy because like in the past interviews, I was like, man, canola too big, man. It's way classes for a reason. And I was like, no, but in my mind, my heart, I don't think nobody too big. You know, especially in the fight. I'm a fighter. But like, I was thinking like, man, it could happen. So you start really sitting down like, man, that's like, maybe you can have it. Okay. So now you start, you start sizing, sizing them up. You're like, all right, he five eight. I'm five eight. My arms longer than he is. He bigger than me, but I'm faster. You know, so then you start doing advantages. You know, I mean, like man, we right there. We're right there, you know what I mean? So I was like, man, it's not like he didn't go up and wait. Yeah. So that's why I was like, man, that's a fight. And it's the same kind of fighter too, because like, that's why he went up and fought. It's all that's why he fought. Cold love. He went and I challenged for him to go up from junior middleweight all the way up to light. Have you waiting when the title? Definitely. But going up and becoming undisputed against enough. You go up from junior middleweight all the way up to light heavyweight and win the title definitely but Going up and become an undisputed against canelo Come on, man. I'm flying in the sun and say man. Thank you boxing guys. That would be it. That would be it Yeah, that's that's that's the only thing to get for me. I didn't accomplish Everything there is to accomplish in the sporter box. You know There's really nothing for me to accomplish right now Like anything it's about the money now It's about the money You know, I'm not gonna sit here and say it's not but the money and to beat canelo if that fight was ever To happen. Yes, come on man. Y'all better leave me alone Leave me alone, man, call me call me you know me TBC man. Yeah, yeah, man. That's what I've been thinking about. I don't know why You know, I just like man the last few days. I was like, man. I Don't know if it's God talking to me or what but That's a fight that if he win if canelo win then Yeah, I'm gonna try to pursue that. I love that. I love that mentality I do I love it. I love it because that's where it's at that's that's what makes all-time grades Yeah, it's like you you have to have that mountain decline but nobody went up I don't think nobody went up three way classes Well didn't Roy Roy started 160 no, I'm saying not at once right You know, I mean from 147 to 168 No, the closest is that is when canelo went up 68 to 75 starting at 54. Yeah, no not starting. I'm saying I start at 135 You know, I'm just saying like say if canelo was the champion at 147 To go up once right right right right one jump. Yeah, one jump. It's a big jump to 21 pounds It's a lot of weight. It's a lot of weight. Yeah, that's a part of big guys though, too. Yeah, I spar big guys That's why I'm like I'm starting thinking like man Oh Pirate can be great Probably can be great, you know me, but you know, it's different in the fight But I believe in my skills and my ability and I believe in my team I believe we're we'll come up with something that you know Would be suitable for me to be successful in that fight that would probably be the biggest fighting box definitely that fight would be gigantic It would that would be a big one. I have to go to that one. That happens. I gotta go to you supposed to go to this I couldn't that was at the UFC You know wanted to go it's crazy how they had on the same day It sucked but it was good because my fight was early Then y'all fight was later on that night, so I didn't I've unfortunately somebody spoiled it for me all they did Yeah, they saw That I said all right, let me watch the highlights. Yeah, I was just watched the highlights on my phone. I was like oh shit Yeah, then I got home and watched the whole fight on the big screen. That's what so that's actually got Paramount plus just for you Yeah, it's like a watch it. Hey, you could watch it anywhere else after it was already aired. I appreciate it is magnificent Man, I just I love excellence. I love when someone just rises to the top of a Shark infested pool because that's what? Boxing is, you know and when you're at your level and when you could perform that way against a guy like arrow spends against a guy as an undefeated You know elite champion and for you to perform that way. That's just what to me What boxing is all about when one person shows that there are levels upon levels upon levels upon levels Yeah, you know and then they put you in this category where people go okay Well, what other champions can move around in weight classes or go up or come down like You know, there's I know there's been a lot of discussion about different people from different weight classes coming up Do is there anything else that's interesting to you other than canelo or Jamal? nothing No You just need like dragons to slay You know what I mean like at this point of your life. You can't even fight a regular fight. Yeah, like I don't know like I get excited I don't know why I get excited when I talk about Canelo like I use use to get excited about pack. Yeah, really, you know, I used to get so excited like me I'm gonna be able to fight pack. Yeah, you know because that's the one you think out of way. Yeah, it definitely did Definitely did I try I try my eyes on what stopped that fight for me. They didn't want to fight It's too dangerous. They want to fight Freddie Rhodes say he didn't want to fight They hit the pack y'all handleers didn't want to fight You know, I believe pack y'all as a fighter he wanted to fight but they didn't want to fight for him. So you know It just got away when looking back at like Floyd career like him coming up in that in that Arrow that he came up in he had all them champions that he was able to fight and that's what led him to be so great You know because He fought the most champions beat the most champions You know got the most money for beating the most champions So it was just like man he had this guy this guy this guy this guy this guy back the back the fight one at the one you know and when I was Coming at the peak of my career. They all retired You know me so it's like I can't get these guys name on my resume, you know me so it's just like you know now I'm the old guy in In the era You know that the young guys want to try to get a piece of it to build a legacy and put names on a resume and It's just gonna keep his re gonna keep repeating itself Yeah, there's always gonna be a new guy coming up and they're so like right now you got boots in us Your way class definitely what do you think about him? Oh, he's very very talented He's unproven, but he's very talented. Yeah You know The eye test tells it all, you know, he's got it You know, but we haven't seen him against any elite fighter. We've never seen him tested so Until then, you know, we just gonna keep saying our boots boots boots and tell him meet that fighter that's gonna test them Is he's he's the mandatory? Yeah, I probably got like three mandatory Yeah, all right four bells. Yeah. Yeah. Is is that a fight that you would be interested in? Nah It just no make sense right now in my career like I said like Especially money wise don't nobody really know boots, but us. Right. Right. I'm looking for a bigger and better Challenges like canal you're looking for the big ones. Yeah, the big fish. Yeah fish fry Definitely definitely The guys I'm looking for you know, why do you say fish fry? Because he called itself the big fish You know, arrow arrow said he was the big fish and I said we was gonna fry him It's gonna we're gonna real of me Was gonna put him on the bank was gonna gut him He's gonna filet him that was gonna fry him That's what happened. Yeah, and you did it when boxing is this is a great time for boxing Japanese stars coming up right now and everybody fighting each other. Yeah, what did you think of a loma chango Devin? Haney fight I was a great fight. I was actually wearing sign You know Devin Devin show a lot of heart grit Canelo showed a lot of heart grit. Loma chango. I mean. Yeah My mind is like you're locked in. Yes. Loma chinko. He showed a lot of heart grit and you know, they fought the ass off You know, they fought the ass off and the better man won that day Did you think that the decision made sense? Man, at least I'm not the judge I always Tell people I'm not a judge. I can't you know Teleperson that's been judging probably longer than I've been boxing. You know What he's basing his rounds on or why he Give what round to who? We can we can argue all day, but that that ain't going change the results. Right. So I just don't get into it. I just Hope that I never be on the end of that. That's it Right. Yeah, that's that's what's unfortunate is that it was such a great fight But so many people thought the decision wasn't right that it sort of diminished the accomplishments of both fighters Because Devin Haney fought a brilliant fight and so did Loma chanko. I mean Loma chanko turned the clock back You were incredible Yeah, both of them both on put on the show, you know I was I was room for Devin the whole time, you know But both of them put a put a hell of a show on and you know I got to my hats off to him because you know they put it all on the line Yeah, and you know that weight class is a fucking stacked weight class too When Devin Haney beat Kimbosis and beat him twice and just the way he did it like the way he looked All right, you know that you're new that definitely not not taking night in the way from Kimbosis is just levels levels levels. You know it's a reason why You know people was avoiding Devin and Shakur right because those two boxing Phenons, you know if you're not You know not on that that level mentally You know you were gonna compete with those two dudes right this it's such an interesting thing because a Lot of people don't know You know the the general public when someone gets to like an elite level they need some high profile fight in order for people to realize Because all the boxing fans realize like Shakur is a great example It's not really a household name, but it should be means a elite fighter He's so fucking good, but he needs like a big high profile fight like Jervante did You know, okay, I want to fight right now. Bye. I want to fight No, not not see why you know, I get it, but at the same time They're gonna have to see him sooner or later No matter what no matter how far they they go They don't have to see him sooner or later. So You know all these fighters, you know, he's calling out everybody It's calling out the big boy. He's calling out Loma. She ain't going. Yeah. He's calling out Devin He's calling out, you know, Tain he calling out everybody. Yeah, he wanted to fight everybody right now right, you know and Said dangerous man when you know how talented he is and he's motivated. He's focused He's staying in the gym. He's a gym rat. He he loves boxing to the core like Yeah, that's that's a dangerous man right now because he he got something on his mind that You know, he want to he want to accomplish and he's still very young Yeah, very young and still getting better with every fight Him versus tank would be insane Yeah tank is one of the most interesting fighters to watch because he's so different his style so different You know, he's so economical like he puts pressure on guys without throwing too many punches and then it starts to figure your Holes out and the way he can explode and move in with one shot My god, yeah, he very explosive. He's very explosive You know, uh He'd be cracking them dudes He'd be put up this way just crack at people and he has so much confidence in his power so much confidence in his power He doesn't even fuck if he's giving away. Yeah, he definitely be giving away rounds But you know, he just in his mind, you know, it's a matter of time before I catch That's the thing with tain, you know these these fighters, you know You got to be aware 15 rounds. I know you're going 12, but you got to think you're going three more because You know the slightest slip And we seeing it. Yeah, you know time and time again one slip one mistake and it's over. Yeah, you know, so You know has talked to tank, you know He's a great talented fighter, but again He's having face-to-top Fighters in his division, you know, so we want to see tank against, you know somebody his size You know at the Elite level. Yeah, and I believe he had do good because you know He got the skills the power you got that ring IQ To do good, but we haven't seen that yet. Yeah, he's an he's also wild Wild fella, so he's fun to watch. You know, it's just crazy dude You know coming from Baltimore man. I think that's just his upbringing as well, you know Product of his own environment. Yes. Yes for sure He's just so so unique in his approach like you know, he doesn't fight like anybody else. Yeah Sorry, I just get very frustrated when there's amazing fights that are on the table that don't get made You know like oooh sick and Tyson Fury. Yeah, I was like I want to say I know oooh sick Small right, I know he's small for the way class, but God damn that to his good Damn he's good and the pace that he fights out for it. Heavy way isn't saying definitely I think that goes back to you know the business You know The business side, you know, oooh sick is you know a great fighter and it has accomplished great things in the sport of boxing and for him to get disrespected, you know, and then negotiations Because I'm pretty sure that's probably what it came down to Is it's not right? Well, he was willing to accept 70 30. Yeah, which is crazy But he's like I just I want this fight. This is a big fight and he must realize also that 30% of a Tyson Fury fight is probably bigger than anything He's ever had before in his life, but I still honestly think you know He deserved more than that. I think so too, you know, but I love the fact that he said yes Yeah, and then it still didn't happen right so you know who who who was Behind the reason why I didn't happen. Yeah, that's that's when you start asking both type of questions Who do you think was behind it? I don't know. I can't say I wasn't you know in the negotiations, but you know It should be some type of form where You know these fights should be mandatory to happen So you can clean up the sport of boxing. They can only be one champion. They're one division Like the UFC, right, you know, I think we got too many titles. I think we got too many sanction bodies I think you know We need to clean up the sport as a whole I think the fights need I mean the fighters need, you know pensions For one case we need a union we need health Insurance, we need all that, you know We put our life on the line to go out here and entertain You know the people and Once once we done entertaining We leave home, you know and We come home not to say in fighter that we once was when we left You know and it's heartbreaking to see a lot of these old-time fighters, you know that speaking impaired and you know Can't enjoy the fruit of their labor or Just flat out broke and They gave they they live to the sport And doesn't have anything to show for it and I think that's wrong I think you know, we need to create something to wear At least the fighters can you know live comfortable after the sport of boxing Giving if you know something dramatic was to happen Or you know you didn't put in a certain amount of years In a sport that you can pay in on your own To have you a 401k So when you retire you got some type of income coming in because When you get in that much money So fast and so frequently you just spending You just spending because in your mind I'm gonna fight again and I'm gonna get it again I'm gonna fight again, then I'm gonna get it again But then you start living off of that and then Once you get to the end tell into your career. You're like damn. I didn't spend Millions and millions and I got a couple of more fights now you struggling You know because you got pay taxes if not they come to take everything you got and then you know You pay taxes now you got not even half of that Now you look in like damn. I got to make this stretch Then you ain't got no Work at the skills because you're man boxing your whole life You didn't go to college to get no career skills and other lanes So yeah, I think we we need to create something that clean up the sport of boxing Do you think it's possible to eliminate the sanction and bodies? I mean the only person that can kind of do it is a guy like you Because like if you're a world champion and four different organizations You're undisputed there's no one can say that the welterweight champion of the world except for Terrence Crawford If you say all these belts are bullshit like I'm the fucking champion and whether you it's the ring magazine belt or whatever you You sanction whatever you sanction. Do you think it's possible to do something like that? I think I think anything is possible You know, I think you know Floyd I think Conello they showed us Time and time again that it's not about the belts When you get to a certain point in your career you bigger than the belts right Coming up everybody want to be a champion But once you get your name Out there and you become a mega star star the belts don't mean nothing we paying for the belts How much do you have to pay? I pay like what three percent Two percent three percent like it's crazy definitely so it's like it's like I'm paying you To make me a belt and you have to pay three percent to each individual section Some of them is different some of them is three some of them too You know, so it's like I'm paying for you to come out here and watch me fight To give me a belt that you know, I mean, I'm already paying for like Come on now, I'm paying you you not paying me. I'm paying you so right the only one that really matters the rainbow because It's free Why do I got to pay to be champion? Yeah, once you start thinking about that like thing Yeah, I'm paying all this money and the ring magazine belt is as respected as any of them Yeah, that's the number one guy in the division. Yeah, that's how it should be. I don't think You know a champion should have to pay to be champion. No Where is all the other money going to yeah, you know, especially when you get to these high price fights You know that that that two and three percent is turning into a lot of money Yes, so you're like, okay, so what is you doing with the money right? What is the money going to where's the value? Yeah, so the value is entirely in you Definitely in you and your name. That's a big people don't give a fuck about those three letters at all They just know turns Crawford's the best and who he's fighting who cares like whatever it is That's the big fight WBO WBC not even a fuck they don't know what you're talking They care about who you be all you just be to nobody. You know, I mean care about the belts You know, yeah, it's cool to say you know, I mean He's an undisputed champion out of world, you know, I mean or he's a champion of the world That's beautiful, you know, I mean that's history It's legacy, but at the end of the day, you know It's all about the man's future. Yeah, you know That that money that we spend in on them belts and then with the distinction bodies can go to our kids and our family Yes, you know, so It's a lot of it's a lot of money that Lot of leeches. Yeah. Yeah What do you think about like what's Floyd's doing what Floyd's doing is kind of crazy? I love it It's amazing. He's making more money than most boxers just fighting people have zero chance I love it. I love it because it's entertainment. Yes, you know Ali did Tyson did it like why can't Floyd do it a lot of people Before he's doing it better. Yeah, that's what I was about to say a lot of people getting mad Because how well he's doing it. Yeah, but if I was in Floyd position and I got the opportunity to do a Floyd is doing right now travel the world Spar yeah, you know, I would I would do it. We spar for free. Right. You know, why not spar for some millions of dollars? It's not going on my record. I'm entertaining. I'm You know, I'm getting to work out at the same time Why not right? No, I agree. I think it's amazing. I just love the fact that he's gained a system Yeah, you know because the system is you get to a certain point time your champion make as much money as you possibly can You retire and then there's no more money and Floyd's like let me use Box and people that have zero chance Yeah, and then now with what's going on in like Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates Like you can get paid insane amounts amount like if you're Floyd People just want to see you perform definitely And he just said if you for you see talk some fear, you know, went over there. Well, he's got that gona Yeah, that's happening in October that is an interesting thing That's an interesting thing because you got a guy in Francis and Ghana who was the heavyweight champ retired from the UFC Left UFC as the champ But has zero professional boxing fights. He has no chance But I was that what I was doing the interview at the UFC check the gym They asked me about the fight. I said yeah, I know just Toss the period all day you talking about one of the best heavyweight ever ever You know, I mean, you think this guy with no Box and experience going coming in and just beat him He don't hit harder than tie up You know, you know, he'll hard at the outside wilder No, nobody hits harder. So so what you think this guy gonna do with them 10 ounce gloves on now with four ounces six ounces What he wear he probably strong, but yeah, as some more ounces on, you know Different game. He's gonna get tired You know, it's gonna be it's gonna be a different guy Yeah, he's in he doesn't have the experience and to go from Listen, I think that he could have a he's also 36 You know, he could have a career as a heavyweight boxer because he hit so fucking hard If they built him up and he starts fighting guys and you know different styles and and gets to point Where he's really got experience a few years down the line he could fight world class fighters I think he can fight good boxers if he if he learns those lessons. I don't know That's what's that Up there, you know, that's up there Take just gonna take some years to develop them a long time to take them through them steps and get tested and yeah You know, he walking right into the championship with nothing. It's kind of crazy. Yeah, I command them though Oh, well, he wants the bag he's gonna get a big one I mean, I don't know what he's gonna get paid, but it's gonna be more money than he's ever made before right I believe yeah, that's why all those MMA guys coming over the boxing Mm-hmm Trying to you know, they see kind of McGregor. They like oh, yeah, made all that money. Yeah, let me try Yeah, that was a fascinating fight converse Floyd It was fascinating Because Connors is a talented fighter, but to just jump right in Against the best ever like it's just Hey, he did what he had to do. Yeah, got that bag. That's all it comes down to you know Select a fire yourself and taking care of your family. Yeah, you know, that's why I say a lot of people they look at A lot of these boxers that have a loss and then they just think they're not good or you know, great Man, the guys train their ass off You know what these fighters go through in the MMA and boxing And fighters go through the most they just entertain and put food on the tables for their family and they children take care of them And they they don't get the recognition or respect that they deserve. No, you know, you see all these Other sports they get praised, but boxing and MMA is man. That shit is hard It's like you versus one man like brutally like trying to kill each other You know for for some money, you know, for people to be cheering. It's like you don't know the fight is the easy part You seen like you don't see the injuries. I had to overcome and train in camp. You don't see all the Monies I had to get up when I was tired. You know, you see all the you know The the heart other training that I had to do to get to right now. They they see things right now They don't see the years that I had to do Just to get to this point, you know, they don't see all the sacrifices. I had to make To get to this point. They just see you right now, right? You know, they could have been a fan of you from your last fight, but what about You before that last fight? What about you the whole Team plus years that you've been doing this sport as a professional What about that and it's just like me like I didn't work my Ass off to give to this point right now And it's like this shouldn't come easy. No, like you might think it is because you just know notice in Me and my career, but it was hard like Like who who things getting punched in the face in the head is that's tough living it's tough living Especially the championship level that stuff lit. I think most people Don't have any comprehension of the amount of sacrifice the amount of just determination and will And discipline that you have to have Yeah It's hard My kids no no no football no boxing good for you. They hate it, but when you get your To a point where you can make decisions on your own A lot of it, but I rather you keep wrestling keep playing basketball It's college tuition already paid for so y'all good You know think it's something else go play soccer go play tennis or something go play baseball You know Coming up in in the hood There's three things that that the black community Raise basketball football boxers Wrestlers as well, but you can't make them right at wrestling as you go see But yeah, why come on. No, there's other sports that you can do Golf they make a lot of money Baseball they make a lot of money Soccer and they make all the shit ton of money So it's like you know when they little they just black I want to make a lot of money. I want to be a basketball player Well, you're not gonna be six five you're gonna be four Lavender It's always the real real short. Yeah, you know kids. Let's talk about they want to go to the NBA and I always always get mad when the people say you can be whatever you want to be no you can That was a lot you cannot be whatever you want to be no matter What you say how hard you train genetics is genetics. Yep, you know football you might be too small Basketball you might be too short you can't be the president just because you want to be the president Right, so don't tell this part of you could be whatever you want to be then you grow thinking I want to be the president That's the ball you might be too short. You can't beat a president just because you want to be the president. Right. So don't tell this person you can be whatever you want to be. Then you grow up thinking I want to be the president. Well you can try. I'm not going to kill your dreams but it's going to be hard for you to be the president. Yeah. Well at least a president doesn't rely too much on genetics. Yeah. Because we were talking about this last night that there's levels upon levels upon levels and the truly elite have everything. They have talent, they have the mind for it, they have the genetics and they have the training and they have the discipline. Because some really talented people don't work as hard. Definitely. We've all encountered the Buster Douglas story right. Super talented just only really applied himself during the Tyson fight. You know in camp and look at look how he came out. Miss Mama died. He was devastated. Har broken and he decided it was going to win the fight for his mother. Trained like a fucking demon and came out and outbox Tyson was hitting with that jab left hook. Like what? Like who fucking expected that? He looks so good. He looked like an all time great in that fight. I remember watching that fight and watching the Tyson Holyfield fight. And my mom living on a box TV with the big backs and stuff. Yeah man I used to be like me. Dang man it was kind of sad watching Tyson lose this first fight. It was unbelievable. Even though I saw the fight after the result I didn't see the fight when it happened. I saw it afterwards. I knew what happened and I still couldn't believe it. I'm like he's going to get up. He's going to get up. He's going to win. He always wins. He's going to win. You couldn't believe it. That's how revered my Tyson was. Everything was silent and crazy. Everybody was like what? And then like when Roy Jones Jr. got knocked out by a target. Yeah man people was crying. My house was like with what was at my coach house. People was crying. I was like heartbroken like you know like when you going roller coaster. You go down and your stomach sinking. Yeah I sound like. Oh Roy. And now. Dang man. Like I can't believe it. I'm like man I just knew Roy was going to win. I was like man he shouldn't fall him again. That's like I was like he should have just took the win and then fight him again. Well he had gone all the way up to heavyweight and all the way back down to light heavyweight and I think that weight cut was brutal. But he still won though. Yeah. I'm like I'm like I'm like a little kid. I'm not a little kid man. And I'm cool. I say I was talking about you know what I mean. Both of them. I mean. I mean. You know what I mean. Both of them. Talk was great fine. You know what I mean but he shouldn't have fought him. When they were reading the instructions to him he said you got an excuse this night Roy. I was like oh my god. That was heavy. Yeah. And then I could move. That was a rough one. For me the rougher one was Glenn Johnson. Yeah. When Glenn Johnson knocked him out because he was stiff. And that was right after the Tarver knock out. And he even looked like he hit him now hard. I just think you know after that Roy just couldn't take the punches no more. Right. Because it seemed like you know his body wasn't reacting the same way to the punches. You know every time he get hit with a clean shot of like rattle man. You know and I always tell people it's not the punch. It's your brain. Right. You gotta head out water. A lot of people being dehydrating they sell to the fact where you know they they losing too much water and they brain and then once they get hit they brain is knocking against nothing. Right. That's your skull. Then that that that snap that's what knocks him out. You see a lot of that never may. I just cut a tremendous amount of weight never may man. You know I got friends that that's in the MMA and I never seen somebody lose so much weight in one day. Just the make it wait. It's crazy. It's like man them dudes losing like 12 pounds boring. I'm like how how y'all losing so much weight in one day. Like y'all crazy. Yeah. And they can't even use IVs. Yeah. You guys can use that. You guys can use three. I can't use I can't. When did they change that? Shh. And I remove it. They they change. And they think that was legal because you know when Floyd for a pack yard I was a thing that he was using IVs or something like that. But yeah you can't you can't use that stuff. Yeah. That was the way that fighters always recuperated. They always took IVs. And then you saw it came along and apparently you can use a US you can use the IV to mask performance enhancing drugs. That's where they outlawed it. Yeah. But I think the weak cutting and MMA's they should ban it. I don't know how they could do it. But you don't need more weight classes. That's the problem. Because when you talk about lightweight, then you go in from what is a 155 to 170. Yeah. 155 to 170. Johnny. Johnny. How about 185 to 205? Yeah. That's what I'm saying. So it's like yeah. Yeah we got to because yeah we we down so I can't go up there. Yeah. You're one of the only elite boxers that could wrestle. Yeah. Has anybody ever come to you and said Terrence what do you think? Dippy toes in the MMA water. I don't get paid enough. But if you did. Nope. Nope. Anybodybody be kicking me. Hey look we can wrestle we can fight with them kicks. Yeah. I don't care what nobody man. Them kicks is dangerous. Yeah. Especially them kicks in a leg. Did you see when my homelie was doing that exhibition with that kick box? No key. Yeah. Boy. Torium up. Torelie up. Yeah. Now you respect that sport. I respect it. We can we can fight and wrestle all day. I mean kicks and elbows. Have you ever trained with any of that stuff? Have you ever tried a trained boy tire? No. Nothing. I trained you just who a little bit. Oh yeah. Yeah. But I'm kicks and elbows. No I'm dangerous. I'm dangerous. And they sneak you too. Because when you're not when you're not used to again kick, you know what I mean? You can think somebody about to punch you and they won't punch. You block you don't block kicks like you block punches. Right. So you might be trying to parry something and there you go. Ali versus an okay and then okay with lying on his back. Which is crazy and what shoes on. Yeah. Terrain. Terrain. Ali legs up there. Yeah. Just kicking at his legs. But just know what the way they they fought was so crazy that he just dropped down to his back and was throwing kicks. He had no gloves on but I don't think I don't think he punched him. Oh look at that. They're going to leg lock. Look at that. Yeah. You can be aware of everything. Very dangerous too. Very dangerous because his legs can get torn apart. You need to get ruined. You're toe. Yeah. Chickens somebody you're toe your fingers. You're foot and y'all go through a lot. Yeah. Man. Man. Y'all go through a lot. And the man who was man. $5,000. Just show up $5,000 and win. $5,000 for a business show. Yeah. You're right. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's the guys coming. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I know what I'm saying. That's how it is. And UFC too. Yeah. I don't might get a little more money but they'd be same thing like 20, 20 million. I mean, I 20 million. 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000. So they fight in the ass off to get that bonus. Yeah. That's true. But as I'll get that bonus. I don't like to win bonus. Yeah. I do not like that at all. I think that first of all, there's bad decisions. Yeah. And when you have a bad decision and someone gets caught up. Like if a guy's making 50 and 50 and then there's a bad judgment call and you lose $50,000 Yeah. People are incompetent at their job. Yeah. Happens all the time. So why don't they just change it to a like boxing like a flat purse? They should. I don't know. I'm not responsible. Yeah. I'm not my side of the game. It should be a commentator. Change it to a flat purse. 100%. Yeah. Like boxing as a man. When lose draw. Yeah. We getting extra money. That's one of that contract. Yeah. That's it. That's how it should be. Because it's not like anybody doesn't try to win. Yeah. Because it's the same thing that they're going to get their money either way. They're going to try to win. Those would be fine. Yeah. So man, they'd be busted up. Are they all the way out here? Yeah. Teef and they mouthpiece. Yep. It was like, come on. Man, you talk about a gladiator, words. That's what they do. Do you watch a lot of UFC? Yeah. Yeah. We watching who stands out for you, who you watch. John Jones. John Bones Jones. That's my guy. I like, I ain't man. I'll be hard to say his name. He just beat the dude. I beat him. I have a Israel Israel. Israel. I like Israel. Oh, he's amazing. Israel cool. That dude that beat him. And he just beat man. That dude big dude, man. He's huge. Yeah. He beat. That guy got to a lot of weight. Yeah. Because he weighed in at 185 pounds and then he fought at 225. Yeah. He was 225 when he got into the rain. Yeah. That's crazy. Damn my guy, that just beat. So who the? Algebra. Algebra. He's fighting this weekend. I was just down there with him. I was when I was trying to lose training twice together. Before that fight and after he was doing physical therapy, we was supposed to be playing basketball. So if you're watching Aljo, you still got to go in that court with old boy now. Yeah. Yeah. He's fighting this weekend against Joe Malley. That's a big fight. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Did he ever go to those live? Yeah. I went to a few of them live. Yeah. I went to a few of them live. I think I went to the last one. I went to was Amanda Nui's. Amanda. She was fighting. I forgot her name. But two guys from Omaha drew a dober. Okay. And he fought John Jones to he from Omaha. You put Omaha in the map. Yeah. You really did. People talk about Omaha now. Smith Anthony Smith. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. And I went to the program Anthony Smith was fighting on the same car. So I went there to support them. And a man I like Amanda. See, to go. Yeah. She's amazing. She had to retire because her legs are so damaged. Yeah. She's kicking. She goes too much kicking ass. Like she had nerve damage on her legs. See? Yeah. She's never going to go with. Probably not. Yeah. So you got to think you're getting shins slammed into those nerves over and over again. Slammed into your calves. You've been calf kicked. No, don't kick me. Yeah. But now about to do not it. Don't don't kick me. Listen, my legs are skinny. Now about to do it. Hey, he kicked me. Jump him. Yeah. I think there's any boxers that would be that would enter. I mean, the only person that's elite that ever fought in the MMA realm was a change Tony. Got choked up. Yeah. He don't got no wrestling background. He didn't. I don't think you've been trained for it. I interviewed him before that fight. He was making up kick names. He was like, I think he traded. I think he just boxed. You know, this is hoping to catch him with a punch. Yeah. Now, first thing they're going to do is shoot. First, they're going to faint. The punch up top and then they're going to shoot. If you're going to not sprawl, it's a wrap. Yeah. It's a wrap. See, wrestling, man, I always say, man, I'm a boxer. But I can wrestle. If a wrestler grabs you, I don't care what you know. I don't care who you is. It's over with if you don't know the wrestling. Right. Over with. Yeah. And then you can do it nine times out of 10, street fight. They're going to end up on the ground. Period. So if you don't knock them out before you grab you or in the mix of him trying to grab you. So over with. Yeah. So I hope you're in shape. Yeah. I will. I'm Pokemon. I buy them something. But you know, wrestlers, they tough. Yeah. So you might buy them. They might be like, buy harder. Put you in a choke hole. And it's over with wrestling is such a tough sport. And there's no accolades. There's no glory. There's no world championship where you're making millions of dollars. It's just all for the glory of winning. That's all there is to it. Those are some of the toughest human beings alive. Yeah. Elite wrestlers. Like, come on, talk about hard work. I didn't mean to do some of them. Did you wrestling high school? No, I wrestling in middle school. Middle school. I stopped in middle school. Because your boxing career started taking off. I actually got kicked out of school. Really? Yeah. What happened? I was playing around with the kids, me and my friends. We had the little kids. So we was going through the hallways. And we were scratching each other neck with the kids. So like, just say, if somebody right here in the middle of us and you don't see me, and I go over here and I scratch you on the neck with the kids. We just start dying. Like, that was the thing to do back then. And his little soft self went to the nerves. And it was like, and then the nerves accident, what happened? And he was just like, oh, me and my friend Terrence was playing around. He scratched me with the key. And so they brought me to the office and expelled me. Because they said I was using the weapon. Wow. Yeah. I got expelled for the half of the whole school. You didn't have to go to our alternative school. Wow. Yeah. These crazy. But I was quitting the wrestling anyway. I didn't. The wrestling was tough. Man, I'm those. Keep my eye on it. No. But I think there's something about your wrestling background that helps you in the clinch. Definitely. Definitely. I still always mess around wrestling. That is the day. You know, yeah, wrestling gets you physically strong. It gets you, you know, I mean, your foundation first and foremost, everything comes from your foundation. So if you got a good base, good foundation, you're going to be hard to move for anybody. You know, that's why you see those some more wrestlers. You know, they foundation, they base is just like, hmm, right. And you can try your hardest to move them and they just sit in there and he's like, yeah, man, I'm not able to move this dude and I'm pushing them. It's just, they got that base and that foundation. Yeah. There was a discussion. I forget what experts were talking about that. But they were factoring in your wrestling background. And they were saying that there's something about Terrence, when he's in the clinch that's different than other people. It's because your ability to manipulate bodies where you can move people around. And then also what you do, I think better than anybody ever. You land punches in tight spaces, in tight spaces where you just find the chin. You know, you're so good at like those tight hooks. You know, and you're, yeah, man, it's just, it's so, it's just very impressive to be able to pull that off on a guy like girl's pants. The way that some that me and my coaches was working on, showing up your shots. Because if you're watching a few of my past fights kind of open up, I kind of throw my shots too wide, leave myself hoping. So that was something that was working on in camp. And I always told the reporters and people that interview me, it ain't about spence. I don't got a changing thing up for spence. I just got to make sure I'm prepared and I'm 110% ready for myself. And all I gotta do is be myself and then I believe I'll be anybody. Was there ever time where you wondered or were you worried that you weren't going to get that big fight? As you're like 35 years old, you get become 36, 36. And then you're in the position like Arthur better be of who's 19 and no 19 knockouts. Everyone's fucking terrified of the guy. Can't get a big fight. Just can't get that big marquee fight. Definitely. I was, I got so much. I was in a process of thinking about retiring, you know, because I was just like, man, not going to get that spence fight. But it's worth a shot to go back and try to see if we can land that fight. But I'm not about to just take anything just for the fight. But a lot of fans and a lot of people in the media, they felt as if I should just take anything, but they not the one fighting. They not the one that, you know, being doing this their whole life. So for them to tell me, just take this or just take that, you know, given if I was to put them in the same predicament that I mean, and all the accolades that I have what they do the same thing or what they just take. Whatever somebody just going to give them. You know, I had to stand for something to get to point in my life where, you know, I can get everything that I want. You know, and I feel like me standing standing my ground and standing standing firm and true to myself. And I switching up and not, you know, over, overdoing it. Let me to this moment right here. One of the things that happens with some boxers is they leave a lot in the gym and sparring sessions. And that they just sparked your heart to many hard sparring sessions. How often do you spar? I sparred two days, three days and a Saturday's. Some of them be hard. You know, I mean, that's just how it is. You can't replace, you know, I would say like, take sparring and like, soft sparring from, you know, a comparison to get ready for a fight. Because you fight how you spar. You spar how you fight. And if I'm in there just doing this, huh, huh, huh, huh, huh, huh, huh. Then when the fight comes and everything is full blast for a speed, I'm not going to be able to keep up because I don't train that way. Right. I can hit the bag. I can hit the miss all that I want. But nothing's coming back. Right. And I'm not feeling that presence of a person pushing me, hitting me, holding me. Things like that. So sparring is very important. And not saying that you have to, you know, go hard every single time you spar. But there got to be days where, you know, that fighter is trying to put it on you. Because now you're getting used to that. Now your body is getting in shape. To withstand the rounds, the time, you know, the, the, the grappling, the hole and the hitting, all that. So you need that. How do you judge when you're doing too much hard sparring? Your body, I tell you, I'm a firm believer listening to my body. You know, so I've been doing this a long time. I coach this day being known as just as long or longer, or bomag longer. Well, we all started, you know, this journey on, uh, when I was 2008 when I turned pro. So they've been around me since I was a kid. So they know when my body is breaking down. Or when I'm complaining about something, but we'll be like, all right, what we're going to do this today. What we're going to do this today. And I'll be like, man, what, what? He'd be like, we're going to do this. I'm like, man, I don't want to do that. Man, I want to work because as a fighter, I want to work hard every day, but it's up to your coaches to know when to pull back. When it take days off, oh, no, you ain't working out today. Huh? You ain't working out today. You been working out hard, you know, today off. Or some days we're going in there. You be like, oh, we're going to do four rounds sparring. Like what? Yeah, we're going to do four rounds sparring. Our, our got it. So things like that. So it's just a trust and an understanding that your, your coaches know you as good or better than you know you. Definitely. Definitely. You know, so they're going to tell me, you know, some days they're going to say, man, you ain't, I know energy today. Did you eat some days I'd be like, no, I need to eat before I can. I could tell, you know, or you move in kind of slow. You are. You know, so it's very important that you be honest with your coaches as well. Because a lot of people, you know, they tend to keep certain things away from them. And then when, when things go left, then the coaches is the blame. When the coaches wasn't aware of everything that was going on with you. So if you got, you know, injuries or you're not feeling well or, you know, something's not right or something's going on. As a team, you got to let your team know because that's why they're there. And that's why they're able to pick up on certain things like, you know, you're over training or you're not, you know, getting enough rest. What time are you going to sleep at night, you know, you need to put the phone down at this time. And you know, just all that. Do you monitor your resting heart weight, your heart rate variability? Do you do any of that stuff? Yeah, I do all that. Yeah. You know, in the mornings. So when I get up in the morning, we put it on my finger, then we monitor that. And then it takes a blood oxygen level, heart rate, all that stuff. And so from there, you can say, okay, I'm a little tired or there. I'm a little bit more work. It's not really easier today. Not really. You know, sometimes you can, I go off of that. But, you know, I just go off of how my body feels. I just use that for just how much oxygen I'm taking in and the levels that I'm at. So once I start cutting weight or this, what I've been at, this, this range. Once I start cutting weight, then I can compare it to. How far out do you start cutting weight? I probably can't wait, probably like two weeks to the three weeks. And so that's just a decrease in calories. Is there anything else that goes along with that? Is it an increase in cardio or anything else? No, just everything in the same is just, you know, decreasing the amount of food intake. You know, we start cutting the food, probably like portions. Then, you know, we probably change up the times or the workouts. And then when you get down to the day of the winds, how much weight are you actually cutting? No. None. No. So when you weigh in, that's natural. Yeah. The day at the wind, I'm not cutting. That's beautiful. I used to, I used to have to cut like five pounds and the morning at the wind. You know, did you feel that the next day? No. Not really. Sometimes, but not really, but it's better than not. Yeah. Cause I always, I just ran. You know, your rest in is most important. Like I just seen the bell or that, especially when I was at 135, I didn't do nothing. I was cutting weight, cutting weight, cutting weight, cutting weight, cutting weight, you know, but yeah, that's shit. Like this, this last fight with Spencer was tough, you know, but I, I try to make weight. You know, at least the night before. So I could sleep in, sleep, as long as possible to have a weigh in and, you know, go from there. And what do you do for recovery? Do you have anything specific that you do for recovery? Massages, sauna, anything? I get massages. I don't use sauna. No. No, I don't use a sauna. That's pretty much it. Cause you know, Norma tape. Oh, those like things. Yeah, those are great. Norma tape, massage. I hate to close, cold planche. I did it for the first time. This, this, this count. And man, I tell y'all, ooh, he, I was freezing. I always thought my balls was going to be freezing, but my fucking fingers was cold. My toes wasn't cold. I was so, I was so cold. I couldn't feel my feet. I was in there like this. I was trying to put my, put my hands under my, under my orpits. And I was just shaking like this. And I was just like, I'm about to get out there. It's like, there was motivating me. And I was like, man, I can't, man, this is the hardest thing that I ever did because I'm anemic. So me and co don't. You're anemic? Yeah. I got to take iron pills. Really. Yeah. Interesting. Is that before you stopped red bean? Always? Really. When I was little. Yeah. So I got to go from the cold and then they put me in the hot. And then it felt like needles was shocking. My body like needles was going through. I'm like, dang. You know what I mean? I felt good. Then it was like, all right, you got to go back in the cold plunge for one minute. No, it was two minutes. Two minutes. I was like, what? Like, come on. So I went up. Man, then I was like, all right, get out. You done it. I said, I don't go back in the hot. There was like, no. I was like, oh, man. But I was, I was, I was cool that I did it. Yeah. That is something that, you know, I wouldn't do. And I did it for the first time. And I felt like I accomplished something. How did you feel after you got out? I felt good. Yeah. I felt good. But the crazy part about that is two days after that I had got a cold. And I was like, I was messed up. And I was like, man, was it, was it cause of that? I found out that it was the air conditioner in the house. It was blown right on my face. Oh, on my bed. I sleep with the cover over my head. I don't know why. I've been doing that. Yeah, I've been doing that since I was a little kid. So we looked up and show enough. I was like, man. And it was like one like 62. So it was freezing in the house. Like me, I turned it off everything in the house. It was all hot. Everybody was trying to turn the air back on. Like me, and turn that off. Like no. And it's 120. And Vegas. I'm like, yeah. Is that? Turn it off. I was like, man, I can't. I ain't never experienced that ever in my life. I never got sick. Going five weeks. Really? Ever. So how sick did you get? I was sick. For one day, I was like, down. I was down. But like, yeah. How far from the fight was that? Oh, shit. I was down. But I was just like, man, that one day I was hurting. But then, you know, my nutritionist, she gave me some vitamin C and got kicked. I was my nutritionist, my chef. He gave me a whole bunch of oranges and melons and grapefruit. Big old bowl. You ain't even know me. This is what you eat all day. and melons and grapefruit, big old bow. You ain't even know me. This is what you eat all day. I was like, what? It was like, yeah, trust me. I saw like eight the whole day. And the next day I felt better. I was like, oh, all right, we back to normal. Well, we wasn't all the way back to normal because my coz didn't let me work out. But yeah, it was good. How many days did Jeff take off from that cold? Just one and a half. Oh, not that bad. Yeah. So that one day I didn't do nothing then. The next day I didn't go to the gym. I didn't work out in the gym. And then a day or so later. Yeah, you back in. Yeah. Well, that's fortunate. That would have sucked that happened a couple days out. Yeah. Yeah. And then fuck up your way cut too. Yeah. I don't have to find a way. Isn't it crazy though when you think about all the things that have to come together? So perfectly. Peaking in your conditioning, peaking in your physical training, your technical training, everything's got to come together. Everything. But when you've done this for so long, what you got to do to get there. I think I peaked twice during this camp. I was working so hard. I was just like, man, I wanted this so bad. It was like, all right, we got to pull you back. All right. And when they pull you back, like for how long? Just a couple of days, pull you back. You know, because you're looking too sharp in the gym. You weigh above schedule. So we've got to pull you back, working too hard, get you some rest. That's such a fascinating aspect of the training. Because it's just so on feel and knowing and just having an understanding of the athlete. Yeah, because you as a fighter, you want to feel good. You want to look sharp. You want to feel all those things. But your coaches on the outside, they're like, OK, we still got like three, four weeks. And he's looking like this at this point in time when we want him like that at the end, till end. So pull him back a little bit. It's just, it's such a dance. It's a jill-like perfectly orchestrated dance. Yeah. Everything else to line up. Have you ever had a fight we peaked too early? No. Never. Not that I know of. No, I was sorry. Well, listen, Terrence, what you've done is amazing. It's a person. Excuse me. As a person who's a boxing fan, it's beautiful to see. I love watching. Like I said, I love excellence. I love when someone is just at the top, at the very top of the game, of the sport of everything. And that's you right now, man. So you should. I hope you enjoy it. Congratulations. It's an honor to talk to you. Thank you. Thank you. My giant fan, man. Thank you very much. Appreciate it. Thanks. I tell everybody social media, I was thinking, hit you up. You can reach me on Twitter, what I call it, eggs now, on what that is. Terrence Crawford. And then you can reach me on IG, T-Buh, Crawford, or Facebook, Terrence, Terrence Crawford. You the fucking man, bro? Yes. Thank you very much. Appreciate you being here. All right. Bye, buddy.