In a lifetime of listing to stories about innocent people wrongly prosecuted, I have never heard anything like what happened to Trevor Milton. You've got to watch this. You often hear the phrase, miscarriage of justice and it's we had this pretty amazing dinner last night where you explain exactly what happened to you. And the details are so shocking that I just want to start this by saying I'm really excited for people to hear exactly what happened to you because I think those of us who felt that this was the most just country in the world will have our preconceptions adjusted. You had a vehicle company. Tell us what the company what did it do? What did you started it? What was the product? How did it work? Yeah, so, Neekal, any glow is a company I built out of my basement and a quick positive just for everybody. By the way, Tucker's dinners are awesome. I don't make them. We came here last night, had dinner with him first. He was such an incredible time to just talk about anything. So thanks for having us for over. I would love to. And it allowed me to really get to know you too. So thanks. That was really cool. Thank you. So, Neekal was a company I built out of my basement. So true entrepreneur story. Literally right out of my basement in my house in Salt Lake City is where we started it. We grew it to the point where we are bursting in our seams inside of our basement and our whole goal was to build a clean emission truck. And it kind of morphed through the time like we started off as like a natural gas truck and then we moved it to a to a hydrogen zero emission truck. Like pickup truck. Big semi truck. Okay. So the trucks that haul goods across the country. Yeah, exactly. The ones you see on the freeways haul in, you know, 80,000 pounds. That was our, because it was the third, I think it was around the third largest polluting industry in America. So the whole point was to reduce, you know, the amount of the emissions and noise. And it was also the fact that electric power trains are so efficient. I just loved them. I grew up on local motives. My dad was managed the railroad when I was a kid. So I grew up on local motives. And the whole idea was to build a local mode of semi truck. That was like my people. I know that many local motives are electric. They all are all there either entire power trains electric. They have a diesel generator that powers the electric motors. So for the torque and the power you have to have the electric motors. It's, we did a video last summer on the cyber truck and we hauled 8,000 pounds of dirt and the thing. And if you ever hauled anything in a truck, you know, you can feel the engine strain when you're an electric vehicle. Yeah. I'm a pretty opposed electric vehicles generally. But for hauling stuff. Yeah. It's beyond the difference is just crazy. One of the best parts is the ability to recapture all the energy. That's what I love the most about electric power trains is that like when you go to hit your brakes rather than wearing brake pads down. What happens is those motors going to go into reverse and they're able to absorb all that become a generator and they start outputting. So say like the cyber truck's like 400. I don't know if it's a 400 or 800 platform. My thing is 400 volt. But anyways, what happens is instead of using 400 volts now you're charging 400 volts into your batteries. And so with big semi trucks, it makes a huge difference. So I live part of my life up in kind of the Utah Wyoming area. And there's a part of these past that goes from Park City down to Salt Lake. Yeah. Imagine if you have an 800 or 80,000 pound load. You're charging your battery all the way from the top of Park City all the way to the bottom. You have a battery that's 20, 30% charged more when you get to the bottom just from brake just from exactly regeneration. So you're not even breaking. You never use your brakes. And that's what's so cool about electric vehicle. Like really what it is the instant torque and the ability to recover all the loss energy. And that's just something you can't get anywhere else except for that. I strongly agree. As an engineering matter, it's incredible. If you build this company, it starts electric and then you go into hydrogen. Can you give us the non complicated one minute explanation of what that means? What's a hydrogen motor? A hydrogen is the most abundant element in the atmosphere. It's the only energy that is that can never be depleted. So the reason why I love hydrogen is that it comes from water. You can split there's, you know, it comes from water. You're able to split it. It's also in the atmosphere. It's the first two. H2O hydrogen, exactly two parts to exactly. So what in how this works is how this works is the hydrogen is stored in, you separate it from the water, you store it. And the hydrogen is then passed through a membrane which creates electricity that electricity is captured through these membranes and delivered to the batteries of the vehicle. Now there's inefficiencies with hydrogen, but there's also inefficiencies with electricity on the grid. So if you produce hydrogen on site, it can be as efficient or better efficiency than electricity itself. So when a lot of people plug in their cars, they're like, oh, my, you know, they talk about the efficiency in an electric vehicle like 97% or 92%. Well, that's great, but it's actually not really that. It's less talk about where was that power generated for exactly? It was generated from a solar farm, okay, of 22% efficiency or less. And then transmission lines that take you 800 miles to your home through transformers. You've lost another 20, 30% of efficiency over all that entire lifeline if you factor in how much loss actually happens on the grid. And through transformers and transformers into your home and all this stuff. And so realistically, like if you look at that, the numbers can actually be worse than hydrogen, but people don't want to believe it. They're like, oh, my car is 90, 92% or 97% efficient. Once your once electricity reaches your once I reach your vehicle. So with hydrogen, the point, the point is is that you're producing hydrogen so difficult to say transport. It's not extremely difficult, but it's harder than electricity to transport. So what you do is you you produce it on site so you're saving all that efficiency, say from like hydro electricity or whatever, right. But the whole point is that hydrogen can be used over and over and over again. And you don't have to mine any mountains. You don't have to you don't have to, you know, there's no other elements other than just water and electricity. That's it to produce hydrogen. So there's good and bad about hydrogen. It does not fix every application. And I've always told people like I think that like electric vehicles on a car level or make much more sense. But hydrogen on a heavy duty level makes more sense. So hydrogen for semi trucks for trains for for the maritime, the marine industry, the maritime industry for ships for aviation. That's where hydrogen makes all the all the how expensive is it? It's not that expensive actually to produce it. We call it you move the decimals. So let's say that your cost of energy is to sense a kilowatt hour. Okay. So let's just say you're to sense a kilowatt. Your hydrogen is $2 a kilogram. So it's actually really cheap. And a kilograms actually about a kilogram on a on a. It's pretty equivalent to if you were to think about like a gallon of diesel. It's very similar kind of on energy level like if how far a vehicle can go. That's kind of how we if there's a lot of factors into that. So it's not an exact science. But the point is is that to make it easy as a kilogram of kilogram of hydrogen is going to get is going to be very similar. Like you're going to cost compared to a gallon of diesel. So just a couple dumb questions. I have a hydrogen powered truck. How do I fill it up? You can't right now. That's a problem. So what Neekola was all about was the chicken and the idea around Neekola. The reason why it went parabolic was it was not just building hydrogen trucks. It was actually supplying that the egg too. So it's like a cell phone. Your cell phone is worthless without the tower. So there everyone's like, oh, you know, hydrogen there's no there's no infrastructure. It's stupid. It's going to cost a hundred billion to develop infrastructure. Well, they spent you know hundreds of billions on cell phone towers. Who cares? Infrastructure is like, you know, it's usually sticks around for 50 to 100. It's $1,000 on the Iraq war. There you go. Yeah. Got a lot out of it. We didn't even get our airplanes back. They left them over there. Yeah. It's now controlled by Iran. So yeah, big wind. Okay. So you were in the business not just building the trucks, but of building the infrastructure to fuel the trucks. It was. That was the whole reason of Neekola. It was really an energy play. The point was is to displace the oil companies. That was my goal in my dream was to it was to either partner with or displace the oil companies entirely. And I look, I have no problem with with D. So I think it's one of the greatest things Americans, America's ever found was D. So it's powers everything it powers. I mean, you have D. So literally you have like, you have this. It touches your life probably a hundred times a day. I mean, even a piece of plastic has, you know, has petroleum in it, right? There's everything about diesel was it's the most efficient way of moving American goods for over a hundred years. You know, like it's just the greatest thing America's ever seen. But there's also ways you can have both in this world. And that was my goal was to become a like essentially as powerful or as big as like an oil company, but not doing oil, but doing hydrogen. And that was my goal. That was really the idea was to eliminate the emissions on the road, become an energy conglomerate and provide energy that's a residual income every month in your life. And that's what I that's that was what hydrogen produced at plants. They don't want to produce hydrogen to power if lead a truck's word or why produce it. Yeah, you would have a plant that you would build and it would be done. There's two different ways of doing it through a proton exchange membrane. They call them P. E. M.s. or through electrolysis. So those are the two main methods. And even like Chevron right now produces hydrogen, but it's like 20 something dollars a kilogram. Well, that's that that equates to $20 a gallon of diesel. So you'll never compete. The point of hydrogen is is what you have to do is build it on size. So very similar to data synergy. We were talking about data centers last night. The amount of energy that they're consuming for AI. And so what do they do? They go build them on right next to the what do they do? They build them next to the nuclear plant now. No, of course. So it's the same thing with hydrogen. The only like we had we had the nuclear plant in Arizona was quoting us energy in their two cents a kilowatt hour at the time. So they can make it for a penny and a quarter a nuclear plant can. So what you're talking about is you're talking about if it's two cents a kilowatt hour, you're talking about I'm sorry. You know, two cents a kilowatt. You're essentially you're essentially producing hydrogen in about your produce and hydrogen about $2 a kilogram. And at that point you're half the cost of diesel. The game over the entire world would everything would go hydrogen and we're on the verge of that. And then that's when the forces that be came after us and decided to completely destroy us. It was it was it was most wild enough energy to produce hydrogen. It's fun. But it's okay because we have more energy than we know what to do with it realistically. We do because for instance, the grid can only handle so much energy. And so if you look at California California will actually pay you to take their energy at parts of the day. because you have too much of it from solar solar's fantastic in in the West Coast. And even in some other areas. But the problem is is the sun comes out. It loads the whole grid full energy and then they have to start dumping it. So what one great thing about hydrogen is is that you can buffer the grid. You can say send anything you want to the grid. Doesn't matter because any excess we can produce hydrogen. And you can suck out hundreds of megawatts of energy from the grid, produce and hydrogen and store it. And then you can store it liquid as well. And then you can transport it from there. And that was a whole idea of hydrogen. It's it's not a one size fits all. But it's a solution to the major problems we have in America. How dangerous is it to transport hydrogen? Not dangerous at all to transport it. Most of the time they'll transport it in liquid form. And that's the best way to transport it. And it's very inexpensive to liquefy. It's about 50 cents a kilogram. So if you're two dollars a kilogram and you can liquefy it for 50 cents. Now you're 250 a kilogram. And you can you can move that anywhere in America at eight to sixteen thousand kilogram. And it's not more dangerous than an oil tanker. It's more I would say it's more dangerous. But it's it's nothing different than like transporting helium or or any other gas like natural gas. Like you see no one knows that natural gas is being transported everywhere all the time. And it's extremely volatile. Hydrogens hydrogen. The reason why hydrogen can be a little bit dangerous is that the molecule is so tiny. It's the smallest molecule in the and you know out there. So it gets the fittings have to be designed perfectly. The lines have to be inspected all the time. But one great thing about hydrodiness is it's is how light it is. So if you were to have an accident or something like that, it just goes straight into the atmosphere because how light it is unlike propane. Where it settles. The real dangerous stuff is propane. That's like because it settles below the air and any sparkle. I mean everyone doesn't even know them. They have a propane tank. Next almost everyone's house in a lot of rural areas in America. Oh, yeah. That thing we do right here. Yeah. I had eight of them in my cabin. So you have like eight 1,000 gallon propane tanks buried. Imagine if that went off, there would be nothing left of like an acre lot or five acre lot. I have a lot of propane tanks and I never think about it at all. So I just way safer than propane. In fact, I always take my matches and light them off the propane tanks. No, just kidding. She's no, but no, but your point is a good one. I mean, people who live far from anyone in rural America is a lot of propane around a lot. Anything new scares people until they realize it's not dangerous. Hydrogen. Hydrogen. It's not directly connected to the hydrogen bomb. It's not the same as the hydrogen bomb. No, philosophy is similar, but like a little bit different. Just kidding. Okay. So you build this company. How does it do? It does fantastic for a long, long time. We took this thing. We developed our first prototype was called the Nikola one. It was our very first prototype truck. Sim my truck. We unveiled it in 2019. Where did you build it in Salt Lake City? Wow. At our facility. Yeah, it's really cool. You built the truck at the facility. We did at the facility. We had hundreds of photos of us assembling it. And we was all fabricated by our teams and people we hired to help us. So like the frame was ours. The suspension was was designed by our team and a group and outside engineering partners. But we on the IP on or co-owned. It was just like it was really cool. So like you think about a Peter built or a Kenworth truck. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That all taken him decades to design their trucks. We had an initial design of our truck that we built. So all the frame was ours. The suspension. How the cab. Everything it was. It was not a pile of crap, but it was a first prototype. It was like it was rugged. I mean, it didn't just take a Peter building through your logo. No, no, it was entirely from ground up our truck. It was beautiful, but it was like it wasn't ready for production. It was a prototype. And all the parts is where the world didn't know. Like the whole, and I'm going to tell you a little later about like how the short sellers came after us. And the government did. But what they don't know is that truck was actually real in it functioned. And every they sold this huge lie that this truck was fake. But it was really real. So let's go through that. Like the suspension was real. The airlines, the air ride system was real. The entire frame system was real. The cab was real. The power steering was real. The batteries were real. We had the first 800 volt battery on a semi truck that I knew of in the world. And we tested it. We tested the battery 800 volts at work. Everything was fine. So the the axles were real. The case was real. We had the rotors and staters and gears. Everything was real. All the stuff was real in this truck. And what's crazy is when, you know, later on we ended up doing a commercial. And we're like, oh yeah, go ahead and use it for commercial. No problem. You see like the Chevy Camaro turned it in a bumblebee on the transformers. It's like you don't think that GM's defrauding everyone because the Camaro becomes bumblebee. You're like, it's a it's a it's a commercial or it's a, you know, a movie who cares what it's used for. So yeah, go ahead and use it. Who cares. So they used our truck in a commercial. And they rolled it down a hill. All the parts worked on it could have powered itself if we wanted to. We probably would have taken a month's worth of work to make sure it was safe enough to maybe two months to make sure it's safe enough to drive on all on its own. But the truck function, he was real. And this is the this was the lie that destroyed my life. This was the moment that destroyed my life because later on the short sellers sold it to the government that this truck was fake and it never worked. And that message was so sexy that this truck was rolling down the hill that no one cared about the facts. They cared about this headline. Neekle are rolls of truck down a hill. And that's what ended up that's what ended up, but, you know, allowing these people to destroy the company, destroying me, make hundreds of millions of dollars in profit. And the government to indict me was this big fat lie by the short sellers of the truck truck didn't function. So last month hackers gained access to a major data broker's files and leaked over 350,000 people's information that information is now out there. And it could wreck people's lives. Using ExpressVPN is a great way to make sure you don't fall victim to something like this and schemes like this are accelerating obviously they're all of the news. ExpressVPN is an app that hides your IP address and re-routs all of your online traffic through secure and encrypted servers. That means that data brokers can't watch what you're doing. They can't track your movements online. Acres can't steal the information because all of its secret. All of its private and your privacy returns to you were up longs. ExpressVPN also includes a new feature called a identity defender. It's completely free to new US customers. So if you're new to VPNs, data brokers probably already have your information. Identity defenders scours their files and requests removal of your data. And critically it also alerts you whenever your personal information is used like just a security number of your home address. Plus it provides insurance if your identity is stolen. And that actually happens. It's a real thing. ExpressVPN takes just one click to use super easy and it works up to eight electronic devices at the same time. So your whole family can use it. You get an extra four months for free by using this shows like so scan the QR code on this screen or go to express VPN.com slash Tucker and get four extra months of ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN.com slash Tucker. The reason I wanted to talk to you and the reason I think your story is amazing and not just another, oh, I was unfairly prosecuted, which I think is a pretty common story in America's presence. Is because of the role of the short sellers. And I think this is one of the most extraordinary things I've ever heard ever. And so I just want to ask you to explain it in a way that people can understand. So you've made two references to a short seller. What's a short seller? Or a fund that actively bets against you that your stock is going to collapse. So unlike a regular investor that buys shares and they hope that the stock goes up short sellers, buys shares and they force it down. So it's like a it should be it should be completely illegal. It should be. Well, it has been for most of the last hundred years from I think the depression until right before the last financial crisis. There was something called the uptick rule, which prevented short sellers from selling when the stock was in decline. I think that's correct. I don't know. It's been heavily regulated. It's banned in a lot of countries. It's so clearly immoral and bad for a country and for markets that I don't exactly know why we have it, but we've had it since 2007. But anyway, but you're saying that a short seller as distinct from an investor makes money on failure. Well, and not just failure, but forcing failure. So an investor in VASP base and then they hope it goes well. They go out and they, you know, they hope it goes well and they hope it does it. You say you invest in in in Tesla or somebody else, whatever. You're hoping that they that they come out and they deliver on their products. Right. You hope that they do good and that goes up and you make money and everybody makes money. A short seller is different because they don't just hope it goes down. They force it down. This is where this is where it gets really crazy in the story. This is crazy. It's never been told before. I've never gone through this. It's playing how a short seller. This disreputable evil should be a legal brand of anti investment. How they're working with the US government, the DOJ like how could that be? How does that work? This is where the department justice has just gone so far off the rails. And it was covered up for a long time. No one knew about it. In my trial, the stuff got exposed. So you can it's actually available. It's not like a someone doesn't have to take me my word for it, but we can. It's easily available through the through the anyone can ask for a FOIA on it. Anyone can look at all the materials that was submitted in my trial. What was really crazy is that the short sellers were building a fake report on me and the company prior to us going public. And their entire goal was, okay, the SPAC is going to go crazy. We went public via SPAC. It's a special acquisition company. They knew it was going to go up. And what they wanted to do was then force it down. And that's where they make their money. So what they were doing is they were working with the department of justice. They were actually communicating with the department of justice prior to releasing the report. Which to me is mind boggling. What is the short selling report? Short selling report is a is normally a salacious and false report for the most part. So what they'll do is it'll mix in 5% truth and 95% lies to just scare the market. It's all some companies look, there are some bad ones. And like everything, a short seller has gotten it right on a few companies. But majority of what they attack is all complete bull crap. It's just their interpretation to make a company look bad. But a short selling report is like a magazine piece. It's like a hit piece against a company. Like this company is bad for all children for these reasons. Yeah. And they do research on you. They do. And they do. They pay any enormous amount of money to employees. So they get insight information that a lot of time is slanted. Because they promise the employees money. So they wait. What? Yeah. So if I go to your employees and pay them for instant information on your company and then invest in the company, I go to prison because that's called insight trading. Yes. But if I go and pay your employees for bad information and bet against your company, that's legal. It's still inside it. It's still inside trading. But it is. The cup but the prosecutors look the other way. We actually presented them. Is that really real? It's real. So look, they actually look. They're this dude went to prison. Yes. This is why it's so I get so angry is we presented the department of justice, the evidence on Hindenburg's essentially insider trading. Tell us what Hindenburg is. Hindenburg was the short seller group that attacked us. That attacked an equal and me primarily me, but Nikola. And it's run by a guy named Nate Anderson who is the head of Hindenburg research. And he, his entire goal was to burn a company, take out an insurance policy, burn the company, the ground, call the cops on you and then collect on the insurance policy. So Nate Anderson, I just looked him up on the internet and never heard of him. This is not my world. But there's like nothing on the guy at all. He was like 39 years old, no real track record as an investor. He was an ambulance driver in Israel for a while. Not clear graduate from colleges. There's like no information on the guy. And all of a sudden he winds up as this like major player in the American economy, running the short-selling group called Hindenburg was just disbanded pretty soon. Just barely just disbanded completely. Okay. Yeah. Right. So, Nate Anderson produces a report attacking you, a hit piece on you, designed to drive your share price down, because he's bet against your share price as a short seller. Yeah. The weird part about this. This is so crazy. The short sellers, like essentially commit this, I'm going to try to explain this easy to public, but this is just get your blood boiling. Without the department of justice involvement, the short would never work. Because your stock would like they would just come out with some report and people would be like whatever. The stupid, like it's not true. The truck's obviously real. It turned out that Nate Anderson was communicating directly to the department of justice prior to releasing the report. Which means, so what he was doing is he was telling the department of justice that there was this fraud that he was going to, he was going to launch, he's launching this investigation, he's going to launch it. And he wanted to make sure that they had it in their hands and they were ready to look at it the second hit. So what he does, he stokes the fire, gets them all angry at you, sells this big fraud, pays where they look, he was doing, looking at your company before. They were because of Nate Anderson, because of what we found out it was because of what Hindenburg was doing. So Hindenburg was feeding this. Sue, so the Southern District in New York, the federal prosecutors in New York had, as far as you know, no intention of investigating or prosecuting you and tell you or approach by a short seller. That is our knowledge. Yes. It's fucking crazy, man. This is the craziest thing. That's insane. So this, the audience doesn't know this. The feds shows up. Sorry. I'm just like, I'm shocked. Yeah. It gets so much worse too. Let me just say, just to put a finer point in this, in the United States, you're not supposed to be prosecuted. So some guy can profit from your prosecution. Is that justice? It's, it's not our country anymore. We've lost it. It's, it's, it's, look, it is so if people, this is going to be funded, because I get to tell you, I get, you know, tell us the entire thing, but what no one's ever heard. That is why I love coming on your platform because it's so, so big and we can really explain the truth. The FBI, so Hindenburg started investigating us and, and filling the FBI with all these lies. But just to be clear, you don't believe the Department of Justice had any plans to screw with you, investigate, indict, bring you to trial, anything. And tell they were approached by this group of short sellers who was like, hey, you should look into this, to this Trevor Milton. From what I know that is a hundred percent accurate. It's unbelievable. So Nate, Nate, Nate, Nate gets the Department of Justice that originally he goes the Eastern District. That was what we hear. He goes the East, it lands in the Eastern District of New York's, because he wanted New York because New York, you can get like New York, you're done. If you get indicted in New York, you're over. You get indicted in Arizona, Utah, you're going to get a fair jury in New York. It's over. It's a guaranteed stamp, a conviction, 90 plus percent conviction rate. And the ones that get off for low level crimes that don't care about. So what happened was is the Eastern District researched it. They sent the feds in, in Arizona out to our facility. They showed up at my chief engineer's home out of the blue. I get a call from my chief engineer and, and he's like Trevor, the FBI just showed up at my house. And they said, for what? They said the truck was fake. And I'm like, well, the truck's not fake. So, I mean, what else weird? I might do you take him down to the facility. Go show it to him. I don't care. I haven't called us. I haven't called our attorneys. And they asked, he's like, yeah, they question me for like 10 minutes. They're like, hey, is the truck real? We know it's fake. And he's like, what are you talking about? It's, of course it's real. The, the truck's freaking real. It's at the facility. Why don't you come down? I'll show it to you. Feds wrapped up, essentially like, made, you know, scared him. And then they went back and they're like, yeah, nothing's wrong. The trucks are real. So the feds originally, you know, they originally looked at and they said, nothing's wrong. So he didn't get the response he wanted. They went back, they essentially declined anything. They're like, yeah, the company's real. It's all, well, I don't know what these guys have even seen that the company's fake this bull crap. So then he moves from the, from essentially the Eastern District to the Southern District. Then he goes, then they go essentially to different prosecutors, people they have better connections with her. And next thing you know, Southern District opens up an investigation. So this is after the Eastern District already turned it down. Looked at it and said, there's nothing wrong. So then the Southern District gets it and decides they want to take me down. But this is all being shopped by a guy who's hoping to get rich from your failure. Exactly. Before, by the way, before we go, why is he not in jail? It's the question that I think that's the question that should be answered. I just, I, but it gets worse. It gets worse because I didn't know. I'm sorry to keep repeating myself. I just didn't know that this happened. Yeah. And it gets even worse because of what he does and how involved he is in making sure that the Southern District creates an indictment. So his report is worthless without an indictment or an investigation by the Southern District. So then what happens is that he, he creates, you know, he creates this big report and he shares it with the government. And then he launches his, his report, his shorts. He takes out a huge position that your stock's going to collapse. And from according to the court, we have some information how much money he made. We don't have it all. We're going to get it through the, there's a big lawsuit going on right now and we'll find it all out. But we know that he made somewhere between $30 and $100 million off of this short. Nate Anderson, Hannah Burke, Nate Anderson. That's what we know. It was, we know he's somewhere between $30 and $100 million is what he made on this short from, from creating this fake report, getting the department of justice involved. And then when he launched it, what happens is then the next, literally that day or the next. from creating this fake report, getting the department of justice involved. And then when he launched it, what happens is then the next, literally that day or the next day or whatever it was within, within 48 hours, the department justice sends all their subpoenas to everybody, like our entire company, us, our attorneys, me, everyone, like scaring the shit out of everybody. And as a publicly traded company, you have to disclose it. So what happens when you disclose that a federal investigation by the department of justice, you're stalked us what? Shh, and Nate Anderson and Hindenburg at Rich. It's a guaranteed, absolute guaranteed profit because without the department of justice, he makes no money with him. He makes hundreds, potentially hundreds of millions of dollars. So what does it mean to be safe in your own home for a long time that meant good locks and maybe an alarm system that was enough, but they're not enough. And you know that because the news was filled with stories people thought they were protected and fell victim anyway. Simply safe can help prevent you from becoming the next victim. Instead of just responding after somebody comes into your home and in true to enters, simply safe can stop them from ever getting in and the first place is proactive. It doesn't just react. It stops the problem before it starts. Simply safe cameras and live monitoring agents to text suspicious activity and if somebody is lurking around your house, agents engage in real time. They activate spotlight, taking call the cops to get the intruder away from your house and prevent him from coming in. Not all security systems do that. The difference is enormous. That's why our team along with four million other people in this country trust simply safe. Monitoring plans start for about a dollar a day. They include a 60 day money back guarantee. Visit simply safe dot com slash Tucker to claim 50% off a new system with professional monitoring in your first month is free. That's simply safe dot com slash Tucker. There is no safe like simply safe. Did you know that this could happen? No, I didn't even know it was happening, dude. I didn't know until way way way like almost probably two or three years later that who was all involved in it. Like it took the investing like it took the the subpoena power and everything else of when I was getting when I got indicted to finally get in there and find all this out and by then it was like too late to do anything about it. The company's gone. Company now is destroyed and the department of justice default $34 billion destroyed by the department of justice. So Nate Anderson could make $100 million. And the other people he's involved with made who knows how much money. So there's funds in Canada that were involved in this. And we still don't know who they all were that made massive. So what he did is he went out and told them to. So the insider trading was prolific like he like you're not allowed to go tell people something that you have inside our knowledge on and get them to trade on it. He did this. And this is why he shut his entire this is why I believe it's a belief. This is why I believe he shut his entire firm down and ran. Where is he now? No idea. I mean, he's obviously wearing the middle of a lawsuit. But like, no, I know short sellers as far as I know don't have to disclosure. He does not specifically have to disclose disclose who's investors are. So there's a syndicate presumably because that's typically the way I don't know this. But I'm just guessing that there's a syndicate behind him. He has investors. Yep. Correct. Yep. And they're all profiting from this with insider information. And you know for a fact they paid members of yours. So the, the, the chief, the government's chief witness was, was a, was a guy who made $600,000 on the short paid by Hindenburg, by the way, paid by paid by Nate Anderson. So the government's chief witness in my trial, my federal trial, was on the stand, made $600,000 by making sure I got convicted and his, and his set to make millions off of the so called fraudulent whistleblower group. This is the government's chief witness. I mean, imagine like the guy on the, is guiding Paul Lackey. But what was his role to do? And it's public because it was in the trial. That's why he worked for the company. No, he had been to our facility one time in his life. He worked on the batteries. He was an outside guy. He worked on the batteries. He had been to our facility one time in his life. And he was the the government's chief witness. And he was paid by Hindenburg, $600,000 by Hindenburg. He's admitted that on the stand. And the government and it's stood to make millions in the whistleblower groups who knows how much money he made from the fake fraudulent whistleblower group. I'm just saying this one more time. You are you positive that Hindenburg, page your employees for information about your company. They paid contractors and outside and other people for it. Yes, that were inside of our company that had come in. Yes, 100% for sure. Without a use that information to trade. Yes. Like if someone wants to see go, go look at the trial transcript. It's public. If you want to go see go search for Paul Lackey and he admits he made $600,000 from Hindenburg, paid him $600,000 a portion of how much he would make. If he agreed to come in and create a story. And they did this and they did it to other people. There was other people that he promised money to do. There's probably a half a dozen people that I don't know the exact number. We're going to find out in the lawsuit. But there was somewhere around a half a dozen people that that need Anderson paid for information and gave them a portion of all the profits. And these are the guys that were that are part of this fake whistleblower group and that were part of testifying against me at trial. So justice in the United States and also lies countries is administered by the state on behalf of the population, the whole population. So when the state indict somebody, the state makes the claim that indicting this person, convicting and imprisoning this person protects the public. That's the point. That's the point of justice. Yes. Protect the society. Yeah. The idea that a private investor could be driving a prosecution in order to benefit from it makes a mockery of the idea of justice. It's not on behalf of the public of protecting the public. It's on behalf of a commercial interest to try to put you in prison in order to help someone get rich. If Pam Bond, he looked into this right now, Nate would probably be in prison for 30 years. This is how it corrupt and not just hand those other short sellers and it scares me because like my life man was a big short seller. I mean, there are a bunch of short there are a lot of prominent people who've done a lot of short sales and gone on television to talk down share prices in order to benefit from the decline in share prices. And I don't understand why none of those people is ever prosecuted and now I'm starting to understand that the system seems captive to those people. So you didn't, as you just said, you didn't know why this was happening for a couple of years. In those couple of years, what do the government do you? Oh my gosh man. So the government, it's really interesting. The government has it. What Americans don't know is the government has a playbook and it's been developed by the CIA and other entities inside the government and it's passed down into the Department of Justice. They have a very clear playbook of how to guarantee a conviction and destroy someone's life and break them. So it's it's a it's like the profilers but psychological profiling. And what they do is they figure out how to do it and they have a very clear playbook and it's taught and very disseminated within these groups to how to do it. The first thing you do is you separate the person from all their friends and colleagues. This is number one thing you have to do, you have to separate them. You have to turn everybody against each other. Yes. That's number one. So psychological warfare. So they come in and they threaten everybody differently individually. They separate them. They don't care about the truth. They do not give a crap about the truth. We showed we actually showed them the truth about major things that they were going after me for and once they realized that they were wrong, they just pivoted to something else that didn't matter and indict me on. So this is this I want to stop at the psychological warfare real quick and I want to tell everyone in the audience right now. In my indictment, there was never not one time they could not find not one dollar missing ever, not one dollar misappropriated ever, not one filing incorrect ever. There was no crime. There was no fraud. There was no, there was nothing. What did they hate me for? They came after me and died to me specifically because of my tweets, my speech, how I explained the business plan. We were at pre revenue company going public pre revenue, all of our filings disclosed that that we were four years, two to four years out on revenue. And so I would speak about this business plan in present tense because why? Because our over filings, which is what the government requires you to do, explain that we are two to four years out. So I was like, hey, this is how we're doing this. Okay, why didn't realize it when you say, this is how we're doing it that somehow they could indict you because like, oh, well, you haven't done it yet. Well, yeah, this is the process of what we're doing. Like I've explained that and they didn't care. They just indict you wanted to cut your words out. So speech, I want America to know why this is important because I've had a lot of people asking like, you know, Trevor, why did the government indict you? And you know, why did these guys take you down and later I'll get into that? But the answer is the speech is what they indicted me for. The answer is even more scary. It was and we'll go into that later. It's the ability to prosecute speech is what is what the, what the Biden administration wanted was the ability to prosecute free speech. So I was the poster board for prosecuting free speech. But we're going to, I'll get into that later and it will actually really hit it hard. But the, the, what they do is they, they psychologically, what they do is they come in and threaten everyone individually and they split you up. And so what they did is they scared everybody, the threatened, they actually told, we have an email from where they called Kirkland, which was the attorney group. Kirkland and Alice, either one else, the prosecutor's called Kirkland and Kirkland called the company because they want to keep these communications from ever getting private. This is how they do it. It's like a big sham. It's called, you know, privileged communications. Normally it's good. When you seek advice from your attorney, but the government uses it to circumvent the ability of disclosure. So what they did is they call Kirkland, Kirkland called the company and said, we need two people to exactly as a testify against Trevor or they're going to get indicted. So what they do is they just say executives, you're going to indict you too. If you don't turn, if you don't just don't do whatever we say, they don't care about the truth. They just, they're just saying this is what we're going to want demanding. You're going to do so who showed up the two executives to testify against me. And this was like, this is the crazy part. And by the way, I like, so that's that's step one divide divide everybody turn them against each other. Do you believe if I get asked you to pause? Do you believe the department's justice had an inappropriate relationship with Kirkland and Alice? Personally, I do, but it's extremely inappropriate, but I think that they are very good at what they do and cover up their tracks. It's very, very hard to you felt that Kirkland and Alice was not straight, straightforward. Well, no, we found communications between Kirkland and Alice and Ecla where they actually laid out nine steps on how to frame me. And this came from the department of justice because it was my exact, it was my exact indictment. So that we know that the department that the prosecutors had to have been talking to Kirkland and Alice because they gave them literally the blueprint on what their indictment was going to be. And he's idiots put it in writing some, some intern was actually writing it there was nine steps on how they were going to frame me step by step. They actually said we're going to make up stories about Trevor. And this is what we need to say. Were you being represented by that firm? Like I was at first. Yeah. And then later I wasn't, so there's some really badness conduct there that is like, but ultimately like there's the hard part is is they it's almost impossible to to get into privileged communications and sue people on privilege. It's really, really difficult. It's not not much you can do about it. How much did you pay Kirkland? The company paid Kirkland are over $100 million. So I'm just trying to figure out who wins in this. So so shareholders lost tens of billions of dollars. Your life was destroyed. You're convicted of a felony. And so the short seller won and the law firm law firm. So my legal fees were over 80 million personally and current 80 million 80 million. And you know why is because the member I was talking about psychological warfare. The next thing the government does is say you're going to turn them into an enemy combat of you're not going to share anything. So then what happened is I was not privy to any of my community any communications inside the company. I couldn't interview a single employee. I couldn't interview anyone in the company. I couldn't get documents from the company. They were obligated to turn your company from my company because I left it this time. And they they were obligated to turn this over contractually, but they just said, what do you induce? So let's go ahead. You'll take it two years. Kirkland said that to you. Well, that was yes. And essentially, Neeklow, but through Kirkland said we're not sharing anything this off. So then they got Kirkland to essentially turn the company against me. And wait, can I just to be clear on the fees here? Because the fees are really substantial. And so they're they're an incentive clearly. So you paid Kirkland 80 million dollars. I didn't pay Kirkland paid my attorneys separate attorneys 80 million. Okay. And then Kirkman 8 800 million. The company paid Kirkland around over 100 million. $100 million. So this is what they did with the law firms do. They create they're Kirkland think about it. If Kirkland went into the department justice and defended us and actually got this thing squashed, they might make five million. But if they create an indictment, now they create controversy, they get to build two to $3,000 an hour. They destroy the company. They create more problems. They defend every one of those fires. They create shareholder lawsuits. They defend those two. And then they defend the company against a company with the department justice through the indictment. So if they create chaos, they make 100 million. If they if they if they prove innocence, they make five. Do you see an now? I do see it. I'm not even a math guy, Trevor. I see it. Yeah. Yeah. That's literally what happened over $100 million. I just want to whatever. And through the lawsuits that I've heard through the discovery around over $100 million to to to Kirkland in their in their attorneys. I've known a lot of Kirkland attorneys. I'm just some nice ones. But most mostly just greasy disgusting people. Honestly, I can tell you that there that law firms in New York are, are, are their single goal is to represent chaos because chaos creates immense wealth. Our country is if it ain't broke, don't fix it as a cliche for a reason because it's pretty good advice. But sometimes it's not true. Cell phones are glaring exception. You've got yourself on. You've had it for years. You don't change. Sometimes your cell phone battery life fades remove your processor can't keep up. But your phone is bound to run into trouble eventually, no matter what the problem is and replacing it early is much better and often far cheaper than replacing it too late and to pure talk. This month, if you switch to a qualifying $35 plan, 35 bucks pure talk will give you a Samsung Galaxy A 36 completely free, literally free. Just 35 bucks a month for talk, text and data and you get to restart your phone lifecycle without paying for a brand new device. So it's a scam free deal. All on America's most dependable 5G network. It's like a cell phone that works as well as any other. It's just way cheaper and they're not scamming you. So switching is a win for everybody. You save money on your cell phone bill. Pure talk grows to hire more Americans to support more veterans, which it does. So get a pure talk dot com slash talker to get your free phone today. That's pure talk dot com slash talker to switch to our wireless company. It's America's wireless company. It's pure talk. Like I didn't realize how deep this was dude. I'm not look, I came from a farm town man. I grew up in a small town called Canab Utah. Okay. My mom was, my mom was dying when I was eight years old a cancer. When you're lived in Vegas, my dad's like, I gotta get out of here. We got my mom was like, I don't want to die in a city. Just don't want to get out of here. So we moved to a small town called Canab Utah. One of the best things for me was really tough. But I moved to small town in Canab. We're extremely poor. My dad or my mom, my essentially, my mom was dying our insurance company dropped us, refused to pay any of our medical bills. My dad sold everything he owned in his life to pay for her medical bills. And then try to try to figure out a way to have some sense of like happiness as she died. So we're in the small town in Canab. I'm taking care of my mom. My dad's working in Las Vegas three to four hours away trying to find work. And we are broke beyond measure. Like no food sometimes. I had no money, nothing. Like I had to go out and work. I was working in the morning. I was delivering papers. I was, you know, go over to milk cows with some of my neighbors. I did whatever I could to make a few bucks, mowing lawns after school, whatever I could. I was also in wrestling. So I'd have to get up early and go to wrestling practice. And sometimes I'd go to practice. I wasn't very good. I just wasn't good. It was interesting because through Hindenburg and all the media there, they used this guy in locally in Canab about me. They were like, oh, what do you think about Trevor? They used like, oh, he's a loser. He lost every wrestling match he did. And he's like, he's a total loser. And it was really interesting. I just asked you, so Hindenburg, when an interview, your childhood friends, then they sent media to do it because they got media to, Hindenburg works with massive media groups. One of them was one of them was, was Bloomberg. The other one was CNBC. Hindenburg works with Bloomberg and CNBC. They're tied, I mean, tied to get almost tied completely together. What? Yeah. So the short seller uses like has a former relationship with the media monster relationship. This is how they, this is how they get the short. They guarantee the collapse of a company and this is, dude, it's deep, fucking deep. How can a short seller use the media to destroy a company and then profit from it? They're best friends. Do they, they all, I wear the what happens and how they get like, I can't tell you the relationship of how of what happens behind the doors with these guys. All we know is there was an enormous amount of communication between Hindenburg, a guy named Bloomberg, Ben Foley, other guys. And also CNBC where they created a, a, a, a salacious TV episode to hit during my jury deliberations. We'll talk about that later. Actually, actually, yeah. We have a massive billion dollar lawsuit against CNBC and Hindenburg for this. That just got the judge, we just cleared the motion to dismiss the judges like, I can't, wow. It's this deep. It goes so deep. Do these guys are like straight up, it may, it reminds me of a government entity how deep the layers go. Like these guys were had so much control with so many groups and they were working directly with the media. Man, the story is is it's so much bigger than just you and your family. Like this just says so much about how our financial system works in tandem with our justice system and our media establishment to make a few people rich while destroying so much like the country itself. It's, it's really difficult because that, that the audience has only heard out Nickelodeon truck down here. They don't know the truth. The truck was actually real function. No problem. We just didn't turn it on for that scene and you could have easily. But here's the thing. What's important to know is like why I did certain things. This is what is important. So as going back to cab, you know, so I mean, like the media went and interviewed Gank and Junction with the short sour groups. When interviewed this guy and he's like, go Trevor's a loser. He lost every wrestling match. And it was interesting because later on, someone was like, you know, and this kid, this kid was like, oh yeah, he's a loser. He lost. This is why he, he probably stole from everyone. This is why he got indicted, like, tied it to my wrestling matches, right? Okay, cool. You're high school wrestling, high school wrestling. And so what am I pretty deep on you, huh? Deep deep. It would just find what their interview in your ninth grade classmates actually earlier in that it was like the seventh is like seventh and eighth grade. So by the way, I'm like, this is, this is kind of interesting because like there's one, the only areas that the short sour has got it right. I mean, I'm, it's kind of sad to say. But the answer is I did lose all my wrestling matches. I'm sorry. I lost everyone. But I don't know the reason why, you know, it'd be sometimes it'd be two days that I hadn't eaten. You know, so I, we had no money where broke. We lost everything. My dad sold his well. They're to pay for his money to get to Vegas to go work. I had no money. And it would be two days sometimes three days I wouldn't, I wouldn't eat. And I would maybe grab like a handful of cereal from a neighbor. And like, that was my food. And like, and it was just a tough time. It wasn't like that for all of our life. It was just that time for a few years really bad. And we lost everything. And like, I would go to wrestling matches and get my ass kicked. I mean, just bad, just get beat. And, but I didn't even have enough energy to even stand up. And so like, I was like, yeah, I like some friends asked me like, is it true Trevor? Because you're a fighter. I can't believe you're losing wrestling. Because I'm a pretty scrappy guy. And, uh, and I'm like, no, it's true. I lost everyone. And like really? And I'm like, yeah, but I hadn't eaten for two days, dude. My, I was skin and bone. I had nothing on me. I was so exhausted. Tired my mom was dying. Wasn't mentally there. I was like, yeah, I lost her. They used it like what they do is they take these huge things and then they roll it into like this whole entire short sell report about how you're this big fraud. And, and it, that story is important because like, my family means more to me than anything in life. It just makes you not want to have a publicly traded company. They're, they're, I, I love the public system. I hate the corruption that the government allows to exist around it. It allows people to actually be equal to other people. Like think about it. It allows an entrepreneur to go from zero to, you know, to creating incredible wealth for their employees. The problem is is the government real, the government figures out a way to destroy so many good people and profit the big people that are their friends, like the big banks and other people that are like and making a billion off everyone they touch. And then a law firm's making a hundred million dollars by encouraging each one. Yeah. So it's important to know why I do things like, you know, everyone, one of the big lies that was set out was like, go Trevor, Trevor left the company because he was a, you know, because, you know, when, when Hindenburg hit, I decided to step away from the company. What the public doesn't know, they see the headlines, the media, the lies, but they don't know the truth. You know what, why did I step away? What was the reason for that? My, I had told the board a prior to when we went public, I told the board, I was going to retire in December. So just a few months later, I was like, look guys, I've taken this company as far as I can is up to you guys to take it the rest of the way and my wife is incredibly sick. She was a, and this, this interview is amazing because the documentary comes out today finally. I've been working on this for almost a year. The documentary about Neekle and myself comes out is just is now live and everyone can see it on YouTube. It just launched. So the handles Trevor Milton, but the title of the documentary is a conviction or conspiracy. And he's made a provoke the thought process. Is this guy, was it a gigantic conspiracy or was it a true conviction? And part of the documentary is not favorable to me. I mean, you come, you know, you got to show both sides. It's pretty, pretty fair. And we wanted to make sure it was fair, but we also want to make sure the truth was out there. And, and so I had told the board, I said, look, I'm going to, I'm going to step aside and your wife was sick. My wife was actually dying in the tie. I thought she wasn't going to make it. She was a, a doctorate put the wrong person's blood plasma into my wife during a procedure. Oh gosh. Yeah. She developed all kinds of diseases. And not only like to go over them publicly because it's not fair to her, but like she developed a lot of diseases from what happened there. And also autoimmune diseases, she developed diabetes instantly. She went from a very healthy woman to a type one and type one, one and a half diabetic to no longer be able to have children. Oh, God. It was the worst thing you can imagine. And so I, she had been, she had taken a, a, a, a, she went to, we went to the emergency room that gave her, they gave her like a some type of vaccine that was, that was there for they thought that maybe she got, they wanted to make sure it was like, I don't know. I'm not a doctor, but they required it when we went to the ER. And that put her into seizures. It just, it only almost killed her, he was off. It was like the most, so my wife was literally dying on her death, but couldn't get out of her bed. I was like, I was like, bathing her. I, she couldn't get out of bed, couldn't walk. And all, and then all of a sudden, Hindenburg hits. And I'm like, I can't stay here and fight all this when I got my company. They all promised me everything would be fine that they would fight the government. And they would expose the truth and work with me. And they got me to sign these papers, these lines, scumbags. And I, they use my wife's death. I are like, on a verge of death in order to get me to sign papers because they want to power and greed and control who's they? They'll offer them the executives and law firm. Yeah. The law firm wanted it because they knew they couldn't control me, but they could control the other people because they were idiots. So they controlled them like little puppets, but they would never, they would have never gotten away with that with me. I would never allow it. So I decided to go help my wife. And then what does Hindenburg do? They go out and they're celebrating the like you see Trevor's he's a criminal, he's a liar. He got thrown out of his company resign because of the disgrace. Hindenburg's true. And that's where, you know, so Hindenburg used the department of justice, the media and my, my, my wife's my wife's sick illness to in order to make sure that they profited $30 to $100 million or whatever. Did you just meet anyone from Hindenburg? No. I saw him. I saw him at trial. He came to my trial to rub it in my face like he'd just sitting that he'd sit in the, you know, Nate Anderson did. Yeah, they would like they, they, there was times when he came through the, came through the trial. I think it was just intimidation is what I believe. I never called you. You had no content. I don't know. No. Never even wanted to know the truth. Never wanted to have any comment on anything. He was people like one thing they did is they used a, they used, like, they would use recordings from people. And then like, and delete half of them. So Bloomberg did a, do Bloomberg did a, an interview with me. And they were like, he asked me, like, oh, was the truck here? They're trying to get me catch me in like some kind of liar fraud. Did I go? Was the truck real? Did it dare or did you guys just, you know, push it down? You know, did you guys push it down the hill or was under its own power and I said, I said, no, the truck was real, but we didn't use its own power. We just used it in a commercial and we let it roll down the hill for a cinematic effect. And, and I told the truth, right? So what is, what does Bloomberg do? They come out with an article and they cut out my answer. And the headline is is that Trevor rolled the truck down the hill, but they cut my answer out. So in the criminal trial, we got the judge actually one thing that judge did fair to me. One of the very few things was he actually forced Bloomberg to turn over the entire, the entire recording. And sure enough there, it was me explaining that like, oh, no, we never, we never, you know, the truck was under its own power. It was, it was, you know, we rolled it down the hill for cinematic effects and dot, dot, dot, dot. So literally Bloomberg deleted everything that showed I was innocent and hit it from the department of justice. And Bloomberg was working with the short story with with, with an A Anderson. Do you think Bloomberg or CNBC took money from native Anderson? I don't know. I don't know. I don't think the company would be who knows. I don't know. I don't know. I do know that they're very close. They're like best friends and Nate and some of these guys at Bloomberg and they work on every one of his projects. They literally every one of the short cells, they you see the same guys disclosing like launching massive attacks against people. So it's a coordinated effect. That is crazy. Yeah. They Bloomberg allows that unbelievable. We're actually suing, we're suing a CNBC right now because of the fact that and and Nate Anderson, but not the hard part with Bloomberg is is there's nothing I can, I can't sue him for deleting part of the recording and withholding it. There's no crime for lying about someone unfortunately like it has to be a slander and it has to be like premeditated and it has to be slander like you have to prove that they knew it was a lot. It was it was it was we have it with CNBC easy, but we don't have it with with with with with Bloomberg is just they just did really awful this was the fact that media organizations, business networks are working with short sellers who profit from attacking people is just I mean so prima facia corrupt that you don't you don't need to make a case beyond that just that fact alone is disgraceful. Yeah. And I didn't know what is low and opinion is I have the US media having spent a lifetime in it. You're still you're still shocking me. My beneath's even lower. They are criminals. Okay. So back to the playbook. The US government in conjunction with the media and the short sellers ran on you. The first part of that you said was to separate you from everyone you knew and loved and trusted and they did that. Yeah. And then they threatened the other guys. And then what they do from there is they get the company to this is the third step is is what they do is they what they call control the environment. Control the environment is where they where they come in and they they sanitize and filter every interview. What do you get your news? What's the tell you where we get ours in our private news briefing written by our guys in house every single day. It is comprehensive. It's smart. It's honest. It's hilarious. It's the best. It's our private news briefing and you can read it too. You can also unlock access to TCN's entire library of documentaries. You can listen to the show ad free. All three are within your grasp. You just head to Tucker Carlson dot com to become a member of TCN today. And we hope that so these employees came to me afterwards and told me about this is how after my trial, this is how I knew. So they threatened the employees and said you can't talk to Trevor. You'll get arrested, which is a lie they could. They could talk to my attorneys, but the government threatened them if they did. They would be turned on. So Kirkland would threaten the employees and essentially dividing conquer and then sit down and say, okay, they would interview an employee. And they say, all right. turned on. So Kirkland would threaten the employees and essentially divide in conquer and then sit down and say, okay, they would interview and employ. And they say, all right, you know, here's our nine steps on how to frame Trevor and they would go through it with the employee. And they would tell you employee what they wanted to hear. They would be like, that's not accurate. They're like, okay, well, we're just going to move on. It is accurate, but we're going to move on. And then they would, but they wouldn't take notes of it. They wouldn't take notes of it. So when employee would be like, oh, no, Trevor, Trevor told the chief legal counsel this. And then the chief legal counsel signed off on this and Kirkland was like, no, that's actually not how it happened, but it's okay. We're going to move on. And then they wouldn't write it down and they would just move on. So like I had no idea an employee would actually tell this is, imagine this is Brady material means information that shows your innocent or exculptory. Kirkland and the company would sanitize all of it. And then what they did is they would come up with a plan that they would come up with this report and Kirkland came out with it a whole report on me about how I was a fraud. They created this report fraudulently with all these partial employee comments where they sanitized everything out of it that showed I was innocent. And the government wanted it because he wanted to guarantee they would use that as part of their indictment and use it as part of the SEC coming after me. It's just crazy. The whole thing is just bonkers. We go. What kind of penalty were you facing in trial? 64 years is what the government has. 64 years in prison. 64 years in prison. I think is what the number was at the old. How old were you? Is the hot at the time? I was like 40. Right. So you'd be 104 when you had begun. Yeah. And you're facing a life in prison for tweeting, by the way. Remember, this is important to know. Even one day in prison is the worst thing you can do to human that's innocent because it destroys their life, their freedom, their liberty, their family, their name. It's irreparable. There's probably been a quarter million negative articles written about me because they just follow what the government says. So a great example is when the government came out, the US attorney, Audrey Strauss came out. And this is the crazy. They will, they convict me for misunderstanding my tweet, right? Because they say it was marked. It affected the market. So here's a crazy part. Audrey Strauss comes out. She stands in front of the whole world and she says, Trevor Milton is a liar, a fraud is where the rubber meets the pavement. He created a truck that was nothing more than a Ford, a Ford truck with, with, with his own badge on it. It wasn't even real was fake, everything. That was categoryically 100% false. So the market collapses on equal. So this market manipulation, they should indict her like they indicted me because she actually caused massive market class when she had the resources at her hands to know that what she was saying was fake, but she didn't care. You know why? She can just like, oh, well, maybe maybe we misrepresented it a little bit. No, they destroyed the company. The department of justice destroyed $34 billion in value. And she is responsible. The US attorney came out literally lied to the entire market. Okay. Like it's provable. The nickel of the pickup, one of the other trucks we did, the pickup truck was a nickel truck, nickel of frame, nickel of E axle, nickel of battery that we were working on all of our own suspension designs, our own exterior panels, everything, all that design was ours. We used like a couple pieces from other OEMs, which every OEM in the world does. And she came out and said it was literally just destroyed when that when she came out and said that it the whole entire company at that point was known as a fraud. It was one of the wildest interviews I've ever done. And I hope people understand the importance of it. Because what it shows is that there's a shocking level of coordination between major institutions in our society that are not supposed to be coordinating with each other and that it's on behalf of what is in my view of criminal enterprise, short selling. Here's where it gets really like, okay. So now we've had all the I agree. And now we've had all this fun talking about this. And here's like that here's the cherry on top. Here's the cherry on top. This just shows you how corrupt it is. So I didn't know this was going down. This is completely, I did not know this was going down in the background, okay? So after everything I'm telling you, I'm sitting there, I get a call from my attorney and he says, Trevor, I need you to answer me something honestly. And if you lied to me, I'll never represent you. You need to be 100% truthful to me right now. And I'm like, what? I've never lied to you. What are you talking about? Why would you even phrase it that way? What's going on, dude? What the hell else is going on that I don't know about? And he says, Trevor, are you a Russian asset? I thought you were like a Mormon kid from Kenab, Utah. I was a very innocent naive Mormon kid from Kenab, Utah. And I admit one Russian in my lifetime up to that point and she was a male lady. She was really nice. Like at the post office. Yeah, the post office, you worked for the post office. And you were Russian asset. I had never been to Russia. I had never met a Russian in my life up to that point. And no big deal. I mean, there's probably lots of great people. I mean, it's probably good and bad just like every country. I was like, what the fuck are you talking about? I'm sorry for the language. Sorry for the language. I was just my job. I had no clue. What are you talking about? They're like, did you hack Nate Anderson and the department of justice? What the fuck are you talking about? I don't even know how to hack, dude. That's a hacker, a Russian asset. Dude, I have to go to my engineers to ask them simple questions for because that's how I learn. Like I don't know how to do it. Like I'm not like the expert when it comes to like, you get in super advanced chemical engineering. I'm not the expert. I have my engineers team. Yeah, I don't know how to hack a government system. Good for fuck, dude. So I was this is that was the line of questioning right in front. And I said, why? And they said, there's a meeting before the judge. The department of justice is alleging that you're a government Russian asset and that you've been hacking their systems in Nate Anderson. And they want to, they essentially want to take you to jail. Like I'm pretty pretty trial. Like you want to just throw me in prison for this. I don't know what the fuck you're talking about. He's like, you've never emailed anyone ever to get information from to like try to get into the system of Hanenberg or the United States government. No, you've never talked to anyone ever. No, you never asked someone to talk to someone else about it. No, don't even know what the fuck you're talking about. So I guess what happened. Nate Anderson before trial wanted to stoke the fear of the United States and get the government so mad at me that I have no ability of a fair trial. Remember, they're profiting off of the failure of me every step of the way. So every month they would make another however many millions of dollars, millions of dollars, millions of dollars. They're stock to clients to clients. Negative news comes out. They had to make sure that I was convicted. Their entire life and identity was on this from what we hear. And I have to say, this is only from what I know. I don't know all the details. I just know a lot of them. But from what I know, Nate Anderson reached out to his buddies in the department of justice, the prosecutors that he's been that he fed the report to and told them that some Russian asset was trying to hack him in the government and get information and that it was me. And the department of justice fell for it, hook lying in sinker. They go to the judge, they tell the judge and they set up a FBI sting. I've never told this is breaking here. An FBI sting in New York City. Supposedly, I'm behind it. They're going to nab me and my Russian asset. They set it up. Nate Anderson or a look alike. I heard it might, it was a look like it was a guy dressed up as Nate Anderson, like that he was like in the FBI or like a way or something, but they didn't want to risk his life. They got protect him. He personal look alike, show him is there. The Russian, this Russian person shows up, realizes it's not Nate or whatever and fucking takes off hits an FBI vehicle from what I hear it. By the way, this all filmed, the FBI has it these fuckers. Sorry, these people have it. I don't have access to it. I've heard about it in my attorneys have seen it. They fucking filmed this thing. Actually, I could say we're going to use it to go to the judge and throw me in prison. If Nate Anderson is texting federal prosecutors, that right there should trigger a criminal investigation. If that's true. If it's true, I mean, it's true. If it's true. I from what I know it, that's the thing. That's where I have all the evidence from what was been told to me from my attorneys, from what I've seen. I was standing there one day when one of the prosecutors had to show me a message because there for disclosure reasons, they literally had to show me their phone and say, hey, we just have to show you this message because it came into us. They had to show it to me. So this is how I know that, like, I'm just saying what was the message? It was a message about me fleeing the country. Who was it from? One of their friends that was involved in this whole scheme. I didn't have their right to number down in research. He was in the prosecutor's cell phone. They're fucking cell phone. It's insane that these guys have shot. So they, they, meaning likely the short sellers, were telling federal prosecutors that you were a flight risk in order to encourage them to put you in a Russian asset and Russian asset. They wanted me in prison. They did not, they had to do it because they needed to make the judge think I was guilty. So remember, they had approached the, the judge sees all this shit. So the judge is thinking I'm the biggest scum on earth. You know how it is? Like the liberal, like the very far left in New York, where do they hate more than anything? Russian assets. They used Trump 101, Trump's a Russian asset. They used that to stoke the anger to the judge to fuck my life and my, my trial knowing that they're going to make another 10 $20 $30 million on it. That is just crazy. I lost almost everything I have in my life because of this. I lost 80 million and attorney fees, billions of dollars in losses in my, in my, on my stock in, in innocent investors lost billions of dollars out there potentially in different ways because of what that, because of the decline in the stock value, because of the department, misconduct of the department of justice. And then the blame did on me. And there's been 200,000 articles out there about how I was the cause of this. And it now the truth gets out is why I'm so excited to finally think. And I, and I use his name so sacredly because I'm a, I'm a religious person. And I use this most, in the most sacred, most amazing way I ever can and like respectful and reverent way, like, think my God for stepping in and allowing Donald Trump to, to, to see my story because he issued me a full and unconditional pardon days before the government was going to seize every asset I ever owned. And I, that's all it was not for Donald Trump. I would be destroyed. And it was the same people that came after him came after me. And when he saw this, he was like, this is a huge abomination. I can't stand for it. I don't care what the articles say. I don't care what the, what the short-seller narrative is. This is wrong. And I don't stand for it. And that's one thing I love about Donald Trump. He does not stand for something when he thinks it's wrong. He doesn't give a shit. Who is going to attack him? He knew there's going to be blowback. He didn't care. I don't care. I do. It's right. This is, and he is a man like he has got a spine. He's a real man. He's a true man. He's not a cow. He's not, he literally stood up to the media. They said, why'd you pardon Trevor Milton? And because they were trying to, you know, get in like, make him look bad. And he said, he stood there and said, they destroyed five years of this man's life. Trevor did nothing wrong. They're evil people. Yes. And that was his statement to the press, life on the fly. And that was, if it wasn't for Donald Trump, I'd be screwed. They had filed that to see $690 million or something like that from me. There were days away from taking everything. I was sending an approach and then sending me to prison just weeks or months later. I've been my goal in this life now has been to try to figure out a way to help Trump perform the criminal justice system because there's four or five things I could do. And I can lay them out real quick. That will change the entire justice system. I think it's important to tell the world what it is. This would be, these would be like, because you know, you can go into thousands of things. I only care about four or five things because it'll 80 to 90% of prosecutions, wrong prosecutions would go away instantaneously. Number one is the department of justice should never allow it to be allowed to talk to anyone unless it's a recorded call. Totally. That's number one. They should never be allowed to talk to an attorney. Cops have beat cops who are making 50 grand a year in risking their life every day in the worst places in the United States have to wear a chest camera. But FBI agents don't know. So here's a problem. There's a problem. They course and they lie and they destroy people and they destroy evidence. So the number one thing they should be is every call, every personal visit, everything should be on camera. If there's really every interview. Every interview as well. I mean, I ask you a dumb question. Are you allowed to whip out your iPhone and record the interview? I believe you are. If I believe you are, if you're being interviewed, that person has, but the person wouldn't know the employee would never know that. Yes, they're never told. So, but they should force the department of justice to do it. So that way it's turned over in discovery. That should be part of their discovery applications. Okay. Number one is every single interview or communication with a with any counsel, any any any attorney or anyone working on the case or instructed to work on the case, it should be a recorded call or video. Number one, number two is if you indict someone, they, the, the person, the defendant should be able to choose the venue. This is a really important one because what they did is they had no connections to New York. We filed a, not a native New Yorker. No, I never, I didn't own a property. I had passed through New York on a flight one time overseas. I've been to Canada here for once. I was, I had been interviewed one time and one time early on about New England in New York. And it was, it had nothing to do with the allegations of the government. Climmy media interview. Yeah. For me to interview. So if you look at my whole history, everything the government alleged happened in Arizona, Utah, not in New York. So we filed a motion with the judge and we said, you're on it. It's a wrong venue. I'm, I'm guaranteed by the, by the constitution. It's actually one of the reasons why America exists is because it used to drag the founding fathers across sometimes the ocean, sometimes into other cities and states, and they would prosecute them with people that hated them. This one reason why our founding fathers created the venue clause. And that is, that was for me was one of the most was, was very sacred. May I ask, how did the case wind up in New York City? Be if you had no connection to New York City. That's the whole scam. Was the company chartered in New York City? Well, no, they said, well, so the prosecutors claimed that it was because we were, that there were publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange that they could drag me to New York. Okay. So my con somehow the company's organization would bring my personal venue into the company, underneath the company, which is crazy, that doesn't happen. Number two is, we, so they, we found this motion with the judge and we said, your honor, Trevor, let me connect just to New York. This shouldn't even be here. She'd be in Arizona, Utah. They would never try it in Arizona, Utah ever because your stock was traded in New York. Yeah, but here's the fun. Actually traded on the internet. It's trade, well, yeah, so they say it passes through his trade through New York, but you know, the funny thing is we told the judge, right, your honor, even that, even that argument's wrong. And he says, why is that? Why is that? So New York Stock Exchange says, your honor, the service around New Jersey. Well, there is New York Stock Exchange anymore. I mean, this whole thing's stupid, the government should guys in coach with slips of paper trading stocks. No, it's taking place digital. Digibly. So what, what that means is that if you took away the venue clause in the constitution, then the rights that we've been given, the venue is one of the most powerful clauses ever given. And it was, it was made to prevent people from dragging people into other venues where they could get destroyed. So here's the important thing though, real quick. The, the prosecutors claimed that because something passed through New York somehow digitally, that it allows him to prosecute New York. If that's the case, you might as well get rid of every, every district in America, it should only be Southern District, because that allows him to pull anyone they want from California from, from, from Portland, from Texas and charge him in New York just because the internet goes to New York or some kind of thing like that. That's the problem is it, it would, it would, it would destroy every venue in America. So you have to move to New York. I did, you moved to New York. I had to move there to the entire time in trial, like how long was that? How long were you new? I mean, you know, we, we had, we bought a house there for, for the whole, for the whole trial was awful, it was terrible. I was for the trial and it were there, you know, the trial took, I mean, the pre trial and trial was over a couple of years. Should you move to New York for a couple of years? Not, I wasn't there the full time. I was still, I'd still go back and forth. But yeah, I was there for, I was there for a little over a year. I mean, at least a, probably a year in and out all the time. What did you think of the jury pool? That was hard. And that, this is why the government tries people in New York. So the jury pool in, in my, in my trial was, this is why the rubber stamp convictions in New York is how it works. And in Utah and Arizona, the jury would, the people actually feel like it's a, a, like a very patriotic thing to serve on the jury. And they want to make sure that no innocent person goes to prison. That's why they wouldn't try me in Arizona or Utah. They would, the, the prosecutors would have been laughed out of the courtroom and probably sanctioned by the judge for their conduct. But in New York, the judge's cover form. They can do it every day. One, there's never a prosecutor that's ever recommended for anything in New York ever. Shit, the, the, the, in Utah just barely that the chief justice in Utah called the SEC and essentially told them that they had committed crimes shut down the entire SEC division in Utah over this because the SEC lied to the judge one time that the prosecutors lied to the judge hundreds of times in my trial. The judge literally threw the entire criminal case out against a guy because the prosecutors misled the judge one time. They out there, they actually gave a shit about the rule a lot in New York. They don't. So what are they doing to you? How's it work? They bring you in and they have this huge jury pool. New York is, is the people my jury pool ended up through process of attrition, which is guaranteed every time almost every one of them, none of them had a very few of them had any type of job. Most of them were on government subsidies and welfare. Actually, yeah. They, the, the people that did have jobs like there was one guy that came through that was a plumber and electrician and I was begging us, please, like stay on my journey. They didn't have jobs or a welfare. Some of them, some of them, not all the jury of your peers. Like jury promise. Yeah. Yeah. So the, the, the, one of the guys was like, uh, was, was a, was a small business guy. I'm like, oh, please for the love be it. I'm staying on my journey. And he's like, and the prosecutors like, you're on this jury, this trial could take up to four months. The business guy's like, I can't be away from my business for four months. I'll lose it. I'm sorry. I can't be here. So the guy who's actually, like, who's actually run a company that's like, would, would be a peer one person left. See other guys make it, you know, the other people they're making six, eight bucks an hour, 10 bucks an hour, whatever getting welfare, getting welfare checks, retired, don't, don't even work anymore. They're like, really old people. We had, we had, we had a couple of them that slept through the whole trial. They're so old, they just slept, they didn't even, they weren't even awake. We, one of them was, and then what we found, the crazy part is, so during this void, I, you know, they called void, I were they, were they interviewed the jurors. There's this wonder. And this juror had, um, she was younger, African American female. And most of my jury was, was, was, was, was, uh, was other races. They were not why it was most of it was all, um, I think that might have only had one white person on our, our jury off to look, but it was almost all a different race. Which is fine, but, you know, you would think normally, but in this situation, it wasn't, um, so this, this jur had, and during questionnaires, we asked the jury, do you have social media? No, I don't. Do you, do you social media? No, I don't. Do you, where do you get your news from? Um, I get it from YouTube. Okay. All right. Cool. Sounds good. Um, any prior convictions? No, no, no, no one. Okay. Cool. Whatever. So there was nothing on her. And we asked the judge if we could research these jurors to make sure that the jurors weren't lying. She was again, no problem. You can research, you know, so we, the person said they never had social media, never had, do you have anything that against rich people or white people that would, that would affect your ability to be fair. No, no, you're on her. Okay. So cool. We put her in a pool of like potentially just acceptable people, because they didn't meet any qualifications to be disregarded or just, just, um, you know, essentially thrown out. And, uh, so long story short, it's going to be the trial. Most of my jury is, and she's on the jury. The show on the jury, there was, I had one good jur, I had one good jur, and it was, it was a, it was a Hispanic lady and she was awesome. She ultimately went along with the rest, but she was, she was actually, she was the only one that had any sense of, of soul and her heart in her that was like, hey, this might be wrong guys. Um, she was a really great woman. And I think she was bulldozed by everybody. She, she, but I'll go through this. This African-American girl, um, lied to the judge, lied to us. My trial happens. I get convicted. And she goes out. She starts speaking to the jury. I mean, speaking to the media, we're like, what the fuck? Like, and so she, she starts speaking to the media. She gets interviewed by the media and and the media is, uh, the media asks her questions and they're really weird. And we start researching her and we find multiple social media accounts that she owned through investigative ways that she never disclosed to the, to the judge or us. And right before my trial, guess what, her New Year's resolution was, to abolish, quote, abolish the billionaire class. End of quote, that's unbelievable. Her New Year's resolution was to abolish the class of the human that she was on the trial for. Imagine this. Imagine if there was a trial with a young Hispanic kid or a young black kid and there was a white supremacist on, on the trial and his, and his New Year's resolution was to abolish the African-American culture or abolish or, or class or abolish the Hispanic class. Can you imagine how quick that fucking trial would be thrown out? What did she express any racial views? Yeah. Lots of stuff against white people, wealthy people. Everything was a, everything was a class warfare against wealthy white people. Like explicitly against whites, everyone except for Elon Musk, which was her, which was her hero. So she was like implant my brain with your neural link, Elon. Like she was like, uh, she was an Elon lover. My brain with your neural link. So she said, she actually tweeted that. And she tweeted it, but she hates whites otherwise. She hates whites otherwise. I think it's because he South African or something. But like, the point as she absolutely was like, her whole thing was like, she served on the jury and voted for your country. Not only served, she was the head of the, she took full control of the jury. She admitted it. So it was, why wasn't, why wasn't the conviction thrown out on the basis? Oh, it's even gets worse already. So one last thing I'll say. So when she went out and interviewed the media, they're like, they're like, oh, why didn't you, you know, like, what about this, this, and this they asked her questions about something. She's like, well, we didn't want to have an alternate come in because we knew he'd be found innocent. She actually said that I would be fighting in a sense. Why didn't you, the country? No, seriously, I wanted to say this is joke. Everything about this is fake. There's no reference point in justice here at all or truth. And I know it's your country and you love the country. I feel the same way, but like, if you're sitting before a jury of racists who hate you for being white and rich and say so and lie, you're, you're going to do life in prison life in prison. They asked for 64 years and should you consider fleeing the country? No, I never did. Mainly because like, I grew up in a really small farm town. As I said, my dad was very patriotic, is still, but like, we know the problems in the government. We hope we can fix them. But the point was is there's something very very brave and very like patriotic and very like manly about standing up knowing you're going to be assassinated and looking them in your eye and saying, fuck you, that was my, my best thing I could do is look at them and through the eyes and I looked at the jury and I said, you know, one day you're going to stand before God and oh, how the hell you're going to pay? Because they're going to realize that they like, so the one juror was like, oh, we didn't want hit. We didn't want an alternate because they were going to exclude someone. We didn't want an alternate because he would have found innocent. She's like, I couldn't stay. So I just decided we needed to have this done by 5 p.m. So I could go home. So she like literally is just like, well, I have to be home by 5 p.m. So we're going to convict him. We're not even going to look at the jury and strut what the stuff we're just going to, let's just, let's just go home. And she like, she was bragging about convicting, convicting me, putting me in prison by 5 p.m. And it was her lifelong goal. And then she went and bragged about it to the media because she wanted a big, she wanted a big payday. It was just sick and it's sick. And there's something about like, I feel like God like Christ, if you believe in God, allegedly, you know, what they believe is that he died on a cross. He didn't die because he didn't die on that cross because he had, I mean, because he was forced to. He did willingly. And it's the greatest sign of a man is to look at the people that are evil in their eye, why they hurt them or merge them and look them in the eye and just say, you don't know. And one day you will and it'll be pain. The pain will be deep. And I promise you like if God does exist when they meet their maker, the pain, they, the pain they caused me and the lies that they, what they did to me, if they're raised, they're hatred towards wealth and race and everything else and whatever other reason, they will have to pay a price greater than what I paid over my five years of hell because that's the only way you can truly atone for something is you have to pay for what you did. And then God can forget about it. But their, their pain is going to be incredible. And I don't wish that on them. But the growth that's required requires that. And so they will have to go through it. And that's why I'm so afraid of ever doing anything wrong to anyone. So I give so much away. That's why I love I give so I gave 70% of my company away. The judge wouldn't let me talk about that at trial. So they could say that I somehow I was like, Oh, I was lying. I was defrauding the cutting, you know, defrauding Gerald, I like lied about something in a tweet when it was a misunderstanding. But like, they just didn't understand how I was explaining it. But if I was really trying to pump the stock and defraud people, wouldn't I have not given 70% of, I mean, I'm talking 10 billion plus dollars away. Why would I keep such a small amount for me? Why wouldn't I keep it all? Not I gave it all away. But somehow I'm a fraud. It was just it's just it's that's America and talk or that's where we're at now. And that's there's a first time I've ever exposed it. And first time I've ever come clean about like what really happened and what went down. And it's a, and I'm just really great. I'm really proud of doing your wife. Take this. Not well. Yeah. Yeah. I bet. She still struggles to this day because with her with her illnesses and sicknesses stress is like the number one factor for diabetics and for for autoimmune diseases. That's what it flares up the histamine reactions and everything. And her stress level, like there was days where I thought we were both going to probably just wake up. Like God would just be kind to us and just let us like dine or sleep. Like, you know, that'd be the greatest way to go. Like, you know, that'd be wonderful. Like just wake up and I'm in heaven with her. That'd be rad. Like like there's my heart hurt so bad and tore so hard. I was like, I can't I could never imagine hurting like I've come from a life of service. I lived in Brazil when I was a kid. I did a service mission in the favelas. I taught people English. I taught people about God for a period, you know, for for a period of time. I've given almost everything away to my employees. I gave everything away to other people. I never pass up a person. You can ask anyone you ever meet that knows me. I'll never pass anyone up on the street unless it's like a dangerous position where I won't stop and help a person. It's been my it's who I was raised from the time I was a kid. It's a true patriot as a lover. Like of just wanting to see people happy. I want to see what I meet my maker. I want him to say, you know, Trevor, you stopped 23,000 times in your life to help help me help my my children, the people that I that I made. And they were never grateful for it, but I am. And that's what I wanted. I wanted that feel. I wanted to know when I met my maker that I was like, you know, when I I never passed someone up that needed help. And that's why I was so grateful for President Trump. He was the first person. There was other people there that helped as well, but he was the first person. That was that was that was publicly able to, you know, that was able to willing to stand up and do what's right. You regard this of the consequence and think, my God, for President Donald Trump, because I'd be in prison. Everything would be ripped away. My wife would probably be dead. And that's how evil these prosecutors are. And I hope they go to, I hope they hear this and I hope they understand the damage they do to people because they have to meet their maker one day. And they can excuse it of like, Oh, it's just my job. God doesn't care if it was your job. Was it your job to throw, you know, not comparing equals here, but was your job to throw the Jews in the oven? He doesn't care if it's your job. He cares what you cannot excuse your behavior on your job. And I'm telling you right now, dude, like I'm, I'm halfway through my life right now. And I don't think America has much more and much more in the future. I think we got maybe 10 years left in us. Probably so if I really think about it, I probably have 10 years left in my life because I think we're going to end up in a world of hurt and most of us are going to be most of us are going to be affected negatively. And I look at it. I'm like, I'm pretty close to meeting my maker right now. And I'm really glad. I'm really proud. Like I can look at my maker in the eyes. And I can say, I like I did nothing but love people and help them and give everything I could. And I never lied. I never defrauded these guys, these short cellars and the prosecutors, they all just lied. And they just, and they just spread it and they have their power. them but love people and help them and give everything I could. And I never lied. I never defrauded. These guys, these short sellers and the prosecutors, they all just lied and they just and they just spread it and they have their power. They've layers like nine layers just deep everywhere. And they back it up because oh, well, the media said this. Well, Bloomberg said this. Oh, CNBC said this and the thing I didn't tell you about and I kind of missed it in that timeline was is that Hindenburg worked with a group called with NC and BC called the American Greed. And they launched this massive, massive, disgusting show about me. That was all lies. The entire thing was lies. They launched it during my jury deliberation to guarantee. So you think about this. Wait, are you sure that Nate Anderson and Hindenburg work with CNBC on that show? 100%. It's actually it's in all the velocities proven to the judges. It just passed a motion to submit. How could CNBC work with a short seller to defame or attack in any case a company in the short seller was profiting from the deco. During my jury deliberations knowing that jury members would go home because they're all social media watchers. They all watch this shit. Every show that comes out people watch their own bingers. Watch it to think about it during the jury deliberations. And it's it's 100% factual that they that that Hindenburg was working with with American Greed. It's part of the big lawsuit. It's a billion dollar lawsuit against them. I hope you put them under. I hope I hope they have to pay. I don't know if the court systems are honorable enough to make them pay, but I hope they do. It's bad. I mean, the best thing would be is the department justice actually open a full investigation on the prosecutors, the process, what happened? Hindenburg, what they did, who they who was paying a money, who they you know, did they trade on this information, which we know, which they which we have a high beliefs that they did. We know it. Well, I mean, obviously they traded on it. So if they did this, that would be the greatest. That would be the best thing that could happen to America is for them to actually restore trust in the justice system to realize, you know what, we're not going to stand for prosecutors fucking around with with short sell people committing crimes. We're not going to we're not going to stand for it. And if you are, you're gone and you're prosecuted. Dude, not just gone, but prosecuted. And that would be the that would be the best way to restore faith in the American system because it's gone right now. How did you find out you were getting important? I got a call on. So this is crazy. I was actually like my world was over at this time. I had finally come to the conclusion. I had finally resigned mentally that it was done when was beginning of April. I think it was April being in April. March. Sorry. I'm sorry. It was beginning. I'm sorry. It was about the beginning of March. I heard your thanks. Thanks, baby. I appreciate it. She's like, March. I'm like, okay, March. Sorry. Your wife is a very good memory for dates of day. And I noticed I noticed early. Yes, she remembers everything. It's good. And so some time around the beginning of March, I got a call on my phone and it pulled up and my screenshot. It just the just the call or ID number because I was like, it was like so interesting. It was said, it said executive office of the president of the United States. And I was like, I'm either getting trolled like straight trolled. Like they're going to impersonate them with AI. I'm getting full on set up here. But I was like, I got to answer this way answered it. And they're like, Hey, this is Trevor Milton. I said, yeah. And this is the executive office of the president of the United States. So and so and Mr. President, President Trump would like to speak with you to have a minute. And I was like, absolutely. That'd be great. And I go on a hold and I'm a hold for probably like three minutes. And I'm like, this is really scary. Because I truly thought it was like a full set up. And and all of a sudden it was the president comes on the line. He said, you know, this Trevor and I said, yeah. And he says, Trevor, how you doing today? And I said, not too great, Mr. President, but I'm alive still. And that's, you know, it's all you can do is just keep fighting. And he says, you're so true Trevor. So true. And he says, well, you're going to have a better day after this. And I just wanted to tell you. And I said, see, the Anne, why, and I said, why is that? And he says, he says, well, Trevor, I've heard your story. And what they did to you was evil and disgusting was wrong on every level. And I'm an issue, you a full and unconditional pardon, the highest pardon a president can give a human is a full and unconditional. And I'm going to give, I'm going to issue you a pardon, you know, deserve what you've been through. I'm so sorry. And he says, you're clean, you're cleaner than a baby's bottom. And it was a very, very like, and I didn't know how to take it. I'm like, I don't even, here I am, like, I had finally given up, finally resigned mentally. It's five years. I was just like, I just didn't have anything left at me. I was just over. And that was when I got the call in it. And it was like, it was so incredibly because I like, I realized that sometimes in this life, you don't get the help until you have nothing left to give. And it was at that moment. And he stepped in for what reason. I, you know, I know the reason because it was wrong, but like most politicians don't have bravery to do the right thing. They always do the wrong thing. And, and then he says, I'll be in touch soon. And, and he says the tea, he's like, just want to let you know he's like, you know, I'll be in touch soon. So two and a half, three weeks go by. So what, what did you do in the meantime? Did you tell your lawyer? I told my, I told my parent, my dad, and I told my brothers and my sisters. And I told my lawyers. And I made sure that like I was like, listen guys, this cannot get out. This is the highest level secrecy. Do not mention this to anybody. And my attorneys actually were like, I didn't know how to take it. They're like, are you, um, you know, Trevor, do they're like, do you have a, do you have a piece of paper that signed? And in that moment, I realized, oh, shit, I don't like, no, I don't. And then they're like, then it didn't happen. And it doesn't matter. And there's a million things that can go wrong from now until then. Or if it even, you know, you know, like, you're not questioning you because we like you and we trust you. But this is a little, like you got to understand is very rare to get a pardon. And I said, I have never lied to you guys before. And I'm not lying to you now. That's, that was like my wife was here. She listened to the whole thing. And then I go, all right, well, we'll see two to three weeks goes by and nothing. And I'm like terrified. Am I great? Someone got to him. Someone made him think I was the evil man that the press said made him think what the short sellers believe. And, um, and next thing you know, I sitting there on an architecture and meanwhile, the government's looming over you to seize all your assets and put you in jail. They did. I was three. I was a few days late on a on a filing, because it was like, oh, my, it was an asset to seize all my assets. You know, I was a filing to seize all my assets. They asked my judge to allow him to take $660 million from me when they couldn't prove a single dollar had ever been, ever been, ever been lost or anything that like I had nothing wrong. So that's part of reform when you'll talk about that, you know, that that's one of the things in reform needs to be the true, you know, needs to be not what the government just says that you like has to be true. Like show me someone who invested on my comment when they made it and how much they lost. They couldn't find one person that ever did ever. They searched every investor that ever invested in England. They could never find one person that said they invested comments that they took me to trial for and what was the losses from that none zero. So it was a $660 million and we were a few days late on our filing and we, uh, and then all the sudden I'm on a call with our architects and attorneys and Chelsea Chelsea, like all of a sudden, I get a call and it was a Florida number. And I was like, mm, okay, I better take this. I usually don't answer calls that I don't know numbers from because I got so much spam, but it was a Florida number and I thought, okay, maybe. And it comes online. Trevor, yeah, Trevor, it's it's it's president Trump. How are you doing? And I said, I'm doing, I'm doing okay, Mr. President. And he says, he says, oh, he says, boy, are you going to be doing better today? He says, I wanted to let you know that I'm sitting in front of your pardon right now. And I'm about to sign it. And but I wanted you on the phone, why I signed it. And it would, and then he said something to me that was really the most powerful thing I've ever heard probably in my life. And he says, I'm doing something for you that they, that they, that they never did for me. And it was one of the most deep is like that they, no one can do for me, like to accept or him, he may be the only person that can ever do it for himself. But you know, as a president, whatever those constitutional powers are, but essentially what he told me at that moment was I almost broke down balling in this because it was, it was like out of everything, that's what I took more powerfully than anything is that Trevor, I'm giving you something that I've long wished I could have been given. And I can't no one did it for me, but I'm doing it for you. And I almost busted down because it was really like a religious moment for me. It was a moment of like of like where I felt like God was sometimes like that's a moment where God's like, I, I didn't do anything. But I had to let the evil man of the world murder me and hang me on a cross and suffer for days beyond any human could ever comprehend. And I had to do it because you couldn't do it for me. And like, fuck, that was like, that was like, that was a moment that like I had, I had never imagined the power of a man's words in my life ever hit me like that. And it was when Trump told me I'm doing something for you that no one could do for me. And it was like it hurt my heart, like it hurt me to like think about like what he went through and what Trump's been through and like what they're doing in there and no one could come in and do that for him. And I was like this guy's a human beyond measure. The media loves to make about to be a villain. He is, he is so human, so fucking amazing. Like I, I, I straight up I would die for him dude in two seconds. I take, I take a bullet in one second for him. Like he, he's that good of a man and like I'm like, I just, it was, it was so special to my wife was crying. Like I was crying. It was just like, it was just like, he, and he, he did it. He called me. He wanted to make sure I heard his pen. He put the phone, you can hear his pen up and down, and up and down and up and down. Up and down like he's, you know, 20 peaks and valleys in the signature and it's so beautiful. And he says, Trevor, we everyone here loves you. You don't deserve this. I'm so sorry. And he says, he says, go tell the whole world you should be proud of this. Go tell the whole world. And I say, you're okay if I, if I, if I talk about this, just I expect you to. And I was like, what, what a, what a man. Like I think we forgot what men are. Like it's, I feel like society is dumbed men down to nothing. It's almost no, no hero is in anymore. No, no, no greatness. No spine. No, no character. No nothing. And I'm like, this is what our founding fathers were like, like the guy is willing to give up his life everything and he's willing to save someone who's, who means nothing to him. I meant nothing to Trump. I mean, other than the story, other than he was wrong, but like he did, he, you know, I wasn't, I wasn't a lifelong friend of his. He did this because it was wrong. What they did to me was wrong. And so he did this because he wanted to write a wrong. And that's as Godlike as a making this world. And I'm, I'm damn proud. I have that, I have that, that part in him on my desk and I'm blowing it up and I'm putting it on my wallet, my, in my hanger and I'm going to blow it up to 30 feet high. And I'm going to wear it with a badge of honor for my entire life and I'll go down and I'll, I'll, I'll go down and die for that dude. Doesn't matter. He deserves it. He, he's earned it. I can't thank you enough for the interview. Thank you. Trevor Bowman. Congrats. Thanks, Tucker. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a more, what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.