But I think that's part of what you have been able to bring to the table over the last, like, uh, several years, really through the whole Tucker Carlson tonight run and now your, your show on, on Twitter, or X, excuse me, it's going to take me years to get. Let me call it X, Dave. Yes, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to, I messed up. Stay with my favorite. Just a single letter. It's, it's, I like a lot of what Elon Musk has done changing it to X was the second worst besides his trip to Israel. Or now, I'm not correctly or is it, or is it, is it one of the 20? I mean, like, what is it? I don't pronounce it. I was counting on Twitter to be the one non Chinese social media company. So I hope it's not, I hope that's not it. But there was what one of the things you do on your show that I really like, I try to do this too, um, because I do show about the news, you know, and one of the things I try to do as best as possible, which is challenging in today's environment is to zoom out as much as you can. Because it's like every day there's a new crazy thing. But then one day there's a crazy thing and you go like, no, wait, this is not just a crazy thing. This is one of the biggest stories in American history. Like this isn't just some crazy thing. This is like, like, you know, like the three letter agencies tried to frame the sitting president for treason. That's a really big deal. That's up there with like top five stories in American history, right? Yeah. But I got to say, I think one of them is gotta be you and this show you're doing on X and forget. Look, I love it. I never miss an episode of it. But regardless of that, the fact is that the biggest show host in cable news gets fired and then has to move online and is bigger by orders of magnitude. But that's a really big deal. It's a better medium. I mean, we just say in TV like I was on a couple different or several different channels, cable channels, broadcast channels. And like my ratings would vary dramatically and the show, you know, maybe better worse depending but like over 25 years. But it was, it's the venue matters a lot. And it just turns out that people use social media and far fewer subscribed to cable news and consumer information sitting in their living room. Like that it was just so obvious and I'm such a late adapter because I'm not into tech at all. You know, we don't have a TV in my house. You know, we're not tech people at all. We're book readers. So I didn't, I only sensed it, but as soon as you make it easy for people to consume free effectively, we've got a subscription service launching. But basically, you know, the meat of it is a lot of it is free and always will be. Your viewership goes up. And also I think, you know, it's pretty obvious. It's certainly obvious to you and your entire audience, but like media are controlled. That's the whole point. And as soon as people sense you're not controlled or less controlled or you're out of control, they want to watch, right? I mean, why wouldn't they? Yeah, no, absolutely. But it does like what it represents is right like a real losing of that control. And for the first time, at least in my lifetime, that there isn't kind of this monopoly on the flow of information. And of course Elon Musk buying Twitter is a big part of that. And he's going to be dealing with is already dealing with tremendous forces trying to, you know, interfere with that. But at least for now, it does seem like, yeah, there are the two guys I usually point to argue and Joe Rogan, but between you two guys and then a whole bunch of other guys like on smaller levels, but like a lot of them. It's like, yeah, there's a whole new generation of people who are consuming their information that is not controlled. That doesn't mean it's correct all of the time. I'm sure we all make our mistakes, but it's not controlled by the CIA. You know, like there is a different fact. Exactly right. And actually, I know you know this because we've talked about it offline, but if you were to say out loud in specific terms, the degree of control that that specific agency and there are many other agencies, but that one specifically CIA had over our public conversation and over our politics, you'd say someone can complete freaking wacko. Like you wouldn't, people wouldn't even believe you and yet it would be absolutely true. So I guess what I'm saying is we understate the power, and this is, I'm speaking this from knowledge after 35 years in Washington, putting a lot of people work there and knowing a lot about it. We understate the power of this Intel agency with an unknown budget, unknown staff, unknown reach, unknown mission. It's completely out of control, like much more than people on the system is completely out of control. And it's also completely corrupt. I was telling my wife at dinner actually two nights ago with a bunch of relatives saying that we were thinking of four separate real estate transactions that we were personally party to or on the same street or next door to or whatever of CIA officers, current CIA officers who are paying millions of dollars for a very expensive real estate. And I'm like, oh, well, what about that one? We sold our house wants to a CIA officer for all this money. It's like, and the question was like, where do they get all this money? You're a federal employee. Where do you get four million dollars or $12 million? And I mean, like leaving aside the assassinations and the subversion of democracy, just the pure financial corruption of the CIA is like a mind blowing story that the average person knows nothing about true. Yeah. And look, and this is one of the things that Trump and in many ways just to be clear here, I think Trump is almost like this like an inspector gadget type political figure where I don't know that you know, like he's just kind of walking around and things just all fall into place. One of the things that Trump kind of revealed even to people like myself who probably, like if I was taking a written test on this would have gotten the answer right before Trump, but to actually witness it and not just on like an intellectual level, but to watch it happening is that you're like, they do not work for the president. I mean, this is not something that that idea. And it's almost as if if we're talking about the federal government of the United States States of America and we're still discussing it as if there are these three coequal branches of government and the people elect the president and they elect the House of Representatives and they're you're like, oh, that's not that's not really the government we live under that in fact, there's the whole other shadowy forces that are completely untied to that they don't they oversee the politicians much more than the politicians oversee them and that that's really who's kind of in charge. And then it's like, okay, we're talking about a whole different thing. I mean, I could I could bore you for hours, but I would you're absolutely 100% right. It makes a mockery of democracy and the defenders of democracy are the ones propping it up. It's also grotesque, but I would just say one thing and that is that the I know this for a fact that the sitting president of the United States, there've been of course 40 odd since the Second World War have routinely been left out of briefings on the two, big programs that I know about one is the UFO stuff where there's a lot of evidence US governors had direct contact, maybe even negotiations with whatever these forces are. That's real, I think. But I know for a fact that presidents have not been briefed on that. One, choose the Kennedy assassination in which the CIA was implicated and not the whole CIA but the operations directorate under Angleton of yeah, how to roll in that that's just true. I know for again for a fact that there have been a number of presidents Richard Nixon famously on tape asked the CIA director about that. And he said, I think the CIA was involved in killing John quote. They did not respond. They did not brief him and instead they said in motion the wheels of Watergate, which had a amount of office in less than a year. That's not a democracy. That's an oligarchy by unelected spies and there's nothing scarier than that. And by the way, last thing I'll say if everyone talks about the famous Eisenhower retirement speech where in 1960 where he talks about the military industrial conflicts, that's where that phrase comes from that famous speech. Last year I was on a freaking treadmill trying to lose weight perpetual mission of mine. And I'm bored. So I was like, I'm going to find that YouTube. I'd recommend you, listeners, watch that speech. I think it's only like 30 minutes long. Eisenhower wrote it himself. Two things you'll notice. One, it's written at the level of postgraduate. Like the average American at such a higher IQ of a so much more literate in 1960 than now people wouldn't understand what he was saying. A, B, Eisenhower was like deeply distressed by the power of the Pentagon and the CIA and said so in public. And he's like, their budgets are too big. Thanks to the Second World War. And this is going to end democracy. He said that on television in front of everybody, it's totally worth watching. And he was right. He was right in the hands of the country over to John F. Kennedy. I mean, this is like, you know, like, this is the next president that comes right in on the heels of that. Right. And then also, you know, this is something I remember you talking about this when you covered it because it's so like I was a kid. I'm born in 1983. So like I grew up in the 80s and the 90s. And at that point, the only thing you knew about Richard Nixon was like, yeah, he was the most corrupt president. And it's like this tiny little detail that's left out that he was the most popular president. He was in, he won 49 states. He won by the biggest part in every 16 million votes in 1970. He was the biggest margin ever recorded. And he's gone shortly after that. And they control the narrative so much that the narrative almost becomes like, yeah, you know, the people really didn't like him. They really didn't like him so much. We had to get him out of there. Well, what's so crazy is that he was undone by this guy, famously called Bob Woodward, who's still around, still right. Well, still getting the participation of all of our leaders. Who was Bob Woodward in 1973? Was he a famous journalist? He got the biggest story in the world was handed to him by Ben Bradley, the editor of The Washington Post. No, he was not a journalist. He was a naval intel officer who'd been detailed to the White House, the Nixon White House. That's a fact. Look it up. And yet somehow he winds up with the story that topples a president and his main source. Who was the main source that was Mark Felt, the deputy director of the FBI who ran the Co-And-Tell program? This is not conspiracy stuff. This is like on Wikipedia. Yeah. That's what ever says it. It's crazy. And by the way, who replaced Nixon, Gerald Ford, unelected, who happened to be on the what? Oh, the Warren Commission. Yeah. Nixon picked Ford well because they took out his VP, Spiro Agnew on a tax charge. And then Carl Albert, who was the Democratic leader in the house said you are picking Gerald Ford and he did. It really is like it's out of a movie, man. And it does that like I get where it does sound like if people don't follow this stuff, it sounds like nutty conspiracy talk. And it is conspiracy talk. It is a conspiracy. It's just not a theory. It's just like no, this is all like documented. And Bob Woodward, I mean like I know Bob Woodward pretty well. I lived right down the street from Bob Woodward and Georgetown is a kid and it's like, I'm not attacking. You know, it's perfectly nice guy and he's not stupid actually. But the idea that, you know, he's just a shoe leather journalist. No, he was a naval intel officer who somehow wind up as like his first one of his very first stories in the Washington Post is Watergate. But that's so obviously bullshit that like that. That's not how it works. First and say that, not one person. Why? Right. And it's such an interesting story that you're like, it kind of goes to show you. That's why like you would want to talk about this if you were just trying to get eyeballs on your show. But no one will touch it. At least in the corporate media, nobody will touch it. Yeah, I know. It's so in look, I mean, I'm 54 on my kids are on fire. I don't really care. But like I just think if you're in this business and you're not curious, the question is why are you in this business? Like the whole point is curiosity like, wow, tell me how that happened. That's an amazing story. Like that's that's why I do this. That's why I got into this in the first place. No one is interested in anything. It's like bizarre. It's like, well, shut up. Everything you heard in fourth grade is true. Shut up, resist it. What do you you remember? I'm I'm blinging on her name. Maybe you remember it was the ABC reporter who she had the hot mic tape that leaked where she was talking about how she had the Epstein story broke years before. And they told her to squash it because it might mess up the relationship with the Royal family. And what happened to her, do you know? I don't I don't I'm not sure where she is. But that's it. But be Rob Mark. I worked with it at another, you know, the cable arm of NBC News years ago. I didn't know her very well. She's totally nice. She says that on the air. And I'm not a conspiracy. Not I've just, you know, everything I know I read in the Daily Mail. I'm just I'm just telling you that. And then like two or three years later, she gets bounced out of her job at ABC because she had an affair. Now I'm not endorsing affairs. I'm not having one. I'm against them. However, if we were to fire everybody in television who's having an affair with a co-worker, no one no one report for work. Like that's not a fireable offense. And MSNBC might need to find a new morning show. I'll say that much. Well, exactly. And like, just trust me, that's not a criterion for firing. And yet Amy Roboc got fired for having an affair. Oh, that's kind of weird. Right. It's like I forgot about that part. Fire Amy Roboc's and she got caught. And by the way, they made her apologize for it. They made her apologize. And she like she did she's this hostage state and trying to keep her job like, ah, when I said the Epstein stuff was real, I was just kidding. It's like, what? All of mine. And kind of these motor cage. I'm 39. I'm not the best of Jeffrey Epstein.