The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. I've enjoyed your work. Thanks for my love. I'm a gigantic fear fan of going clear in particular. Oh really? Yeah I read the book and watch the HBO documentary on it. One of the most bonkers things in our culture today. Amazing. That Scientology is like still, I mean I pass by the church of Scientology here just the other day. I was like, oh, still works. Yeah they just moved it. When the documentary came out, some woman had just gone to see it at the movie theater and they got, it was on the drag, you know, on Guadalupe across from the university. And she drove her car through the plate glass windows of the Scientology building. And she didn't stop there. She drove her on the lobby a little bit knocking over bookshelves. So she decided to issue a statement, deploring violence in any form. Was she a victim of it? No, she had just seen the documentary and she was really worked up. Wow. So that's a hype. She might have some other issues. Yeah she might. Maybe Scientology could have helped her. Yeah I wrote a band that might have been a course for that. Well it's a weird thing when you see so many people that are so successful that are Scientology, at least you used to see that. I had a neighbor who was one of the nicest guys. He was a great guy. He was a, in my old neighborhood. And he was a Scientologist. And I found out in the most bizarre way. Because there was a piece of land that was for sale. And he was talking about this piece of land about possibly purchasing it. But he was going to have to put it off because he needed $50,000 because his wife was going clear. Right. And it was like a scene in a movie where the record skips. And I went what? Like what are you doing? And this was me of, you know, it's probably 28 at the time, 29. The podcast has radically changed the way I look at things. So I've had a chance to educate myself and have all these conversations with brilliant people. Just enough of these conversations where I have a different perspective. But back then, I really didn't know too much about Scientology other than I had bought a book from Dianetics online. Because not online rather on television late 1994. And they wouldn't stop sending me these pamphlets. You know, asking me to come to all these various meetings and this and that. And sending me all these things for programs they have at discounts. and I mean, I was in one way I was kind of admired their hustles. I was like, these guys don't stop. They just kept sending this shit to my mailbox. I thought it was like a self-help book. And I would always been in the like Anthony Robbins and all these different. I always seemed to motivation. Like what can I get that's going to help me work harder or succeed better, whatever. So I saw this thing. And it was like, wow, this seems very compelling. And I knew that there was a bunch of famous people that were Scientologists like Tom Cruise and all of them. I was like, maybe this is legit. And I was reading it and I was like, this boy, this seems odd. It seems off without getting too much into it. So when I talked to this guy who was my neighbor, really didn't have a deep background and understanding it. But that was the beginning of me like really getting into it. Like talking to him and finding out like how much money he had to spend. And what was it about? And like what do they do for you? And he was explaining how nothing would ever influence you again. No negative influence. That's going clear meant. That was probably one of the first times I had ever heard that expression. Yeah. I first time I ran into it was when I was in college and I was my girlfriend and I were living in an apartment above this little storefront. And it was Scientology. And I'd never heard of it before. And you know, they showed me the emitter and stuff like that. And I just thought, I thought it was an interesting. I wasn't put off by it. I thought maybe so. I didn't pursue it. How old were you at the time? I was 21. 21. Yeah. And it was, I've always been interested in religions. You know, it's one of the themes, I guess, of my work. And why people go into one religion rather. Why they believe one thing rather than another? Because in America you can believe anything you want. And you know, it's not true in a lot of countries. But in our country there's a smorgasbord of religions you can choose from. And if you don't see something, you know, you can make up your own. And you know, it's a very fertile religious culture. Which interests me. And I, as a reporter, I think about how people have strong political beliefs. And it doesn't affect their behavior at all. You know, you know, you know, a lot of people like that, I'm sure. But you know, if you have powerful religious beliefs, it determines your life. And you know, as journalists, we should pay more attention to that. So I've always been intrigued by different religious manifestations. And so Scientology was on my list. I had wanted to write about it. And because they're, you know, they're always scaring everybody with, you know, legal threats or, you know, shake downs and stuff like that. They still do that or have they kind of backed off from that. And so they know that some of my sources for that, you know, they handed them mercilessly. And, you know, they hire private investigators. They're not doing the job that private investigators are, you know, they're doing. It's not so much to sneak up on your, you know, go through your trash, although they do that. It's to intimidate you. And, you know, they had somebody following me around for a while, mainly to my public events, you know, when I was making speeches, I'm in a band. And he came to one of my gigs. What kind of band you? It's a blues band. We play, you know, Texas Louisiana Music. And we used to back before the pandemic. I don't know if we had a regular gig at the Skylar Clowns in East Austin. And open it to the university. I want to come see you when you can be invited. Yeah. We got it. We're going to be really rusty. We need a lot of rehearsals now. That's to be expected. So you got really fascinated by religions and what made you focus on Scientology. I mean, there's a lot of crazy religions out there. One of the weirdest ones about Scientology is we know who made it, right? It's like him and Joseph Smith. Those are the Mormons and Scientology, the only ones where we know who the creator is. And the Scientology one is particularly weird because it was a science fiction author. It's like that didn't raise any red flags to people. You mentioned Mormons in the same breath and I think that's apt. They were the most stigmatized religion in the 19th century. Mark Twain hated them. Zane Gray wrote a novel about how wicked they were. They were hounded from one state to another. And Scientology is kind of the modern equivalent of that. And one of the reasons I wanted to write about it is you have these famous and sometimes wealthy people as you point out, affiliating with this organization, there must be a kind of public relations martyrdom for them. I mean, you can admire Tom Cruise or John Travolta for their acting. But you also think, are they a little nuts? Is there something going on with them that they need this religion? And so why do they affiliate? Why do they lend their celebrity and their standing to such a stigmatized religion? It was one of the reasons I wanted to write about it. Well, they must get some benefit out of it. That's what I, and they do. I think especially at the lower levels, they offer courses like Jerry Seinfeld was in for a while. I think he was interested in it and he was studying it. He took some courses. But he was never committed as a Scientologist. What is a Scientologist? I mean, once you're going to the celebrity center and you're taking courses, I say you're a Scientologist. If you go fishing once, are you a fisherman? Yeah, that can't. Aren't you? It's a good question. I'm testing the water. I've played basketball a couple times. I'm hardly a basketball player. That is a little different. Is it? I mean, I guess it is. But I mean, I feel like taking courses and things doesn't mean... Well, Leonard Cohen did as well. Sure. Rock Hudson. I mean, there were... A lot of people were drawn to it. And I think part of it is Scientology said itself up as a... a religion for celebrities. It deliberately targeted people like that. And for instance, if you go to Hollywood and you look at, you know, prominent actors and so on, they tend not to be Southern Baptist. You know, it's not designed for them. And, you know, they may come from a Southern Baptist background, but if they move to Hollywood and they're looking for a group of spiritual seekers, like themselves, and they're, you know, they want to affiliate with people like them, Scientology says, here we are. And we have the celebrity center when people like you, you know, can come and you can hang around with other famous people. I think they offer a certain amount of protection. I think there's something that... There for that. And there's also, I think there's a structure that exists. And I think there's a lot of people that, especially in such a volatile sort of... It's a uncertain world, the world of acting in particular. It's such a crazy world. I mean, I always said, if you want a formula, like why is LA the way it is? Well, just stop and think about what it is. You have a bunch of people that move there from somewhere else because they want fame. Right. And then you make them audition, which is the weirdest thing. You go into an unnatural environment, usually a conference room, there's a bunch of people sitting around judging you and you want them to like you enough to pick you to do this thing. So you can't, in any way, buck trends. You have to be like uber polite. You have whatever the ideology is that's accepted, the general vibe of Hollywood. You must confirm to that. You must conform to that, right? Like they don't even have opinions. They have this conglomeration of opinions they've adopted in order to be let in to this tribe. And then you hope that they pick you. And so you have these incredibly insecure people who want acceptance and love, and then you make them beg for it. They're essentially like going there and hoping that these people will like them. And that's where you get the abuse, like the Harvey Weinstein's of the world. And these type of people, it's like they're praying on this need to be accepted and brought into this group in order to be, to work. You have to play this fucked up game. And so if something comes along like Scientology that gives you structure and gives you family and gives you, like, we are, for you, we're going to help you become clear. We're going to bring you to the next level. You know, you're a six. It gives you something where you feel like, like, have you ever done martial arts? I did. Jeto when I was in high school. One of the beautiful things about martial arts is the belt system. Yeah. Because like when you're a white belt and all of a sudden they tie that blue belt on your waist, you're like, wow, I am making progress. This is really happening. And you feel fantastic. Whereas if you went to a martial art, like, I did kickboxing for a while, there's no belts. And it just feels weird. Like you don't know where you are. Like where am I? Like it's not the most, like, because of that, some kickboxing systems even more tie, some weird systems have developed their own belt structure, which is weird. The system, they've just sort of added to the existing martial arts. They didn't have a belt structure. But it's to give people this sense of progress, give people a scaffolding, give people structure, give people this thing where you feel like something is happening for me. And I think that's one of the things that Scientology does really well for these fucked-up people. Absolutely. And you know, the other thing you mentioned the word community. When I started writing about different religious groups, I am asking about beliefs. I noticed that people would always say, well, we believe this or that. And I finally began to focus on the we, rather than the belief. Because the Scientology has bizarre beliefs, as does Mormonism. They're out of the mainstream, for sure. But especially I can speak about the Mormons. I also wrote about them. It's a beautiful community. And the nicest people. Yeah. And Amish, for instance. I wrote about them. There are a lot like Scientology in some ways, because they have the same policy of disconnection. You know, we lived up in Central Pennsylvania in this little Amish community called Kishikwala-Svali, or Big Valley. And it's famous among anthropologists because they're so schismatic. And they define their community by the color of their buggies. What if schismatic? That means they break off fraction off. So, you know, here's a church. And one part of the church doesn't agree with the other part. So they break off and start another church. So in this little community, they have the white bogeys, black bogeys, and yellow bogeys. And they all have a different set of beliefs. They have a different set of practices. You know, like the white bogeys are the most, they're called the old order. They don't have, they don't have ease on their buildings. You know, they don't use electrical power at all. And, you know, they're very rigid about that. No pictures on the walls and so on. Whereas if you go up the grade when you finally graduate out of the Amish, you get into the midnight community, then they'll start driving cars. You know, but the most progressive Amish would use tractors only for tractor power. They wouldn't use them in the fields, but they'd use them to help load the hay in the barn. So, but if you're a yellow bogey and your daughter marries a white bogey, you'll never speak to her again and you're living in the same community. And that's not any different from Scientology. But the reason they do that is to enforce the boundaries of their community. And I think another significant part of this is that we look at Scientology and, you know, Mormonism, and you might laugh at their, you know, the theological construct that their religion is built upon. I think the crazier it sounds, then you have to crawl over this huge wall of doubt and misgivings to accept that Z-new, this ruler of, you know, 75 million years ago, you know, sent a bunch of the Thetans to the earth and, you know, what looked like DC-8s and dropped them into volcanoes where they were exploded by a hydrogen bomb and their spirits were caught by a net. And then they were set in front of a 3D movie theater and it takes a lot to swallow that, right? But if you do, if you, at least if you say you do, you go over the wall and you go join a community, this very supportive. And, you know, you have to say, if somebody do you really believe that shit? Oh, yes, we believe this. You're reinforcing your affiliation with the community. And I think people have a hunger, especially in our time, you know, for strong communities. Yeah, for sure. I mean, we also like questions to be answered even if those answers don't make sense because it removes this bizarre, like, there's an existential angst to just being alive, just being on a planet that's hurling through the universe above us as stars and space and there's so many questions and we have a finite lifespan. If you really start thinking about it, you can kind of freak out. And if it's really open-ended, if you really don't know what life is, if we really were single-celled organisms that became multi-celled organisms and we used to be a shrew and a shrew evolved and eventually became a human being and we don't even know exactly how all these steps happened. And here we are today and you don't know where it's going and is humanity even going to make it and you're not going to make it? No matter what humanity, you, if humanity dies off you have a finite lifespan. If you're lucky you lived to be 100. And all those questions are so confusing and scary and if someone comes along and says, we have all the answers, put your mind at ease, we have Zenu and Zenu has created you and you got dropped off into Volcano and you're here today and all you have to do is follow these steps and you will be free of all the confusion and all the emotional stress and the chaos that this life has. You don't need psychiatric medication. You don't need anything. You need us. And also they offer the prospect of eternal life. Because the idea is that you are not Joe Rogan. You are a thetan and you are an eternal being and you incarnate in different bodies repeatedly and so they will help you discover your past lives and they'll also help you save civilization. So you have a noble purpose and you have the assurance that if you die you'll keep going and that's good news. So if there's a reluctance to part with the good news that a lot of religions have to offer. I had this conversation recently with a friend where we were talking about living forever and we were like, I wouldn't want to live forever. I was like, but do you want to die now? And they were like, no. And I said, well, do you enjoy life? Yes. I enjoy life. I'm having a great time. Why would you want it to end? Like if you found out that life right now, like Lawrence Wright, Jamie Vernon, and I sitting here having a conversation that this is life and this just keeps going. It keeps going forever. You meet new people, you go to dinner, you go to see a concert one day when the COVID's up, but it just keeps going. Would you be okay with that? Or do you need an end? Well, actually Joe, I started a group called the Immortality Working Group. And I'm on the side of living as long as possible. Now I don't want to be decrepit. There are things about the possibilities of the end that are pretty awful. And I don't want to endure them. So one of my associates, my now aging group of immortality is that a word. Now, he teaches psychology at the University of Texas and he starts his class by saying, I'm pretty sure that at least one student in this room will never die. Well, because he's on top of a lot of the research that there are creatures that tend to be like seaweed and stuff like that. Or cancer is immortal. These life can be immortal, but in the current construction that we have with our bodies, we're not. On the other hand, in the 20th century, we extended the lifespan of human beings by 30 years. So that's a significant contribution. So there are a lot of things on the horizon. I'm afraid that for me, it's a little over the horizon. You miss the cut. I'm hoping my children are able to, in my grandchildren now, are able to, but I'd like to be among them. The real question is, what do you miss an out on if you don't die? If you're a religious person, you think there's something at the end of the line. But even if you're a quote-unquote spiritual person or someone who's maybe plunged into some psychedelic waters, and you recognize that there might be some things that we don't totally understand about this life that we're living in. Maybe there is something that all of these cultures for untold thousands of years of inspeculating about a soul, a thing. It's not just your physical tissue and your eyes ability to see what's in front of you and your ability to hear things, but there's something inside of you. If you're seeing a dead body, it's the weirdest thing. They feel like they're empty. They feel like empty vessels. You see a dead body. It doesn't just seem like the person's not moving. It's like whatever was in them is not there anymore. Was that a perception? Is that something you think of? Because you know the person's not going to move and you know they're gone? Or is there a thing inside of a person? Is there a thing that creates whatever consciousness is? Whatever your embodiment is? Is there a soul? We don't know. Sounds crazy, but life is crazy. Well, you know just I've been assaulted with a lot of mortal thoughts recently. Sometimes in the morning when I'm just on the edge of waking, those are the dreams that tend to still be accessible when you wake up in the morning. The other morning I had a vision of both of my parents in their caskets. I agree that there's a sense that this is an empty vessel. Where is a life force that was once my mother and my father? I don't know. But if you're weighing the prospect of heaven or some assemblage of souls in the cloudy ether somewhere, versus the actual pleasure of life itself when it is pleasurable. As a reporter I can't help but have experienced many people's misfortune. And there are a lot of lives that I would not want to have spent. But I cling to the joy of being alive and the love of my family and my work. Those things are incredibly rewarding to me and I don't want to leave it. So that's why I'm still looking for the pill or whatever that will keep it going. Yeah, I've had many life extension experts on the podcast. Guys like David Sinclair and Aubrey Gray and a few other... Those are the top guys. It's an interesting prospect, the idea of living for... But I really do wonder if one day you get like if a movie is amazing for three hours, is it suck when it hits seven? Well how long would you like to live? I've never thought about it. Narrow the range. 100 years of thousand years, 250 a million. I don't think I've ever put a number on it. I think I enjoy being alive. I'm just going to keep going. I'm not going to think about a number because those numbers see... I'm 53 years old. That seems bizarre to me. When I was a child, I thought of a 53 year old man as being a fucking dead man. He's dead man walking. It's not going to make it. 53. Oh my god, you're so old. You can't do anything. But I can do a lot of things at 53. So I think my perception of what 53 is is based on what I thought of it when I was a child, not based on the reality of it, maintaining your body, being healthy, and enjoying your life, do you enjoy it? Well then keep doing it. That's my philosophy. That's my thought process. So I put very little thought into my actual age other than knowing, like, hey, you're 53. Maybe you shouldn't do shit that you did when you were 23 because things break easy. That's about it. But other than that, I just think of... If it comes to a point where there's a real health crisis where my body starts really failing, then I'm sure I'm going to have to confront my mortality in a much more direct way. But the way I look at it now, it's like I like life. I'm enjoying what I'm doing. You were talking about it. With your life, you're a very fortunate person. You do a thing that you love doing. And that, I think, is if there's a key to life, other than loved ones and family and surrounding yourself with nice people and really realizing that, oh, you can really enjoy your time and if you're around other people that are enjoying their time as well. And friendly, compassionate, just very nice people. That's a better world. It's a better life. Some people don't have that option. They've never had that option. So they've been fucked from the go. From the jump, they've grew up in a terrible environment with terrible people. And they've just encountered violence and crime and hardship. And they really haven't met a lot of very generous, warm, friendly people. They haven't had the opportunity to experience humanity at its best. And unfortunately, when over and over again, you've been punished by circumstance, people get hardened. And so their view of life is very different than your view of life from my view of life. They haven't been fortunate. Well, I'm 20 years older than you. And so those questions are more acute. But sometimes when I'm filling out a form, you know, when they come to the year and they have this drop down menu, it goes to the beginning. It's like I'm flying past decades and, you know, revolutions of presidential assassinations, wars, you know, and I finally come to my birth date, which is one third of the entire history of the United States. And maybe it's a fourth. It's no, it's between the third and the fourth. And, you know, it's a long time. That's a crazy thing to think of, isn't it? Yeah. And a lot of my high school classmates have passed on. And, you know, those kind of stuff happens with, you know, annoying regularity. But I think about these things. A great deal. I do feel, you know, like, you know, the Woody Allen line when someone said, you know, but you will live on in your work. And he said, no, I want to live on in my apartment. Yeah. I like having some kind of legacy with my family and with my work. But, you know, it's not given to us apparently to understand what else there might be if there's anything. But it's not a religion so attractive, right? Yeah. Because someone comes along. Not all religion, like Judaism doesn't place much of an interest in afterlife. And I think that's one of the reasons there's a strong sense of civic commitment. A lot of philanthropy among Jews, Jews, cities and our culture is so enriched by that kind of philanthropy. And I think it's driven by the absence of an afterlife as a part of their consideration. Also an incredibly strong community. And it's difficult to get in. I mean, they're not proselytizing. Like, you have to go through a lot. I have an uncle that converted Judaism when I was a child. And it was one of the first times that I ever really questioned religion. I had gone to two things, got me. One was that my uncle converting because I didn't know what Judaism was. I was like, wait a minute, there's another religion. I had gone to two things got me. One was that, my uncle converting, because I didn't know what Judaism was. I was like, wait a minute, there's another religion? Remember being like six years old when this was going on? And the other thing was going to Catholic school. I did one year in Catholic school, and that cured me more than anything. There's no fucking way these ladies are talking to God. If there's a God out there, there's no way he wants these crazy bitches running the show. Like this is mad. These are angry, crazy people. They're sadists. You torch a little kid and scream at you and tell you you're going to sit on a nail in the closet. You're going to stay here, you're never going home. And like, whoa. And my parents got divorced and I was ready. They split up when I was about five years old. So that made me very religious because I felt like I needed something to like some stability. And that stability when I was a small child was God. And so the Catholic church, it was Catholicism. And then going to Catholic school was actually excited about it. But then when my uncle was converting, I remember thinking, well, what do they believe? Well, is he going to go to heaven? Like, is he still in? Is he still a part of the team? Like, what happens now? Like, this is bizarre. He just opted out. Yeah. Well, he went to there. Well, did they have their version of the afterlife is very different than ours. It's just not pronounced. And when I was very pious in my teenage years, so I was a little late blooming. What started that for you? I think there was an organization in still around called Young Life. And it's sort of, you know, for it's a Protestant mainly organization that recruits teenagers in high school. And for me, it was a way of finding social acceptance. You know, I was not much of an athlete. I was not popular. And, but you know, you could get into this organization. And the way you advance in a religious organization is through piety. And I think that's what's really dangerous about religion. It's one thing to, you know, associate in the community and enjoy the fellowship of other people that, you know, are searchers or, you know, part of that environment. But if you want to get ahead, you believe that more strongly than the next person. And that allows you to advance up the ranks. And when that happens, when those pious people get control, then the rules start to harden. And, you know, that's what, you know, I think Scientology is a great example of that. But there's so many religions that are exactly the same way. And they start enforcing, you know, they become Dr. Nair. And Dr. Nair, being Dr. Nair is their power. That's where they get their, you know, people are afraid of them. They're afraid to contradict them because, you know, they have the Bible on their hand or they have the Word of the Lord, you know, or, you know, it could be, you know, you could talk in tongues or something like that, where you must be really spiritual. You're deeply into it. You know, whatever religion there is, is always a route to power. And I think that's where they often go off the tracks. Yeah. The, the, the levels, right, like showing someone that you're more pious and that you're, you can, you can almost compete to get to the top. Like there's a, there's a ladder to climb. Yeah. And, you know, in Scientology, he had the brilliant idea of ritualizing that and monetizing it. So, you know, each of these steps that you take to them on the bridge to total freedom as they call it, in your pay very dearly for it, but they're all a notch in your belt. And, you know, the higher you go, the more you're valued. So, it's so strange that it doesn't occur to them that it was created by a science fiction author who wrote terrible books. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, he, he has the, it may not be true still, but he had the Guinness Book of World Records for the number of titles published more than a thousand, maybe many more. You know, never had a second draft. You know, he used to, he used to type on butcher paper on rolls. He would, he had an IBM electric typewriter, one of the earliest ones. And he would sit back and close his eyes and start typing. And, you know, and the roll would just go through. And then when he was done, he'd rip it off and then roll in another sheet and start the next story. So, he didn't look at what he was typing. I, I don't know. I mean, he, you know, the legend is a lot of it is, I think, automatic writing. And it reads like that. You know, he would, he would tell a story. Yeah. Well, you're being very charitable because automatic writing could be interesting. It could be. And, you know, he wrote it was nonsense. He wrote a lot of like really bad fiction. Yeah. There's no question about it. And horrible. But there's one thing I find very interesting about his writings, and his, I guess, theology. And, and not sure what the right word is for the organization of the church and so on. And the organization of his psychology. The whole thing about the Theatons and so on. He, you know, as I said, he wrote thousands of books. How many million pages? No, no telling how many. There's this uncanny consistency to it. There's a unified vision. And I think that, you know, if you want to go in and start picking it, you know, what he said that was wrong, it's pretty much armored against that. You know, there's, you know, he, whatever lunacy was driving his mind. It made sense to him. And it would, I think that, you know, the Scientology really is just a journey into the mind of Elron Hubbard. Hmm. It was, it was, he was very much self-medicating a lot of ways, right? Yeah. He, early on when he got out of the service and that's where he really, you know, went into di-dionetics, you know, the whole idea that he cured himself of being blind and lame when actually he had conjunctivitis. And he had wasn't lame at all, but he checked himself into a naval hospital and he claimed that they told him, you know, he was hopeless case. And, and he cured himself with these maxims that became di-anetics. All of that came out of, you know, di-netics is full of what he says studies show this. There aren't any studies, but there are all things that he imagined, you know, sitting in that naval hospital. And it comes up with this, this scheme of self-help, which is really a way of him trying to treat himself. He had asked for the VA for psychiatric counseling and they never responded. So he sort of was treating himself. And I compare it to a shaman in an Indian society where, you know, schizophrenics are often the shamans. And they're the people that go out, you know, both actually physically go out on spirit quests, but also, you know, you know, you know, they go into his hallucinations and they come back and they try to heal their community. And I think basically that's what Hubbard was up to. I know I'm giving him more credit than you think he deserves. But I think he should be seen. No, no, I think you're very accurate in that way. I mean, I think there's also some deception and there's also some fuckery going on. Oh, yeah. But he believes that's all in the service of the great message that he's trying to deliver. Maybe. It's hard to say. Right. Hard to say what he really meant and thought. But clearly he also recognized that there, I mean, there was one of the great quotes from him about if you really want to make money. Religion. Yeah. That's where the money is. I mean, he kind of knew. So it wasn't like he was structuring it in this way where you can go from tear to tear and pay. Like I said about my neighbor, whose wife was going clear. It was $50,000 she was going to have to pay. Yeah. He's a carpenter. He wasn't making that much money. Yeah. If you want to go up the whole brank, you know, you can think about millions. I wonder if he still lives there. I like to go visit them and just see if he's still a part of it. Well, you can ask the church and I'll tell you where he is. It's just, it's weird because like for him, it was providing some stability. It was doing something for him. At least the way he's, I didn't know him that well. It's new him enough to have conversations with him or run it into each other outside the house. But he's a really nice guy and it was giving him some sort of structure. Something about it. But, you know, I almost want to sit down with him and make him watch Battlefield Earth. Oh God. I'm like, I'm watching that. I'm watching it like five times. No, really. I love it. Again, hi and watch it. It's fucking hilarious. I suppose there's one way of trying to approach it. Yeah. It's like the science fiction version of showgirls. Like there's movies that you watch just because they suck. Yeah. Like you just want to watch them just because they're so preposterous. That movie is one of the most preposterous movies of all time. Yeah. It's horrible. And it's better than the novel. Isn't really. Yeah. I've read some of his stuff. And it reads like a 10 year old writing a story without anyone going well, Billy. Maybe we should edit this down a little. Let's try to consolidate some of these ideas. And maybe it's a better way to phrase this. Like it's just one draft. Yeah. Oh, he just flies through it. I, you know, when we were doing, I was working on that story for the New Yorker, which is where it started. I think it all, many things you can trace back to his experience in the war. And he had this longing to be a hero. And he wasn't. You know, he was, he, at some point he was in a subchaser, captainning a subchaser in the off to coast of California. And he took it out. And one thing he did artillery practice against these islands from Mexico. So he was shelling Mexico, which is probably correct. Not a, it was a hostile action, but he, he thought that he had come up on a Japanese submarine. And, you know, chased around dropping depth charges everywhere. And, you know, it turns out, you know, sunken limbs or something like that. And so he had, you know, essentially a disgraceful experience in the service. But when he got out, he posed as being, you know, having been a spy, you know, that he was on the first ship to be sunk in the Pacific. And he escaped to some desert island and all that sort of thing. Of course, we got his records. And, you know, almost every single day of his career is in the service is marked by some sort of report. So we could find exactly where he was, what he did, you know. And, but the church insisted that, that he really was a hero. And that, you know, there, they gave me a, I've forgotten the form, but when you're discharged, there's a form that it gives you, you know, your assignments and stuff like that. And, you know, he had had all these, you know, glorious assigns, and then they showed me a picture of all the metals he'd want. Well, that's interesting. And so we got through the records from St. Louis where they're kept, you know, huge box of stuff. And I went through and I found the actual discharge thing, which didn't bear any resemblance to the one that church gave me. And then I looked at the metals more closely. And, you know, some of them from foreign countries, some of them from wars, you know, like in the 19th century. And so, you know, he couldn't possibly have won them. And so how did they, how did they expect me to miss that? You know, it was, and also how, what was Hubbard thinking? Because he's the one that came up with these metals. You know, he awarded them to himself. And he looked passed on to the church, the legacy of his mendaciousness. And they have to defend it because he's the founder. Well, there's a thing that happens in cults where people give in to whatever the doctrine is, right? And whether you want to call it religion or a cult, clearly there was not a lot of research into the veracity of his claims by the people that were a part of the organization. And there's a willingness to give in to the top person. And it's a weird thing. And, you know, my background originally was in martial arts. I saw it a lot in martial arts. It's martial arts are very culty, particularly a lot of traditional martial arts. Even the traditional martial arts type window that I was a part of, like the instructor was God. Like they were the Lord of this dojang or this gymnasium or whatever you wanted to call it, where everybody trained. And, you know, you called them Sir and you bowed to them when you saw them. And my traditional martial art background, though, was legitimate. They were legitimately teaching you a good martial art. And they had these tenants that they thought were designed to increase your human potential. And they were building up your character and it was really what you wanted from martial arts. But I ran into a bunch that were not. A bunch where there were people that were claiming to have special touch. And they could use their chi and they could touch you in a way. And these people, they don't just exist. There's hundreds of schools that still exist today. And there's a couple of websites. One of them has fake black belts. And another one, there's Instagram pages. McDow Joe. What is it? McDow Joe Life. I'm sorry, I keep forgetting the name. I have too many names of McDow Joe Life. And they document these people. Where someone comes at them and they touch like this. And the person like Shanks and Falls and the Grand. See how these students who are part of this horseshit, they give into it. And they, I don't know if they believe it. I've never interviewed them. I don't know what's going on. But they will run at the person. The person will literally, this master will put his hands up like this. And they'll be paralyzed. No fall to the ground. And it's not one. There's thousands of them. They're all over the world. Yeah. And you got to wonder what is happening. How is this so successful in so many different places? There's a thing that happens where someone becomes a part of one of these organizations. And it gives them the sense of community and family. And you have to give in to whatever the belief system is. And the belief system is that this guy has a magic touch. You go running at this guy and you go, oh, oh, oh. And you almost like you don't want to buck the trend. Because you want to keep coming back to this place. You call it home. So you give into it. You follow the ground. But I've seen it all over the country. It exists everywhere. I mean, exists in Asian communities, white communities, black communities. It seems universal. It's very similar. The man has magic. He has a magic touch. And he knows some secret techniques. And none of it makes, especially in martial arts traditionally, it's very hard to fake because you have to spar. So when you're sparring, people try to test you. So they find out how good you are. They're trying to figure out whether or not they can get through your defenses. But these people have figured out a way to brainwash someone in this weirdest, culty way. And by seeing that and seeing how predominant it was and how it was so, there were so many versions of it. It just makes sense that this would exist in Scientology or monies or, you know, fill in the blank. There's a thing with human beings where we want to give into the chief. We want to give into the main alpha, whatever reason. And you see it with people with political as well. You see people give into a political leader with its Trump or whoever it is. That person can do no wrong. That is their person. Anything that says anything different is lies and disinformation. Well, what you said made me think of one of the hardest stories I ever did. I did an article from the New Yorker about the sons of Jim Jones. And not everybody died in Jonestown. He had three sons. Two of them were adopted. And they were playing a basketball tournament in Georgetown, Gianna. And this story took place when I, you remember the branch of the video and now that you're at Texan, you just up the road. Yeah. My editor at the New Yorker at the time was Tina Brown. And she asked me to go right about the branch of the video. And I said, Tina, there are more reporters than branch of the video. I couldn't, you know, but what I had been watching the news coverage. And just before the place was called Rancho Apocalypse, which turned out to be really appropriate. But they sent before the conflagration. They sent out a van with children, you know, who had grown up in this community. And these kids, you know, as they drove past the ATF and FBI alliance and then the media line. And you could see these children looking out the windows. They were leaving behind everybody they knew. They were leaving behind the only world they knew. And they were going into what? And I thought, what happened to those kids? What happened to those kids? This must have happened, you know, what will happen to those? It must have happened to children elsewhere. And so I started doing some investigation. And I found out that, you know, Jones had these three kids, three young boys. They were, well, they were young men. And there was Jim Jr. who was black. And then there was Stephen and who was the natural son. And then there was Tim Jones. And for whatever reason, they hadn't talked to anybody. And they agreed to talk to me. And perhaps it had to do with, you know, the branch of the video and thing that was going on at that same time. So this was in the early 90s? Yeah, it was 15 years after Jones town. It was actually almost exactly 15 years. There's a cemetery in Oakland where many of most of the 900 bodies were buried. And there's, they took a earth mover and took a hill down, you know, half of a hill. And then they stacked all the caskets up and covered it again. But it still has this distortion. And you can see, you know, what remained of the, the, the Jones town followers. But it was interesting to me that the people who joined the Jones cult were all good people. They were all, you know, it was started in Indianapolis and then moved to the Bay Area. And they was largely, you know, largely black. Jones was very, very progressive, you know, on race. And, but, you know, a lot of good-hearted people involved in it. And he was a big figure in San Francisco at the time politically. You know, his, his support was sought after. You know, he was admired as a community leader. But he was totally crazy and paranoid and suddenly decided he had to remove the entire group. And you can't tell your family, you know, can't tell anybody. You're going to just, you know, he sent his sons down to Guiana to clear the jungle so they could make this village. And, and then overnight, they move, you know, nearly a thousand people to South America. And leaving behind all their friends, their jobs and stuff like that one day, you know, they've been, you know, removed. They've been raptured, you know, off to South America. And so I was interested, you know, that, you know, learning more about it. But these, these, you know, young men were totally haunted. But you would, you would certainly relate to Tim Jones. He was physically one of the very powerful, you know, he curled, you know, a hundred pounds with either hand, you know, he, couldn't, he couldn't get on an elevator. The last time he tried to do an airplane flight, I mean, this had been years ago, I don't know if it's changed for him now. But he was, he made the airplane turn around and drop him off at the gate, which is hard to do. But when you're, you know, as physically overpowering as Tim was, you know, he's kind of a formidable figure. And so he just had all sorts of anxieties. So I went to talk to him and he, he said, I'll do it on one condition. We have to do it in a public place, you know, restaurant, someplace where I won't cry. And I want my wife there because I never told her about it. And it's a little hard for me to tell this story because we went to a restaurant and within five minutes, he was, you know, five minutes he was crying, you know, and pounding the table and the waiter was keeping his distance people in the restaurant where, you know, frightened. And he told a story of going back, he's the one who had to identify 900 people. His natural birth parents, his adopted parents, he had a wife and children then too. They were all dead. Everybody was dead. And I've never forgotten the power of a religious belief in a personality like Jim Jones who could persuade all those people to stay with him, train them in this, you know, suicide drills night after night, you know. And then one day it's real. And, you know, the boys felt guilty because they thought if they had been there, they might have been able to stop it. But probably not. I mean, there's been so many of them. It's almost strange that there's not more that, you know, you have like the heavens gate, which is very small, cold, you know, you have certain sex, the moonies are still active, right? Because there are a lot. I, you know, to me, omshin Ricchio that Japanese cult that was, you know, remember the blind yoga instructor and they would drink his bathwater and stuff like that. No. Oh, you don't remember the blessing. You got a lot catching up to do. But, you know, if it's in the 90s and, you know, show him, omshin Ricchio and is the name of it. And there were like 50,000 members in Japan and there are a number of them in Russia as well. But there was a far more dangerous cult than, well, then I thought it was more dangerous in prospect than al-Qaeda. Because a lot of these people were engineers and scientists. They were experimenting with poisons. They poisoned a lot of people on the Tokyo subway with sarin gas. Okay, now remember this. And they were very adept. And if al-Qaeda had had that kind of expertise, then, you know, they were also very interested in, you know, weapons of mass destruction. As are some of the white supremacist groups right now. But al-Qaeda, I think, of an ISIS is being religious cults as well. So, you know, I think that they are, they continue to prosper. And what's alarming is how much more empowered they are now with the kinds of weaponry that you can get to drones. And, you know, when I was writing about the intelligence community, I got to meet. Who is it in the bond movies that makes the West? You? I got to meet our cue, but he wouldn't show me the good stuff. But I asked him what he was worried about. And he said the way in which, you know, like high school kids can create computer viruses now, will send, see them able to create actual biological viruses. Because the technology like CRISPR and stuff like that is so accessible. And, you know, that's terrifying thought. Yeah, it is terrifying. It's, I mean, I don't want to downplay what these people have done and how many of them do exist. But it's almost shocking that there's not more. Because there is this weird, there's a, you know, small percentage of people that have this strange desire to have a group of followers that unflinchingly, listen to everything. They say there was a guy in Australia recently that was saying he was Jesus. You remember this guy? You remember that? He had a Mary. Like he even kind of looked like he could be like when you think of the stereotypical Jesus painting. Yeah. White guy with beard and white hair. He looked like this guy. And he had this woman that he met and he was convincing this woman that she was Mary. That's her. But then she found out there was another Mary in the past. And another woman that he had called Mary too. But apparently he said, no, he had made a mistake. And people were like, wait a minute, Jesus makes mistakes. He's like, you know, how do you know this is Mary? He's like, no, this one's definitely Mary. And another one was just fake Mary. She took me. There is a, have you ever heard of something called the Jerusalem sentence? Yes. Yeah. It's, I don't know how real it is. But you know, if you do, I've been in a lot in the Middle East. It's hardcore Christians that go down to Israel, right? It's not just that. You know, they sometimes you see them saying that they're Jesus. You know. And but if it happens to be, you know, a Jewish person who's gone off, then, you know, they are David. They've chosen a suitably appropriate iconic religious figure to be. And there's a, there's an asylum back in the day when Israel was fighting for its independence in 1948. And there was a little Palestinian village called Deir Yasin, where Jewish terrorist massacred the townspeople to take it over because it was on a road to the airport. And that village is now this psychiatric institution where people suffering such delusion. Well, or, you know, I got to visit it one time when I was in Jerusalem. That's also too much. It's a, it's a, this psychiatrist I was interviewing was, you know, his office was in a little Palestinian house. Whoa. Whoa. How did, did you bring that up to him? Yeah. What was this reaction? Wow. It's unfortunate, but you know, unfortunately Jesus Christ, it's like, like setting up shopping a gas chamber. You know, this is one of those, you know, historical scars that, you know, you see the Middle East is covered with such places. Yeah. You know, it's one of those, you know, historical scars that, you know, you see the Middle East is covered with such places. Yeah. It's, um, what do you, I mean, what is it about people where this pops up? Like, what, what, what, what things have to be in place where someone can create some sort of an environment like that where they can decide that, that, you know, they're the main ruler that they're going to create this, this bizarre environment, set up these rules and have all these people follow along with them. You know, I suppose that there are a lot of people that want to be that person and aren't, you know, they're probably all around us. Yeah. You know, they just, they just don't have the magic charisma to attract the followers. Uh, I think, you know, a lot of people that go into, you know, the ministry or, uh, into politics or something like that probably have a great deal of that gene. And if, uh, if they had the opportunity, they would maybe exercise it, you know, it to, a greater degree. But, you know, you have to have the consent of the followers. Yeah. If you don't get that kind of buy in, then, uh, then you're not going to have much of a cult. Like your friends, the Jesus and Mary. Yeah. I think they've kind of group. Do they really? Yeah. I think there's a group that followed them. Yeah. I mean, I don't know if they're still active, but it's, it's just a strange, it's like, uh, you know, there's these, there's these natural patterns that you can find in nature, predator and prey and, yeah, and food sources and water and others. These things just recur over and over again, despite the terrain, despite the, the geography, the part of the world, there's like, you can kind of like see the patterns. But that's one of the weirdest patterns with human beings is the, the obviously fraudulent leader who makes up a bunch of crazy shit and pretends that he has some secret wisdom and that, you know, the gods are a god or on his side and gets all these people to follow them and even in the Jones town case gets them to commit murder and suicide. Yeah. Like it's a, it's a strange pattern, whether it's the heaven gate guys will kill themselves because, you know, hell bob comet was coming and there's people behind it. There's, they're still around. What's it saying? There's a website. Welcome to divine truth. Oh boy. At what point times this lady going? I don't know. Mary still hanging in. Mary too. The queen. I might be Mary three. No, he might have found a new Mary. This one's the real, real Mary. Yeah. Is there a lot going on? Do they have a lot of members? I want to have many members. They have divine truth is hilarious to call it that. Do you think Jesus would be more creative? The real Jesus? Like just divine truth. That's it. Yeah. I thought we heard that one already. You ever heard him talk? It's not very compelling. It's not, it's not that good. You know, there's some over his head now. There you go. Give me some. Give me some. Here we go. Little Laura. She was saying, is it brother? Over here. Fuck that accent. By the way, you can't be Jesus with an Australian accent. That's ridiculous. Yeah. I don't think it's going to grow. I have to say, you're not going to be franchising that. Coming soon to a district. I love Australian accent. It's still going to be wrong. Yeah. But Jesus would be susceptible to accents. Really? Jesus would be so easily influenced that he would take on the vernacular in the way people, the accents that they use in the region. Come on. Fuck out of here. When he shows up as a Palestinian, there's going to be. Right. Jesus has some restructuring to do. We've got to rethink this whole thing. When you looked at all these various religions, like how do you decide which ones to focus on, which ones to write about? Yeah. Besides, he said to it, if I don't know, you know, I'm drawn by story. Have you written much about the Catholic Church? I did write a profile of a defrocked priest named Matthew Fox, who he's a really fascinating guy. He was a Dominican. And he had a college spiritual university. But he would invite people from different religious traditions. And he set up shop in this convent. In the summer, when the nuns go on vacation, but for whatever reason, he had it to himself, holy names college in Oakland. And I got to sleep in the convent. I was really, you know, how many times did you get that opportunity? But Matt made a sort of tactical era when he invited which to come talk, which, which, and Starhawk. She's kind of a famous witch. And Starhawk? Her name's Starhawk. Yeah. And so, Starhawk got the nuns out and she built a kettle over a fire. She had the nuns jumping over the kettle. And this got to, you know, to the Vatican. She's a piece of Christ. And so Matt was out on his ear after that. I just found him a fascinating guy. He was kind of a spiritual adventurer. He wanted to know what every, every different religious idea and, you know, try it out and see what you thought. And it was fascinating spending time with him. The reason why we're out of the Catholic Church is obviously the sex abuse. But that is one of the strangest religious groups, cults, whatever you want to call it ever. That is so connected to priests abusing children. I mean, you say Catholic priest people automatically in their mind think child abuse. I can't think of another religion where you can say that of. But it's not that there's not great Catholics. No, no. The Catholic religion, like in general, like I know a lot of Catholics that go to church, they're wonderful people. It's not them. It's specifically these priests and how did this culture of these priests not just doing it, but getting away with it, getting shipped to different parishes where they didn't know. Right. Yeah. Did you have such an experience with you? No. And so, you know, I was in Boy Scouts, which is now similarly stained by that. And I regret, you know, what's happened to the Boy Scouts because it gave me a lot. I loved it. I learned a lot of things in the Boy Scouts. I would never have learned otherwise. And I liked the comradeship of, you know, the other boys and some of the scout leaders were a little peculiar, you know. They were mostly good guys. I thought about being a scout leader at one point. But I'd been a conscientious objector and they wouldn't let me. So that didn't happen. In which war? Vietnam. Yeah, I did two years of alternative service in Egypt. Oh, teaching at the American University. I was in Scouts. I was in for one year and I was in a neighborhood outside of Boston at the time. I think it's kind of gentrified now, but it was shady as fuck back in the 80s. It's called Jamaica Plain. Actually, I guess it wasn't even the 80s. It was late 70s. Because I went to high school in 81. Some maybe it was 80, maybe it was 79 80. Either way. A lot of criminals. These kids were sketchy fucking kids. Yeah, they were tying other kids to their cots and leaving them in the middle of the woods and doing creepy shit. And they're basically inner city kids having fun with no real authority. And you leave us all in a room together with bunks and kids start plotting things and doing things. But fortunately, there was no sexual abuse. It was just a lot of, you know, thug-ish young kids. But also, there wasn't a lot of structure. Like I remember, I just would go, I was in the fishing. So I just go fishing every day. I would just blow off all their activities and go fishing. No one seemed to give a shit. So I just basically was in a fishing camp for a couple weeks hanging out with some boys that you had to like keep your eyes on. Yeah, one of my strongest memories is the Boy Scouts is that when we're out camping and there was a Sunday, we'd go to have this service and we're up on a bluff over a creek. And there, you know, there's a bunch of logs covered with turtles. And so we're up on top of this bluff and we're praying and this sort of thing. And we all have our 22s. And then after the service, we all go stand on the edge of the bluff and shoot the turtles. That's kind of the art-type of Boy Scout experience. Well, we had 22s too. And I remember, I didn't, I'm maybe a shot one one day. and I remember doing something else, some other activity and I heard, pew, and I realized it was a ricochet. These fucking wild ass kids had got these rifles and they're shooting rocks and all kinds of different things and a bullet went ricochet and biased. And I was like, fuck this. And from that point on I just basically went fishing every day. Yeah. I was like, all these other activities are quite dangerous. There was no sexual abuse. I didn't hear of any. The counselor was a youngish guy. You know, a guy was maybe 20, 21, really nice guy who had gone through the Boy Scouts himself, became an Eagle Scout, did the whole deal. And you know, for him, it had helped him avoid a lot of the pitfalls of growing up in a bad neighborhood. That's what I think it can offer. Yeah. I think that's less connected to child abuse, though than the Catholic churches. Yeah, it's just really going through a big period of that right now. I'm not sure that bringing girls into the Boy Scouts is the right decision. Well, without appropriate security measures being put in place to make sure these boys don't abuse these girls. Yeah. Yeah. You're leaving teenage boys alone with teenage girls in the woods. It seems like a recipe for disaster or a dream come true or fun depending on what the boys are and who the girls are. And yeah. Yeah. I don't know. It's just there's something very strange about that these, like, whether it's the Catholic church or any group like that that's connected to abuse of minors. It's very strange. And the fact that it's protected and covered up, you know, and it's all under this one name, but obviously it's very different. It's very different in different places. I mean, you have a Catholic church that's amazing and everybody's great. It's great. It's a community and everybody, you know, genuinely goes there and it's warm and friendly and they have a good time. And then you could go to a hellscape, you could be in the worst kind of environment ever. And I know people that have been abused that were raised by Catholics and scary. You know, I did an article in a book later touches on this in a bleak way, which was, you remember, kind of, uh, ritual abuse, scare in the 80s, late 80s and early 90s, uh, satanic ritual abuse. Yes, I do. I had, um, my, I was interested in, um, well, uh, another way of starting this story is my, I have been in therapy and my therapist, people that I really admired, uh, they knew I was an investigative reporter and they said, well, you know, we're seeing a lot of patients, especially young women, uh, who've been satanically abused and have, you know, multiple personality. You wrote a book about this, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, um, so, you know, I thought, well, it's interesting. And then one of them said, and Satanists are responsible for 50 murders a year in Austin alone. And I thought we never had 50 murders in Austin, you know, total. Uh, so I didn't say anything. I just thought it was interesting information. Um, but, uh, yeah, discounted it. But I, I mentioned it to my editor and, uh, I said, I was interested in the multiple personality order, disorder and this is Tina again. And, um, and she was, oh, that's interesting. And I said, well, you know, a lot of times when they started questioning, they find out that they had been, originally satanically, richly abused, you say, oh, there's hot, hot, hot, hot. She was very enthusiastic about it. So then I went to a workshop for cops. And, uh, there's another cop who was going around the country telling, uh, police and various, and sheriff's deputies and stuff around the country about, uh, satanic ritual abuse. And he said, they are responsible for 50,000 murders a year in America. And I thought once again, that's more murders than there are in America. You know, and these are cops telling this story to themselves. And so, you know, and maybe it's true. We hear this. Uh, I think it was 93 that I did this story. So pre-internet. Yeah. It was before the internet exploded before what we think of as the internet. And, uh, I found this, uh, there was, you know, thousands of lawsuits and arrests, you know, around the country. But there was only one conviction. And it was for this sheriff's deputy in Olympia, Washington named Paul Ingram. And his daughters had accused him of, uh, raping them repeatedly and bringing the neighbors over and, you know, they had been cut up. They had, you know, they had children ripped out of their, their stomachs and sacrificed, you know, and, uh, you know, there are, you know, other deputies in the Olympia department were involved in it and so on. And all of this was, you know, wild, but he confessed to it. And so I thought if there's anything to it, then, uh, you know, and I went up to Olympia and I spent a lot of time talking to the cops and, you know, trying to piece together what had actually happened. And because there was confession, there was never really a trial. So they never had the cops who were investigating it, who were his colleagues. You know, uh, they, they didn't have to put together a coherent case. What did he confess to exactly? He confessed to raping his children. Jesus Christ. Well, Jesus Christ had something to do with it, uh, because they were all members of this, um, four-square gospel church, you know, and, uh, very religious family. And, uh, the, the idea of Satan was very real to them. And Erica, the oldest daughter, had made this outcry. And so it started at a, at a religious camp and then it kind of spread and then her sister made a similar outcry. And you know, it got, and then they started implicating their neighbors. And all this amazing story of, you know, the, the abuse that they had suffered and how many people had been killed. Pretty soon there were helicopters flying around the county looking for, you know, satanic fires and digging up their property and, uh, and they never found anything. You know, so, you know, I asked one of the cops, you know, well, did you find any bones? Yeah, we did. Uh, who is an elk bone? Well, that's not exactly. You found an elk bone. That's the proof. And so it turned out, uh, one of the cops had taken, uh, uh, these girls in for physical inspection. And, um, they were wearing these scars. In fact, they were virgins. So there was never any other thing that all the things they had described had never taken place. And yet Paul Ingram confessed to it because his preacher came in and told him that, you know, God would not allow anything other than real memories to come into his mind. And a psychologist came in and hypnotized him. And pretty soon he was being eliciting these, these fantasies. And so Paul began to, uh, fantasize about what, and at this point, the, you know, the girls hadn't gotten so ripe in their storytelling. Uh, he began telling what, what he visualized. I can see myself going into Erica's room, you know, and the preacher took that back to the church and the gossip started and it gets into the years of the girls and they start making similar, but not exactly the same sort of statements about what happened. So these memories never coalesced. And anyway, Paul, I think he served 13 years in prison for a crime that never actually occurred. And one day I happened to be an L.A. And you remember, since you spent some time there, Amy Simple, McPherson, she was an evangelist, uh, a great character in American religious history. She had, uh, she had affairs with Charlie Chaplin and so on. And, uh, she was, you know, really a huge figure on the scale of Billy Graham or something like that at the time of the 20s. And she started this congregation. And I talked to the woman who was the camp counselor at that church. And I said, well, how did, how did Erica make this confession? She said, well, it was a dramatic thing. It was a dramatic moment. You know, I had been talking to the girls. And I would say, you know, I know that one of you here has been abused. And you know, I, I can see you in the closet. I see you hiding. And I can, you can hear the footsteps coming towards you. And some girl, oh, it was me, it was me. You know, so that you know, she's eliciting these things. And so at the end of the camp, Erica is on the stage and she's just weeping. And she's not saying anything. And so one of the counselors called over, Paula was her name. You know, come help us understand what's going on with this young woman. And she put her hand on Erica's head. And she says, she's been abused. And then she said, and it's by her father. And it's happened many times. So in the mind of this very religious young woman, the message came from God. You know, that she, she had been abused. And so she made an outcry that it wasn't hers. It was, it was the camp counselors, really, that started this whole folly. And what happened after that, during that period of time, these, these kinds of stories took root in daytime talk shows. You know, it was, you know, all over the place spread to other countries really quickly. Thousands of families were ripped apart by these kinds of accusations. And people like my therapist, brilliant, adorable people took it on as, you know, their mission was to rescue people like that. And what happened is it drove away people who really had been abused. Their abuse was so insignificant by comparison with these elaborate tales, you know, being, having babies cut up on you. And I finally decided that these were abortion fantasies. I think, you know, the whole abortion discussion, put yourself in the mind of an 18 year old virgin and, you know, drawn to sexual ideas and yet haunted by the prospect of, you know, abortion and all the stuff that goes in it, the fantasies that they elicited were very similar to abortions. But what, what caused the father to think that he had done these things just because of the hypnotherapy? I, that was a big part of it, but he went, when he went into his first session, he made two statements. Well I don't remember it, but my daughter's a wooden lie. And that's what hung him. Oh, God. There's been a lot of like weird cases in the past of people putting memories, particularly in children. Remember, there was a very famous case of a childcare center. Oh, yeah. Remember that? Well, there have been a bunch of them. Yeah. And here in Austin, Fran and Dan, that was actually, I attended one of the days of the trial. It was, there was a daycare center of South of town. Fran and Dan had operated it for years and people would go drop their kids off and, you know, pick them up after work. During this period of time when there was this heightened fear of sexual, childhood, sexual abuse, some of the parents began quizzing their children. And there were psychologists who would come around with a doll and, you know, had anatomically correct. And, you know, did anybody touch you, you know, so suggested? They elicited some stories from these children. And the stories were, mommy dropped me off and we flew to Mexico and we killed a giraffe and buried it. And, you know, childhood fantasies, you know, along that line. And the police couldn't prosecute, you know, the idea that somehow they had all the flown on a private jet from a daycare center in South Austin. And then killed a giraffe. They had enough time to come back home. So, you know, eventually, you know, they start, you know, they assemble, you know, of these psychologists who are, you know, using these dolls and so on to try to elicit, you know, like, Dan, ever touched you any place that made you feel uncomfortable? You can tell me, it's okay, you know, you know, if you don't feel, you know, so it eventually a child agrees to one of those things. And then other parents hear it and oh my God, you know, she was abused by Dan. Honey, did Dan ever, you know, so it began to, it was never any real evidence. But when the day I was there, they put a child on the stand and she had her doll and a lollipop in her mouth. And she was sitting on the lap of, I forgot, it might have been her mother, but, you know, the prosecutors, you know, he says, you know, did Dan ever touch you and, no, did he ever hurt? No. You know, honor can we have a recess? And then it was yes, yes. It was shocking to me that, you know, that children were manipulated in that fashion. Lives were destroyed, eventually, friend and Dan were exonerated. But I think we're always going to be people that believe though. Yes, they will. And they attacked me, you know, because I signed a friend of the court brief about, you know, implanting memories as you suggested. How could anyone not know that if you lead children in a certain way like that, they're going to make things up or they're going to, they don't even, I don't even necessarily think children totally understand memory. Like what think about how humans missed, can's true memories. Like memories are terrible. I've said this before, like if you asked me what I did a week ago, I have a book, I Blurry slideshow in my head. Yeah. I mean, I have a calendar that can tell you, oh, I had a podcast on that day and a comedy show on that day. And I don't, I can't recall it like a movie like a 4K, you know, film that could just rewatch. Like that was the exact moment. I knew something was wrong. Like we don't have that kind of memory. I meant, but some people are so fucking sure of their memory. It's crazy. What is happening in your, what is your memory like? Because my memory is terrible. No, I have strategies to try to remember, you know, like why I walk downstairs, you know, what did I want to get? And you know, that's just immediate memory. But you know, I keep a journal out of defense, you know, for, make sure that I, I remember things correctly. You know, if there's something happened to me that I want to remember, I'll write it down. Sure. And I, when I'm writing, when I'm researching, you know, like when I wrote about the looming tower about Al Qaeda, I interviewed 600 people. I don't remember all that. And, and I read all these books and stuff. I'd take note cards and I had, you know, there's a lab, and I had almost as long as you're tabled, you know, boxes of notes and very scrupulously ordered because I can't remember it. And you know, but putting on note cards is, I can find it. But it's just, it's just so strange that, I mean, I guess back then they didn't know about memory as well. Like that would never fly to that. If you tried leading a child that way today, the defense attorneys would intervene. And they were saying so long ago. How was it? It was in the 90s. Yeah, but even in the 90s. Like, you know, it seems like not that long ago. You know, 30, 25 years ago, that's a long time ago. Yeah, I guess you're right. We had, at that time we had four hospitals in Austin. And by the time I wrote this, they each had a dissociative disorders wing, which is like multiple personalities. We had enough multiple personalities in Austin to stock four different psych wards. And then when my article, mainly the book, when the book came out, insurance companies decided not to fund, you know, to fund psychiatric investigations and to, you know, certain dissociative disorders including multiple personalities and repressed memories like these. And those, those wards disappeared. Once the money dried up, there was, you know, just no support for it. The whole architecture of the repressed memory syndrome just vanished. The repressed memory thing is very strange to me. It's very strange because there's been so many cases where people have led the person who is particularly under hope, no sense, led them into these memories, almost helped them. And there's real evidence that you can do that, that you can sit someone down and impart or implant a fake memory of an event, particularly under hypnosis. There was a guy named John Mack, and it was a Harvard psychologist who he did a lot of work with people that were having hypnotic regression stories of UFO abductions. And that was one of the main criticisms was they thought that he was leading these people into these ideas and suggesting these, and giving these people, I don't know if he did or didn't, but that's the kind of thing that you could do to someone if they were under hypnosis. You could implant some kind of like crazy. that didn't. But that's the kind of thing that you could do to someone if they were under hypnosis. You could implant some kind of like crazy, fantastic memory of, you know, visitation in the middle of the night. I had a story when I was working on the repressed memory story. I ran across this study. There was another thing you wouldn't do now because of, you know, the conventions of experimentation have changed. But a psychiatrist in Georgia had a patient. And he told her in advance what he'd like to do. And I want to hypnotize you and see if I can elicit, you know, a memory that didn't happen. And so she agreed and he hypnotized her. And he said, Helen, you were late today coming to your session, which wasn't true. What happened? What delayed you? I don't know. I was, you know, I was driving and I saw a cow on the side of the road. Oh, really. What was it? Cow doing. It was giving birth. And it was having trouble. And so I got out of the car and I tugged on the calf and I help. And he said, and there was a light above. And she said, and a spaceship came down. And, you know, and I got on the spaceship and, you know, two things, you were late and there was a light. And she came up with a UFO fantasy. And that cow, giving birth. The cow was pretty amazing. Yeah, but what was interesting about that is that when she when she awakened, he told her what she had imagined. And he said, you know, it's one true. You know, this is, you know, we are on time, you know, I don't think that there going to be any baby calves on the side of the road. And, you know, no spaceship, but this didn't happen. She couldn't shake the memory. It was as real to her as, you know, the actual drive into the office. Have you been put on there before? Oh, yeah. I mean, I when I was in the eighth grade, I discovered the abnormal psychology shelf in the library. And I used to hypnotize people. I was really, yeah. I I was eight. I was well, I was in the eighth grade. Oh, I'm sorry. So I was 12. My eighth grade. Yeah. And that should be 13. Maybe I was 13. And I would hypnotize my sister. She was a synambula. She was easy. She was a synambula. There's people who walk in their sleep. And so they tend to be very suggestible. And so I would, she was a good subject for a beginner. And I I used to hypnotize her and make her rigid and suspender between chairs and his stick pins in her. Make sure that she was really under. And then I would hypnotize my fraternity brothers. I hypnotize my girlfriend. I finally gave it up because I thought this is really your response. I was probably by that time, you know, by the time I realized how irresponsible it was, I was probably responsible enough to do it. But I haven't hypnotized anybody in many years. And the only time I tried to I had a dentist in Dallas when I was a kid, he used to hypnotize people. And I, you know, he's going to drill a cavity for me. And I said, I'd like for you to hypnotize me. So it was, you know, your, your mouth is feeling like a block of wood. Your mouth is feeling like a block of wood. And I said, no, I'm not giving the novocaine. But then the only other time that I had what was kind of success in being hypnotized was in 1983, it was a 20th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination. And I had grown up in Dallas during the assassination. There was a story that was quite widely circulated that school children in Dallas had laughed when they heard the news. And I wasn't sure that I hadn't been one of them. I remember being astonished. I remember gaping. I remember, you know, did a ha ha come out of my mouth. I don't know if it did. You know, but I think I smiled in amazement. I'm not really sure. I mean, you have to go back to what Dallas was like at that time. It was hysterical. You know, the politics were off the rails. And Kennedy was hated, although not in my family, but, you know, there was this sense of Dallas as being a separate entity from the rest of the country. And that Kennedy was the enemy. And I was anxious that maybe I had been one of those people that laughed. And so I had a friend who was a therapist who did hypnosis. And I asked her to hypnotize me and see if she could take me back to the classroom and help me remember. And so she put me under, regressed my memories. You know, to the point that I hear the ding ding ding, the PA system and the choked voice of our principal coming on. And did she tell you hearing these things? No, I didn't know. She's asking me what could recall. Yeah, what do I recall? And I remember seeing, you know, the face of my friend Steve Zink, one of my classmates in the algebra class. And I couldn't get it myself. And so she gave me a post hypnotic suggestion that I would have a dream. And it would reveal to me, you know, what I experienced. And so I did have a very vivid dream. And it was, I was flying in a helicopter over the canopy of what I thought was Vietnam jungle. And you were looking for a child. And a saw it in the top of a canopy just lying on top of the tree. And if we got closer, I realized it was actually just a doll with his little X eyes. And that was the dream. And I decided from that that I was that the me that I thought, you know, might have laughed was just a figment, you know, an effigy of some sort. And that, you know, I really hadn't laughed. You don't have to understand what a scarring experience it was to have been from Dallas at that period of time and how everybody in the world hated you. It's just strange thing to try to remember what was your reaction. And how old do you at the time? 13, I guess. Yeah, but it's a very strange thing. Did you feel like you felt guilt the possibility that you had laughed? Yeah, I did. I didn't want to be one of those people. And, you know, I have friends from Dallas who do remember people in their classroom laughing. And my experience that I, you know, the real memory I have of it is that people looked around and just stunned astonishment. And part of the astonishment, I think, was that we just thought nothing would ever happen in Dallas. It was, you know, on the one hand, it was totally crazy. And on the other hand, it was totally paralyzed. You know, there was just a sense, the conformity was so powerful that, you know, you felt imprisoned by the sameness of every day, every thought, you know, just very, very rigid environment. So some spectacular unique occurrence, like the president getting assassinated, dearly Plaza, just seemed impossible. Hotly enough. No. I mean, that was a thing. You know, if it was going to happen anywhere, it seemed like Dallas would be the right spot. And even that morning, I went out to get the newspaper. And there was that famous ad welcome Mr. Kennedy, the Dallas, you know, just this bleak thing. And then there was, you know, it's just, how was it bleak? Oh, it made all these absurd charges about, you know, his eating communists and so on and race, you know, race, they had a racist undertone to it. It was, there was, yeah, there it is. It shows up. You can see how it's can't read all that. Well, it says welcome Mr. Kennedy to Dallas. You can see that it is saying a city, a city. It's about who we are and we are not you. And it was almost, and then there in the same newspaper, maybe your guy can find it, there is a wanted, oh no, wait a minute, I separate. It was on top of the newspaper was a wanted poster for Kennedy with full face and profile. Somebody had placed it on top of that. And it was like wanted for treason or something like that. There it is. Yeah, that was on our doorstep that morning. So that was the atmosphere of Dallas in 1963. There was a, you know, Adlai Stevenson had come to Dallas in October the month before to make a speech about the United Nations and he was the UN ambassador. And he was assaulted. And they went out to greet the crowd. He was booed down. And by the way, I think Lee Harvey Oswald was in the audience that night. But he went out and tried to talk to the crowd and Stanley Marcus was his escort and he said don't try that, Adlai, you know, this is crazy. And but people were working on this woman who was holding a sign. And she went down on top of Ambassador Stevenson's head. The sign said if you seek peace as Jesus. That's some reason that that always struck me as the Dallas, and I just want to say as I'm talking about Dallas in the past, Dallas of today is a totally different place. And I think in some ways, you know, it was so chastened and humbled by that horrible experience. I've said in the past, if Kennedy had to die somewhere, I'm grateful he did in Dallas because it made that city a far better place. And you remember the police killings a few years ago, nine cops could, you know, the way it was a block away from the Dealey Plaza. But the way in which that city handled that tragedy by comparison was so magnificent. You know, I just I have a lot of admiration for the city that Dallas has become. Yeah, I love Dallas. It's a great city. But that is a crazy slice of history. And it's so fascinating how no matter who the president is, there's always some faction that think that that one person that figurehead is the enemy of democracy, the enemy freedom, the champion of whatever, you know, whether it's the communists or Soviets or film the blank, whoever it is, China, whoever it is, there's there's always going to be some faction that think that that person is the real reason why we're all fucked up. Yeah, it's the tension of democracy. Yeah, yeah. You were telling me, what we were talking before this podcast started about, and I said, we got to stop talking, don't say anymore because you wrote a novel about a pandemic and you wrote it and it came out during the pandemic, right? Which free, I mean, it's almost like great timing and terrible time, George Carlin had a particularly damning special that was going to be released around September 11th and they never released it because it was it was very anti-American. You know, George Carlin was as he got older was very much a kermudgeon and had some great rants and they just felt like this is just not the appropriate like post-9-11. You know, it's just that right after the tragedy, but your your your novel that you wrote like when this was all going down, you're novel came out in April. Yeah. When this was all going down, we would we already been shut down in March, and that's when they really hit the United States. Like what was that like for you to to have this sort of coordinate just it is weird. It is still strange to me. You know, it started a decade ago when Ridley Scott had me write a script. He wanted he'd read the Kormach McCarthy novel, The Road, which is his post-apocalyptic story, Father and Son. And so Ridley said, well, what happened? You know, because Kormach didn't bother to explain. And I thought, well, how would civilization end? And so I conceived of a pandemic being more interesting than an atomic bomb, for instance, because nobody is hard to find heroes. And pandemic, public health, I've always been fascinated by the kinds of people. I did a number of stories out of CDC when I was a young reporter. And, you know, I thought if these people are really cool, you know, they're brilliant, they're humble, they're incredibly courageous, they go off to these hot zones, you know, would you want to go to a bowl of zone? I mean, just horrifying. But you know, they'll off they go, you know, really intrigued me. Ridley didn't make it. And he was right too, because I hadn't solved the problems of the story. And I hadn't done enough research. So I stuck it away. And, but I never forgot it. And I thought, I really wanted to revisit it, because I thought, you know, in a way we're due, you know, I had studied the 1918 pandemic. When I was writing a story about the 1976 swine flu fiasco. And I, it was so awful, you know, 675,000 Americans killed, you know, as many as 100 million people worldwide. And, you know, 675,000 Americans was more than all the soldiers who died in all the American soldiers who died in all the wars of the 20th century. And we have to take into consideration the size of the population back then was so much smaller. Right. But October 19, 1918 is still the deadliest month in American history. So when I decided I was going to write this, I first of all, I went out and interviewed all the people that I would want to talk to. Just as if I were doing a nonfiction novel or nonfiction book or New Yorker story. And I made a calendar on my computer that was based on 1918. And it was, you know, what happened in, you know, March of 1918 corresponds roughly with what happens in my novel, which is said in 2020. So it was meant to be a kind of cautionary tale. And in January, I began to hear about this unidentified virus in China. And I thought, geez, that could be something, you know, sars in 2003 happened. The Chinese hit it. You know, there was this virus going around. Nobody knew anything about it. The World Health Authority went over to investigate and Chinese authorities took patients out of the hospital and put them in ambulances to hide them until the authorities left. And, you know, this thing went, I think 37 countries before it was, it was smothered fortunately by good health practices. I thought, this is, you know, early on and by February, I was telling my wife to start stocking up on groceries because I'd just written this novel. You know, how long did you write it? A year and a half, I guess, just the timing is insane. Yeah, I was on it. For one thing, this British presenter, when I was promoting the books, I don't think anybody paid attention to this book at all. If I'm not for this pandemic, I think, thank you probably right. But it's not such a smart publishing strategy to bring out a book when the bookstores are closing. I'm going to have to remind myself not to do that again. But it was weird because the story became what I got right and what I got wrong. And it is interesting. I mean, there were, I see, I did the research and I talked to the experts. Like one of the guys that I talked to, Barney Graham, he works at National Institute of allergies and infectious diseases, which is Dr. Fauci's shop. He helped me design my novel virus and he helped me cure it. He's the guy that made the invented the vaccine that is in both the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines. And I had him to myself. He was one of many people in that category who advised me about how would you make a vaccine and so on. So I did all the research and I asked them, you know, my sources, suppose we had another event like 1918, would we be any better prepared than our ancestors were? And the answer was, this is our biggest nightmare. You know, and there were a lot of reasons for it. But one is, you know, we don't have a vaccine, we don't have any therapeutics. We'd be in exactly the same spot. And that's what happened. Just the timing of it is impeccable. It's crazy. When did you finish the book? I finished it in August of 2019. I guess maybe July, maybe it was in the summer. And I called at the end of October because there was a October was a deadliest month. And October revolution, Ireland off the Russian coast plays a role in it. So anyway, it was, I enjoyed the work. I especially, you know, I love research. And I wouldn't be in this job if I but part of the time my hero is on a submarine. So I got to go to Kings Bay, Georgia, where we have our nuclear fleet and to get a little tour of the submarines. And you know, not everybody gets to do that sort of thing. So I was able to make, you know, I like to make things as real as possible. And then it gives you a sense of authority when you sit down to write. It had to be a bizarre feeling to finish that book and have it come out in the middle of the pandemic. I mean, you almost had to feel like maybe the simulation is real. In the end, going back to what I got wrong, you know, everything unfolded exactly as I had anticipated, unfortunately. But I didn't anticipate how people would self isolate so willingly really. I mean, it's afraid now. But, you know, to at the cost of so much, you know, it's impoverishing, it's, you know, spiritually, socially, culturally, you know, in so many ways, it's damaged us. And yet it's a price that people have so many people had been willing to pay. But my take on government was totally right. You know, it government's fucked up in the novel and maybe under, I underestimated how badly the government would behave in this one. You wrote a long piece you were saying too, where before we started about COVID. Would you write it for? What was it? The New Yorker? Yeah, it's out now. It's called the plague year. And it occupies most of the magazine. It's in, you know, people like Barney Graham or sources of mine now. They same, same sources I use on my novel. But oh, there it is. It's gotten a lot of reaction and I'm writing it as a book now. But it's heartbreaking. It's is a tragic story. You know, the novel is, you know, tragic, but it's a novel. You know, this chronicling of what happened to us this year has been really hard. And I think what has been missed in a lot of the coverage is just the personal experience of this catastrophe. And, you know, a lot of the stories I tell in there, you know, just their hard stories. Well, it's an insane and in our lifetime unprecedented time where there's never been a moment where people have been asked to stop doing everything. And it still didn't work. No. And in fact, in a lot of places it was worse where they asked people to lock down than in places like Florida or in Texas where they don't shut everything down the same way. Well, we went through it in Texas in a like so many states, you know, for one thing, the governors should never have had to do this on their own. You know, there was never a national plan. And, and there should have been, you know, the, but when the national plan vary depending upon the pandemic, depending upon what the virus was. And I mean, it's one thing. If you're dealing with something that's as contagious as the measles and as deadly as Ebola, you know, that would have been, that would have required us to take extremely drastic measures. And that was a lot of what we feared was going to be coming with COVID. I mean, there was, there was an initial thought of what the virus is going to do. And this insane reaction to that, anticipating that, but no correction once we realized what it had begun. And also, no correction once we realized what the consequences of the lockdowns and this now were now into nine, 10 months of this isolation and fear and the economic disaster and despair. So, so much happening and that trying to find the path out of it is the weirdest part. Yeah. Yeah. Many respects the economy is correcting itself. You know, it's, it's not dead as it was, you know, a few months ago. You see a lot of activity. Many, you know, one of the people I talked about in my story was a Goldman Sachs analyst, Steve Strongman. And you know, at first, you know, we had the biggest plunge, you know, and recorded history. And, you know, one of the analysts that Goldman was saying, you know, usually if you're trying to do economic economics, economics, things pronounced the econometrics, you analyze, you know, wage increases and how would that affect spending patterns and, you know, restaurant availability. And then you, in this case, there were no restaurants. You know, you subtract that from the economy. Take out airlines, you know, it's more like arithmetic. You know, you just strike them. And, you know, that's just never happened before. And yet there's another thing that's going on, which is that the economy is reorganizing around a new reality. And that's one of the things about capitalism that's good is it's nimble. And, you know, it sees opportunity. Initially when the markets crashed and unemployment went, you know, further south than we've ever seen it go, stock market just froze. And then there was a realization according to one of my sources, when they learned that this was transmitted asymptomatically. In other words, you can have it and not have any symptoms and infect me. Then they, you know, investors realize the usual treatments, you know, public health approaches, you know, we're going to work. You know, if you have symptomatic transmission, you get sick, you go to bed. So you don't transmit so much. If you are sick and walking around the world and greeting everybody and passing it off, that's a entirely different experience. And that's why this disease is so sneaky. And from the Wall Street point of view, it was, oh fuck, you know, so they wanted at that point, you know, they gone from just trying to, you know, get some money to operate their businesses to rushing to safety. So you had five stocks like Amazon and Apple and so on occupying 20% of the S&P. And, you know, but Strongman said, that's not the, you know, the purpose of Wall Street is to move money from businesses that are no longer useful into the businesses of the future. And that's when you see the rush for opportunity. And that's why this stock market has gone so crazy during this period and gone into historic highs, where people are still, you know, many people are still underwater. And, you know, there's going to be a lot of economic damage. It's going to last for quite a long time. Yeah. I don't, I don't understand how they're going to pull out of it. When you look at like Los Angeles's lost 75% of its restaurants. Yeah. Insanity. I mean, what percentage small businesses are still barely hanging on how many of they lost already? Well, like Austin, your new city, you know, used to be known as the live music capital of America. Is there a more vulnerable business to be in than a bar that plays music? And, you know, the bar that we patronized of Skylark Lounge, a lot of old musicians play there. Miss Lavell White, who was born in 1929, was still singing the blues at Skylark 1929. Yeah, yeah, she's a great blues legend. Wow. But, you know, the, the, a lot of the bars are permanently out of business. But so I think a lot of the bands, you know, musicians typically live on really small, you know, level of comfort. As the comedians. Yeah. Yeah. We lost Cap City comedy club in Austin, which is one of the best clubs in the world. Yeah. The amazing club that had been opened for 34 years, I believe, maybe more, might be 35. And it went under while it was here. You know, we're hoping to bring some comedy back. I want to start a place once it feels like it's responsible and safe to do it. But it's, it's just such a tricky thing to figure out when and how and what to do and measures take place. I've been doing these shows at Stubbs Amphitheater with Dave Chappelle, but we test the whole crowd. and what to do and measures take place. I've been doing these shows at Stubbs Amphitheater with Dave Chappelle, but we test the whole crowd. So they get there early, they get tested. And they've only had to turn away a couple of people. And that was not even a show that I was a part of. I was just one spot on one of those shows and David done three and out of those three. So for 1,200 people, they turned away two people that tested positive. I don't think there was any other ones. The audience for comedy is safer than the average population then because our positivity rate right now in Texas is over 20. Is it 20%? Yeah. Yeah. In Los Angeles, they think it's so crazy that one out of 20 people has gotten the virus. Either gotten over it or is currently infected. One out of 80 currently have it, I think. That's the most estimate. And this new strain is sweeping through in California, in particular, is driving out the old strain really quickly. As it did in the UK, it was stunning how quickly it overtook the contagion. Yeah, it's more contagious, but not more extreme in its symptoms or anything like that, right? That's what they say. And I haven't heard that it's less. So I did, but it was from an unreliable. Yeah. I think there was wishful thinking involved in 1918, there was a mutation that made it more fatal. Well, the weirdest part about this is the asymptomatic people, that some some way in the neighborhood of as many as much as half the people that get it don't even know they have it. More than half. Maybe as much as 70%. That is true. That's true. That's true of polio, also, for instance. Only like one out of 200 cases of polio, actually, you ever goes to see a doctor. And what? When I was a kid, I grew up in the polio era and one morning, I woke up about five or six years old, six from maybe, and I couldn't move my legs. And it was terrifying. And I think it was a reaction to a tetanus shot that I had gotten. There was a syndrome called Giaon-Barre, which is very similar to polio in some ways. In fact, there's a lot of scholarship now that says that Franklin Roosevelt may have had Giaon-Barre rather than polio, because all in said as an adult was so unusual. But it might have been the horse serum in which the tetanus shot was grown or it could have been something else entirely. But I don't remember how many days it was before I was able to move. But I was. And it was a scarring fright. And I've been advised not to take flu shots. And it's one of the reasons I have been so interested in this vaccine. And I'm going to take it. Because the kinds of possible pollution, like horse serum, or flu shots, grown in chicken eggs and stuff like that, it's not a feature of this vaccine, at least not the Moderna and the Pfizer. With any kind of vaccine, there comes a certain level of paranoia, especially a new vaccine. And that's been fascinating and frightening to behold and to read online all of the crazy theories and what people anticipate could happen. And people would say, I'm not taking that fucking thing. And all the people that are terrified of it and don't want to try some with a deemed to be an experimental vaccine. I'm hesitant to get into this because I don't want to encourage the anti-vaxxers, because I think it's important for the nation to protect itself, protect the health of our communities. But this is a story that is where a lot of the anti-vaxxers come from. It's 1976. There was a young recruit at Fort Dixon, a jersey named David Lewis. He was 19 years old, healthy, young soldier. And he was on a march. He got sick on the march. And died quickly. And there was flu on the camp. But they sent in his blood sample to the CDC and they couldn't find any modern flues that it corresponded to. So they checked against swine samples. And pigs, after 1918, became a reservoir for the 1918 flu. We gave it to them and they kept it. And so they've been in over the years, there were occasional examples of farmers getting sick from their pigs. And it was the H1N1 strain, which was 1918. And that's what killed David Lewis. And there were several other soldiers that had gotten it, but weren't that ill. So I decided I would write about it. And I went up to Fort Dixon at the time, Gerald Ford was president. And the question was, should we vaccinate everybody? And flu vaccines, we're already kind of on board. All you had to do was change the formula. And so it wasn't like what we're going through now. And the head of the CDC, David's sensor at the time said, you know, we're going to go whole hog. We're going to vaccinate everybody in the country. And so I went up to Fort Dixon to find out what was going on. And I talked to the environmental health officer from Macon, Georgia. And as we were talking, you know, I said that I had talked to David Lewis's mother who was a nurse. And he said, hey, did she tell you about that pig? And I said, what pig was that? Oh, some story, David ran into some pig, you know, God knows. And so I called Mrs. Lewis and she thinks, you know, yes, this was where David got sick. So the question was, did he get sick from a pig? Or did it, was it a human disease? And his fiance, very attractive young woman, they were going to go in the mission and see how she feels. And she was a nurse and a pilot. She's a lively person. Pig, laugh them. She and I, they had been driving over Christmas from her home in upstate New York to his home in Massachusetts. And the snow had closed the road down to a single lane. And they came up on a pig in the middle of the road, a big 200 pound hog. And David nudged it to see if he could move it. But you know, so he got out and grabbed the pig by his ears and pulled him off to the side of the road. So the question was, did the pig call in his face? Oh Jesus. Because if he got it from a pig and he got a huge viral load and then some other people may have gotten it from him, but they didn't get that sick and it died out. Because in 1918 he had a hundred million people dead. And so far he had one, but you're going to vaccinate everybody. So we had to find the pig. So we went house to house on this Route 23 knocking on doors. Did you see a pig out in the road over Christmas and a lot of people had? And finally, he wasn't too hard to find the owner of the pig. He lived in my memory, maybe a little wrong, but it seemed like a double wide trailer. It was a house pig, not evident at the moment, but it was his pet. And he had been in a railroad accident and lost a couple of limbs and was propped up against the refrigerator. And I proposed to him, I just like a little blood from your pig. I take it to the CDC, they'll analyze it. The whole country is waiting in line to get these inoculations. And if it happens that your pig is a source of it, then we might be able to save everybody a lot of trouble. And so he looked at this girl on the couch and he said, I know you, I know your family, I know where you live, you fuck with my pig, I'll burn your house down. Wow, welcome to epidemiology. I said, really, we don't have to go there for her. We finally worked a deal where his vet extracted a little blood, sent it to the CDC, and the pig had never been sick a day in his life. Well, millions of Americans, I think it was 26 million Americans were vaccinated before there were hundreds of cases of Guillain-Barre. A couple of dozen people died. And Gerald Ford called off the vaccination and lost the election. It was a fiasco. And you know, I mean, history might have been different if that pig had been sick. But going back to that, you can see a government in disarray rushing ill-advised into the most extreme position, which is vaccinate everybody. But wait to see if it spreads. Of course, I understand their hesitancy about waiting. This is a disease that has a history of leveling, all of civilization. So you don't want to treat it lightly. But they sped to the finish line. And unfortunately, it caused a lot of damage and left a legacy of distrust that has never really gone away. And yeah, here we are. Here we are in a very, very similar spot. Yeah. It was an election year, you know, you know, a novel disease. You know, we haven't seen any of our gonna get through this. One of the things that I, with all the misjudgments that have been done, especially by the government, there have been a lot of heroic and brilliant people out there working on this. And I had the privilege of meeting so many of them. And I'm totally confident, even given my own history of having a vaccine reaction. I think this vaccine is a lifesaver. I hope you're right. I do too. Yeah. Do you take any extraordinary measures to protect your health or have you done anything different during this pandemic? No, it's been a very isolating experience. And as a reporter, it's hard. You know, I miss two of the, I miss my friends, I miss travel. I miss playing music. You know, there's a lot of things that I've really, really missed. I have not, I don't want to put my family at risk. You know, you're in the age group where you can get the vaccine though in Texas. You know, there was some real controversy as to whether or not they should vaccinate essential workers first or older people that are more at risk. And there's been some weird shit written about that that's flavored with social justice and I'll sort of, I'm sure you're aware of that. I would like to get the vaccine. I've looked for it. You know, I've signed up with our local pharmacy and, and I'm not, you know, actually healthcare workers are positive at a lower rate than the general population, strictly because they behave themselves. You know, they wear masks, they wear, you know, PPE, they're careful. And they really know how to wear the mask properly too. Yes, they do. Sealed to their face. Yes. They wear face shields and stuff like that. But on the other hand, they're confronted every day with the possibility. And I've talked to a lot of these people, you know, some of them are single. They haven't seen their families in 10 months. You know, some, you know, there's nurses living in basements of their own homes so that they'll infect their children. They don't know if they haven't got, every day they don't know if they haven't gotten infected that day. And so yes, I think they should be at the front of the line. But you know, I'm going to be competing with Uber drivers and, you know, I mean, there are a lot of lobbies coming out for, we're next. And it's a hard judgment to make about who's the most valuable. You start looking at elderly people where they have less life that, you know, to lose. And so that's an argument against, you know, going out and vaccinating people like me who were so desperately forever. But it's all made more difficult by the failure, you know, at every stage we failed. But this is the final stage and we're failing at getting the vaccine out and getting it into the arms of the people who need it. What's the issue here with the failure? Start with, you know, over promising. I was told by Pfizer back in September, I think, when, maybe it was August when they had the results of their first trial and was really, really positive. And they were going to have 100 million doses by the end of the year. And these are the Secretary of Health and Human Health Services predicted, you know, that we'd have 100 million vaccinations. And then it was 40 and there was 20. And now, you know, as it turned out, a little less than 4 million vaccines by the end of 2020. Moderna is now coming online and, you know, this is going to supplement things a lot, a lot more. But it's, you know, my doctor on, there's a sheet that says, you know, where all the vaccines are going and it said that he'd gotten 500 doses. He doesn't have any. He never had any. I don't know what they're saying, but, you know, there are all these different entities that claim that they have vaccine or that it is claimed that they have them and they don't have it. Yeah, it's a mess. They are also worried about not having enough vials to put the vaccine in. So you may have a huge amount of vaccine that you simply can't bottle. Well, there's also the transportation issue right because it has to be insanely cold. And what other vaccines are going to come online and send to, you know, asterisk and nakea, Johnson and Johnson, you know, send a fee. There are a bunch of others, but probably the gold standard is the Pfizer and the Moderna, which is the same vaccine that Barney Graham and Jason McLellan invented. When, you know, you wrote a novel about the pandemic. You wrote this piece for the New Yorker about the real state of what would happen during COVID-19. As a writer, you've got to have an imagination about what could possibly take place or how does this, how do we bounce back? There's pitfalls and there's hope, you know, there's possible, you know, bright futures and there's possible dystopian futures. Like what, how do you, what do you, when you look at the future? What do you see? Joe Rogan's comedy club. It's a good place to start. Well, I would love to have that here. Yeah. Well, I mean, don't you catch, you see it? Yes, I can see it. Well, there are other people with similar visions and, you know, this is a, this is a reset time. You know, our culture has been leveled. There are a lot of things that are going to change, you know, like office spaces, you know, skyscrapers, that kind of thing. You know, we're going to see, you're going to be living in a city where a lot of people are moving. You know, they're drawn to, they first of all, they're escaping. The idea of cities has been scarring, I think, to be trapped in a building where you have to ride an elevator every day. Yeah. And, you know, push the button, you might, you might die. You know, that, you know, people long to have, you know, be outdoors. And so they're moving to places where those things are easier. A lot of people in the west are leaving because of the fires. You know, climate change and things like that have made a big difference. So the people are moving. And if you're in New York or LA and you're looking at a map of America and you think, where should I go? There aren't a lot of places that, you know, what is like, there's no place like New York. There's no place like LA, but there are places that have attributes that make those places congenial. And, you know, Texas is one of the places where a lot of people wind up because it's got, it's dynamic. I think that's the, and also there are places inside Texas like Austin that are tolerant and interesting. And, you know, I think a lot of, Austin has had a reputation for being cool, long, far beyond what it deserves. And this has gone on for as long as I've been here. You know, ever since I moved to Austin, you know, when people would ask me where you from Texas, you know, you get this kind of look where in Texas, Austin, oh, Austin, you know, it's forgivable. Right. And it's supposed to, oh, I hear it's great. I didn't say wake of the look inside. I mean, exactly. Yeah. There's, it's one of those places that people think about moving if they have to. I had an opportunity to buy David Koresh's Mustang at one point in time. And you passed it up. I didn't have a place for it. It was for sale and I already bought, I don't have a bit of a car problem. I'm totally understandable. I think that's a worthy, a worthy problem. Yeah. And also I wanted it, I didn't know if I wanted to have his car because I was like, I'm bad juju. I don't know. Like, is a 68 Camaro, which is a nice car. I like 69s a little bit more, a little wider car. That's it right there. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It was for sale. That's David Koresh's. Uh huh. Yeah. Well, if he should have spent more time working on the car, why it looks great. It looks great. But you just driving around a little bit would be. Well, beauty. He like most cult leaders is too busy trying to fuck the wives of all of his. It always comes up, doesn't it? Yeah, that's the thing he always do. The only one I've access to everyone's wife. Right. Crazy how these patterns just emerge over and over and over again. That's like one of the big ones. They want to separate you from your family. Yeah. That's like one of the, I've had Steve Hassan on the podcast for who's a cult expert. I know. Yeah. Yeah. Who was in the moonies himself. Yeah. He got rescued. Uh, and he sort of outlined the steps they do. But one of the things is like remove you from the influence of your family. Yeah. Fascinating. You know, and with Kresh, they mean literally had a walled compound and brought everybody into the compound. And this one guy with this, uh, this vision. And this, it's funny, it's like we have these tolerant people like like we tolerate a certain level of the like the Joel old steans like, uh, seems to be doing more harm than he's doing good or more good rather than he's doing harm. Let it go. No big deal. Yeah, he's making a lot of money and yeah, he's doing all this and it doesn't seem right, but at least he's not banging everybody's wife. Well, this brings up another memory in my church in Dallas, uh, first Methodist church. Uh, when I was growing up, it, you know, Dallas had the reputation in the 60s of being like the most religious city in America. It had the largest Methodist largest Baptist churches in the whole country and one of the largest Presbyterians in a, you know, large Catholic population as well. I also had high rates of murder and divorce and, you know, all those things that you'd find in a really turbulent culture of the Dallas was. And, uh, you know, my father taught Sunday school for years and years. And then, uh, Robert Goodrich was our pastor and he became a bishop and, you know, his son was quarterback on our high school team. So we knew all these people pretty well. And, um, years later, uh, the church had kind of gone into decline and downtown Dallas was sort of inner city and they brought in this charismatic young preacher named Walker Rayleigh. And, um, he, his first action as a preacher in first Methodist was to blow into the microphone and breathe life into the church again. And he was very charismatic. He's great sermons and I went to see him several times when we went back to Dallas for holidays and so on. I could see the attraction and he very progressive. And then these threats on his life began to appear apparently because of, you know, his racial progressivism and, um, you know, notes were slipped under his door and FBI began to investigate. And then over Easter, uh, there was a really, you know, a very straightforward threat to kill him. And so he wore a bulletproof vest under his vestments and, um, you know, everybody, you know, inside the church circle, you know, it were all terrified. And then his wife is strangled in the garage and into a coma and Walker Rayleigh did it. Yeah, I was about to say, you know, I got suspicious immediately. Well, he was never convicted. And I interviewed him and, you know, he was, you have all the, you know, these piercing blue eyes and that, you know, sincerity. You know, I don't know where you stand on me, but Larry, but I, you know, I just, you know, this all come as a horrible, horrible shock to me. And I said, I think you did it. And I cited all the courage to say that to his face. I didn't think he could strangle me. You know, although we were in the kitchen where there were a lot of sharp knives, but, uh, yeah, there it is. How about that? You guys can really flesh it really. Uh, how do you say it? Right. Really, Walker Rayleigh. He's, um, he got off. How did he get off? Well, there was no witness. Right. There was talk that his children had two kids. One of them may have been partially strangled. That's not clear, but, you know, at the same time. Yeah. And, like one of them might have been a witness, maybe, but the kid was never, you know, it turned out Walker Rayleigh was having an affair with the daughter of her previous minister, Lucy Goodrich, to call herself Lucy Poppy on. Oh, Lucy. And, uh, she was, she played the piano in my father's Sunday school class. So I had my own brushes with, with, uh, I don't know. There's something about religion and sexuality. You know, I wrote about Jimmy Swagert, for instance, you know, and this. I have seen. Yeah. See, I remember that. I was wild. I went to his church and man, that church was, it really, you would have loved the services. I mean, it started off with, you know, this bass drum and then a guitar lick and then the curtains open and it's just rocking, you know, it was, it was entertaining. Much better music than the first Methodist church in Dallas. And, and Jimmy would, he was, you know, a real performer. Um, yeah, there you go. And I remember at the end of the sermon, you know, people would come up and he would embrace them and, and, so he liked to get hookers, right? Very low class, you know, out on airport road. You're sitting in a plastic lawn chair, that kind of thing. And that's a bizarre fetish. He, but it, it, I think, I think that there's something about when you climb into the spiritual spotlight. Is that her? Yeah. That girl? Yeah. She was just, she got a shit together. Yeah. Uh, uh, uh, the, uh, you, you, you're inviting a certain amount of sex. Sexual projection. Because the spotlight. Yeah. Well, then there's also the putting yourself in this position of being the, uh, ambassador of the Lord's word. Right. You know, you're, you're preaching about this pious lifestyle and all the, well, also the emotion, the emotionality that swaggered. I mean, there's one of the signature things is that he would weep. I, that wasn't the only time he wept, you know, he, he would weep. He would rant. He would speak in tongues. He would dance. He would sing and, uh, no, no, he's, he's old. Kind of get him in here. That was, I thought about, you know, doing a follow up, you know, cause I'm intrigued by disgrace. And, uh, you know, so many titanic figures have fallen. This guy, this channel is wife. I'm sorry to interrupt. Blocker really. What did he say? Well, he said, I think you did it. Uh, if I remember correctly as sort of, I'm sorry. You feel that way, you know, uh, I, he's now living in California, he's an LA. Uh, he, he married another, uh, wealthy woman, I understand. And, you know, she set him up and then she passed away. Uh, I don't know under what circumstances. And then he, I think he's with some, anyway, he's, he's got a Facebook page. Uh, you know, he's, there he is. Yeah. What year was this? Uh, it's in the 80s. I'm sorry. I'm not good on the worst. Yeah. And Peggy, his wife in a coma, she lived for like 26 years. You can check to see when she passed away. Never regain consciousness, but was, you know, in a coma for that entire, and then it became a homicide. Once she died. Yeah. What was the evidence? Yeah. It was all circumstantial. He, he left a telephone message. Honey, I'm running a little late. I don't know what time it is. He was driving a Honda, which has a little clock right there on the dashboard. And, um, you know, I've been studying over at SMU, you know, uh, uh, uh, did you listen to the message? Uh, I think it had been, uh, published. I quoted it. So I either listened to it or read it. And, uh, but that was one of the things he lied about not knowing what time it was. He lied about his whereabouts. He went over to visit Luke. into it or her Reddit. But that was one of the things he lied about not knowing what time it was. He lied about his whereabouts. He went over to visit Lucy. Also, all those notes and stuff were written to him. There was one point where Luke's, you know, that I told you about the death threats, he wrote to himself, written to him himself, written by him, written by him. And after Peggy was in a coma, Walker was in the hospital visiting and he overdosed and left a suicide note about how wrong he had been. But he never actually admitted what he had been. So he tried to commit suicide but survived. So he was in a coma as she was in a coma. Oh, Jesus Christ. And the wrong person came out of it. It really goes back to what we were talking about earlier, this desire that people have to be this leader and to be this person with this secret inside knowledge and to be in control of a covenant, to be in control of a parish. But in your performing career, for instance, in there's something element of that. There's want and attention for sure. There's wanting acceptance, there's wanting to be successful, to be recognized by people for your work, you know, for what you do. But you would hope that whatever pathology leads you to stand up comedy in the first place, because there's not a single person that gets in it. It's not fucked up. Like you have to have something wrong with you to want to be a comic. Because it's just a brutal emotional battle. Yeah. He bombed so often, particularly in the beginning. And it's bombing is devastating. Not bad. It is the worst. It's a, I described it as it's like sucking a thousand dicks in front of your mother. But the thing is, I think there is probably a person out there that wants to suck a thousand dicks in front of their mother. I doubt there's a person who wants to bomb. It's a devastating. It's also, it's a, for a person like myself who grew up in martial arts, it's a complex challenge. It's a complex challenge of managing concepts and emotions and how to get an idea across the people. And in a way, it's kind of a massive no-sis, because you're trying to bring people into a state of mind where they think the way you're thinking and they allow you to think for them, and then you can get them to feel good and laughter. It's very rewarding. Yeah, but to look at it as an art form, it's a very rewarding art form when it's done well. Like a show that's done well. But I was telling Jamie, how the fuck up one, one line of one joke. And then it will haunt me for days. Sure. I won't be able to enjoy dinner. I'll be driving in my car by myself and I'll just be like, oh, no, I'm the same way. I discovered an an error in my novel just the other day. It's been published. It's out there. It's a terrible error. And it's been many eyes. We were on it. Copy editors, editors, you know, me many times, you know, it all slipped by and I know, but that achievement of getting a laugh is, you know, even just in an ordinary setting, you know, if you come up with something this funny and you I remember some of my best lines for decades, you know, and you know, I'll never tell them again because, but you know, it's like that was the moment when I got it right in that moment. Yeah. No, those are magical moments. And as a comic, it's, it's a, like I said, it's a really rewarding art form. But there's no, I don't have a desire to like lead people or to, to be revered or to have some sort of, I mean, it sounds ironic that I do have this weird platform, but this is all accidental. This came about from just hanging out with my friends talking shit. Really? And most of the time we were high, like almost all the early podcasts were blasted out of our head. There's a living in California, you know, and all, most of the early ones were all comedians. So we just have it, it was excused to get baked and to just make each other laugh and to put some stuff out on the internet. And then along the way, I started saying, man, I want, I like to talk to that guy. I like to try to get some guests and then I then also have scientists on and professors and it just athletes had just got weird and it became what it is now. But it was never a plan. It was just something that sort of happened. And now, you know, over the last few years, I've recognized like, oh shit, there's like, I have like a responsibility. Like I can't just talk shit anymore. It's now people are listening. Well, there's a whole aftermarket of, you know, other, other people commenting on your shows. Yeah. Oh, yeah. And taking things out of context and misrepresent, misrepresenting what my intention was. And then also like, just the act of, you know, what I would call talking shit. Like when, especially comics around talking shit, they don't mean what they're saying. They're just being silly. They're just trying to say provocative outrageous things to get a reaction from each other to crack each other up or to just to have fun. And when you take that stuff and you put it in quotes, it becomes a totally different animal. Right. You take away all the flavor and the fun. And now it's just like a, it's a hurtful thing or an ignorant thing or it's the podcast has become a very different, a very different endeavor than what I initially have. But it's also because of the higher profile. Now it's allowed me to talk to more interesting people and more influential people like we're talking about the Elon Musk conversation, fantasy, fantasy, fantastic. It's just just to have an opportunity sit down with one of the most interesting people I think that's ever lived. And one of the most productive and prolific people, I mean, just the fact that he's able to juggle all these plates simultaneously, he's a really unique guy. And off air, like super friendly, like really, really easy to talk to, very nice. I'm in a first met him. I was like, I was kind of taken, it took a while during the first conversation I had with him to loosen him up. Took a while for him to relax because he was one way. And then we were on camera and then also he's very aware that he's on camera and he was a little tense. So then the whiskey started flowing and then I pulled out a joint and that became history. But it was all only possible because the podcast had become this thing where it was like, here you have some ideas, go there and then you can get those ideas out and there's no middleman. There's no one's going to stop you from discussing things. No producers going to run ends. Hey, this is not appropriate or this is controversial. We'd like to steer away from this subject. I don't want to steer away from anything. You want to talk about it. I'm more than willing to talk about it. I think any subject can be approached reasonably. And when a guy like him wants to come on and particularly, I found the most interesting thing I could tell talking to him that it was almost like when you're looking at his eyes and he's discussing these things, it's almost like his brain is just wired differently. And when I said that to almost like, I have this feeling that like what does it like to be you? And he was like, he wouldn't want to be me. And that he realized when he was really young, that it was different. He thought everyone's mind worked like that. His brain is just like a tornado of ideas. And he's just trying to like use his time as wisely as possible to give attention to all these different ideas, whether it's the boring company or whether it's a solar power company or a Tesla or SpaceX. It's like, who the fuck is running? That, I mean, companies that are that influential, that powerful, that's significant. And four of them simultaneously, how is that even possible? Well, what's interesting about, I was going to say people like Elon Musk and there aren't very many people like him, but ever they challenge you about what life could be. What do you might be? I mean, you say you fell into this, but in a way you created it organically. You made it you. And Elon Musk, of course, he made a couple of billion dollars and started. But he just had to he allowed himself to become himself. Yeah. You know, there was a role out there in the universe that he could step into. And I think that's true for all of us in many ways. I think we all get handicapped. Oftentimes, I'm in countries where I'm dealing with people who will never be fulfilled. You know, their culture is so confining. They can never be who they might be. But we're not in that culture. And so the potential to become bigger than we are is always there. But there are only a few people that actually become as big as they might be. And sometimes, you know, you're limited by money or opportunity. You know, we talked about some of those neighborhoods in Baltimore or something like that. Yeah. Yeah. Those, you know, they're tremendous barriers. But there are people that come out of those places and take the world on. And, you know, there's something fascinating to me about accepting the challenge. You know, there's a lot of risk involved. You know, you can be totally diluted. And I'm sure you know people who think that they're so great. And everybody knows they're not in this huge joke. But they're also people like Elon Musk who think they could be greater. And they are able to, I don't know, I think that's a very significant point that the people that think they're great, but they're deluded. That is the most toxic attribute that a person can have if they want to achieve something because it'll keep you from progressing because you have this distorted perception of your own worth. There's a lot of people out there that are extremely mediocre that feel short short, short, sighted. They feel like people have looked past them. They haven't got their just due. And it's a, it's a weird, it's a weird thing that sentiment, that idea that you haven't gotten the attention you deserve. But you get exactly you deserve. Yeah, that's the sad thing. Is it, is it the case that they're in the wrong calling? You know, that's the scenario. I think a lot of it is just discipline. A lot of people are not willing to work hard enough to grow. Like that feeling that you have when you found that you have an error in your novel. And it just fucking rots you just that feeling. Everybody doesn't get that feeling. Yeah. Some people are very satisfied with their work, even if their work is mediocre. Some people think that their stuff is awesome just because it's them. You know? Yeah. I think that that's one of the advantages of mixed martial arts, I'm sure is you find out really quickly where you you stand. Yeah. And the truth is laid bare and you can't lie. Yeah. To yourself, because if you're lying to yourself, if you if you're pretending, there's physical consequences. And the same thing is true for stand up. Yeah. You know, the left tell you, you know, did you, are you who you would like to be or think you are or not? And you know, also I think in writing, you know, people buy your books or they don't. They go see your play or your movie or they don't. You know, there's a critics way in. You know, all these things that you get feedback about where you are versus where you want to be. Right. And I'm in kind of unusual spot is I'm a lot further ahead than I ever thought I'd be. You know, I never thought I would achieve the kind of success that I've had. And I'm really grateful for it. But it makes me wonder, what if I'd been more ambitious when I was younger? You know, what if I, you know, gone to what if I'd laid into some study time that I didn't have, you know, doesn't this mirror what we were talking about before the podcast started? We were saying about the differences between our culture and other cultures is that like we're, you know, at least in a concept endlessly ambitious. We want to work harder. We want to put in more hours, to the detriment of our personal lives, the detriment of our relaxation and social time. Like if you had been more ambitious, would you have been you and would you have had the same kind of impact that you've had? Like isn't part of the reason why you've had the kind of impact that you've had is you really just have concentrated on the work. You've concentrated on whether it's with going clear or your book about the pandemic or whatever these things are. You're from my admiration of you, you're a guy who puts incredible focus on a subject and you seem to be, I mean correct me if I'm wrong, you seem to get absorbed in the work. If you're really ambitious, then you're thinking about end results, then you're thinking about ultimate goals or you're thinking about numbers. Like what is, where's the benefit in that? When you're, you're obviously are wealthy, you obviously are healthy, you obviously are fulfilled in terms of your career. Why would you want to be more ambitious? That's an interesting point. I think if I, I made a just, I had a realization, a kind of epiphany at some point and I tend to have these. I've had my two or three in my life where, you know, something came really clear almost like a voice, you know, in my ear. But the helpful little tidbit that came into my ear was nobody's going to remember you. You know, even if they do remember you, they're going to die too. Yeah, well, in all the people that were, all the writers that were famous when I was in college, if you go to college now, they don't know their names. They don't know who Norman Mailer is or Garvedol or any of those people. Yeah, those people have all been forgotten. A small pool of, of Rachondite, you know, literate tours will, will know those names. But, you know, those were the people that were just like, I'll never be that. Yeah. And then that's subsided into, they aren't that either. You know, they just, you know, their reputation is so mighty at one time. You know, have all diminished into pool of forgetfulness and that'll happen to everybody except, you know, Shakespeare, you know, a few, and those, you know, those giant names of the past are enshrined in the academy so firmly that it would take a lot to remove them. But I can see a time when, you know, reading and, you know, that sort of thing is going to be overtaken by other pursuits and, you know, no writers will really be known very well. I don't know about that. I think there's always going to be a desire to hear the well-formed thoughts of intelligent people and creative people. I think that's always going to be the case because there's something incredibly rewarding about whether it's great fiction or nonfiction about reading someone's really well thought out, well edited work. It's, it's a giant part of what makes us understand each other. It's reading other people's writing or seeing their work, whether it's music or comedy or anything. Seeing what happens when someone focuses on a thing and hones it down and puts it into a, like a presentable package and this is done here and then you distribute it to the world and then the world reads it and takes it in and goes, oh wow, I like how he thought about that. Like, and it changes the way people think about things. It changes the way people consider things. It gives people energy and enthusiasm. It gives them motivation and ambition. Like, I think writing is always going to be a thing. It's going to, I think it's a very important thing. And I know for me personally, when I get less focused on things, when I feel like more, maybe less in control of my thought process is when I'm not writing. When I sit down and I force myself and I discipline myself to write, I feel like my thoughts are better formed, they're more concise, they're better, they're easily more easily digestible to other people. And I think it has a direct result of focus and discipline. You know, like the focus and discipline to sit down and put the work in. And then when I do that, that muscle, whatever that thing is, it grows. It gets stronger. It gets sharper, the endurance or whatever it is. It becomes more, it becomes more applicable in all the other things that I do I think writing is always going to be a thing. I really think you said that so well. It made me proud of my profession. And then also because you said it so easily, it undermines your argument. Well, something I've thought about a lot. I've also also thought about my own profession, the various stages of it. Like in the beginning, I remember just wanting to work. I just wanted to be a professional. I couldn't imagine being able to pay my bills, just telling jokes. And then it got to a point, well God, I would love to be like really successful. I don't want to be famous. Like there's a comedian that's sell out comedy clubs. And then there's all this comedian sell out theaters. Holy shit, I can never sell out a theater. And then all of a sudden I'm selling out theaters. And then it became arenas. And that was only over the last few years. But that's the most bizarre shit when you walk into a room and there's 15,000 people all waiting here you talk. The strangest thing on earth. But the ambition has changed to now, now the main focus. And even while all that stuff happened, it was like the more impressive thing that happened, the more I just focused on work. Instead of focusing on getting attention, which is what I did when I was really young and starting out, I focused on just being better at the thing. And the more I was better at the thing, the more I focused on that, then the other kind of success sort of just fell in the place. But that's not what I ever think about. I always just think about the work itself. And the more I think about that, about how to put the bits together and how to make them better and how to edit them. And maybe I should go over that again. Maybe I'm just settling for this position. Maybe I need to like rewrite it entirely and start from scratch and switch it around and maybe take to look at it from a totally different angle. That's when it's been the most rewarding for me. But also I feel the least responsible for it, which is the weirdest part about it. It's like I feel like when something is done, even though I know I put a whole lot of work into it, I was like, I just showed up. And it's almost like, you know, press field writes about the muse and he writes about it. Like it's like a real thing. Like treat it. Like it's a real thing that is show that you show up and you put in the work and then it'll come visit you. It almost feels like that sometimes. It almost feels like the more, the better I get at it, the more successful I get at the less I feel like I did it. And the more I feel like it's just a matter of me forcing myself to show up. And then this process takes place. I look at it a little differently because I think people that are hugely successful are the most true to themselves. Elon Musk is an excellent example. But to be somebody else or to correspond to a stereotype of some sort is very limiting. And also you you don't have the original genius that comes along with being who you really are. And so if you it seems to me that what you've done is command all the Joe Roganess that you can and ported into a novel form and made it part of you. And you know, if you were trying to be something else, it might not be, it would not, it wouldn't give you the chance to be who you are in the genuine way that this does. Maybe that's true, but maybe the way that I'm able to do that as probably just getting out of my own way and not thinking about me at all. But that's the same thing. You're getting out of your own way when you say that, what's getting in your way is social constructs that are not you. And if you remove those and just allow whatever is your essence to manifest itself, then you may go to prison. You know, what that essence is. But on the other hand, you become authentically who you are. And I think that that's what people are so hungry for in any field, whether it's comedy or, you know, politics or writing they want to, they want something that feels real. I think you're 100% right about authenticity. I think that's the thing that I value more than anything. Whether someone's right or wrong, if I hear them talk or I hear their take on things, if I know it's genuinely coming from their real thoughts, there's no ideological bend. It's not a some predetermined position that they've taken, but they're just actually thinking about things and looking through it and trying to formulate their thoughts in an honest way. I can appreciate that more than anything because it's so, especially in the broadcast medium, it's so rare because there's too many gatekeepers, you know, to have an idea and to bring it to a television show, like for instance. It's like you have to, you're going through so many people. It's so difficult to get your own actual thoughts and have them unmolested and then distribute them to the world. Yeah, I went through that with, we did an adaptation of the looming tower. It was not hard, honestly. The problem was that there were a lot of people along the over the years that wanted to do it and I didn't want them to because I thought 9-11 kind of sacred and go make entertainment of it. But on the other hand, kids now, they don't have any experience. It was like World War II for me. My dad was in the war. Well, I wasn't. So I thought it was important to memorialize it. I produced a couple of friends and we were able to, the thing was they couldn't fuck with it. There had to be this general agreement that the tone has to be exactly right because if you get it wrong, it'll be a sin in some way. Anyway, it was a good experience. I'd like to do it again. I know what you mean. I've pitched things in the past and the pitching itself is kind of great. It's such a high feeling. Nothing comes with it. Everybody calls their agents and stuff like that. Oh, they loved you. It never goes anywhere. One out of a hundred. Yeah, just doesn't. I like to work in different formats. I love the movies and I love plays. What are you working on now? Well, I'm finishing a book about COVID and I had a, I told you about my little bit about my movie background. But I had a play that we had two productions here in Austin. It was called Sunnies Last Shot at the time. And it was a lot of fun. It's about Texas politics and it's set in the Texas House of Representatives, my favorite political body. And I never traveled. And I thought, well, Broadway producer came down and took a look and she said, you know, I thought about it as a musical. Well, yeah, Texas politics does make you want to dare to say so. I am a great pal of mine, Marsha Ball, who's a singer, songwriter, piano player, extraordinary, beloved figure in Austin music. She and I started writing music for it. And then Broadway producer bailed on it and said, you know, it shouldn't be a musical. It should be a television series. So we went to HBO and sold it. And I wrote a pilot and they fired my executive and trashed all of his projects. So I had neither of series nor a musical. But and that started to write it as a novel because I thought it's, you know, I got to get the story at something, but I'd missed the music. So it's now going to become a podcast. What? A musical podcast. Really? Yeah. My son Gordon, who's also a musician, has joined me in Marsha. And we're, you know, we're writing new songs. I wish I had written songs when I was younger because it's a huge amount of fun. And the kind of writing I do is usually very solitary. My creative processes, you know, essentially, you know, I spend the whole day alone and, you know, working with other really creative people. It's a great joy, especially these people. So we're having fun. And, you know, we just wrote a couple of songs over the holidays. That's awesome. Well, I love that you're willing to take on all these different kinds of projects. You know, it all comes from nobody's going to remember you. You know, it's, it's like, Jerry Lee Lewis, you know, I, I idolized it. You know, I, one of the reasons I took up the piano, was I wanted to play Great Balls of Fire on my 40th birthday. So I took up piano when I was 38 and a half. And, and even got my feet into it as you, is required. But he's always done the same thing. And he's Jerry Lee Lewis. And he's kind of been prison by that. And does he ever want to sit down and play a little divorce, you know, or something like that? Now, you know, who knows? But it's shocking as it might sound. Nobody's going to remember him either. And if you no longer are tied to this idea of becoming really famous and having this enduring legacy, it frees you up to do whatever you want to do. And in a way, that's become my brand. You know, he's the guy who does everything. And I'm alright with that. But I would rather do this and maybe not have quite a deep trough in the culture. But you know, if you just keep trying to write one book after another, some of them are not going to be any good. You know, but if you are diversifying and you're, you know, I have an idea for a play, but it's not a book. You're supposed to be writing books and that play never gets done. But if it's a really good idea, that's the hardest part in the creative field, I think, is getting the idea. And there's just precious fuel of them. And so, you know, I have to pay attention to the ideas as they come to me. What's a great freedom to be able to chase different ideas and to pursue different kinds of work? Yeah. Yeah. And every one of them reinforces the other, you know, when people say when you write movies and plays and, you know, nonfiction, you know, there's the R.U. Crazy question that is my editor is often asked me, but by writing movies and plays, there's no narrative in them. It's all scenes and dialogue. Those are very powerful elements. And too often ignored by nonfiction writers. And, you know, if you incorporate the kind of scene. means in dialogue. Those are very powerful elements. And too often ignored by nonfiction writers. And if you incorporate the kind of scenic construction in a nonfiction story or book, it gives a tremendous amount of power. And, contrary, if you take your skills of reporting and apply it to fiction, learn how the world really works, make it feel real and authentic. You know, it cross-pollinates. And I think I'm a far better writer because I have developed these tools from different kinds of craft. That's a great way to end this. We just did three hours. Can you believe it? Oh, yeah, I think. Yeah, that's pretty impressive. Pretty amazing, right? It's a good time warping this room. Thank you very much, man. It was a great pleasure. Thank you. Thank you very much. Bye, everybody.