Joe Rogan, the Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast by night All day Hey Hey Charlie Kirk No Don't show Don't show you the new dogs Dogs are Nazi All right He's now sit right here And chill out What a dog New Netflix special Out now You got that right, buddy That's fucking go None two please Check it out We just hit number five So I'm trying to get to Oh no Well maybe this will do it Hopefully Hopefully I'll put it up on my Instagram when the show runs All right thank you Thank you Everything helps It's a saturated market I know there's 19 comedy specials a day now YouTube and Hulu and the other thing for It's not just that There's like Just you're competing with content You think about how many fucking shows there are now It's kind of nuts I mean forget shows Shows as TikToks There's reels the shorts It never ends Never been a time where there's more things to watch And divide your attention I know And then there's the war Yeah That is the war That's so much to pay attention to There's politics as only fans Yeah So much to pay attention to buddy Oh yeah So much Charlie We'll just pretend that's Ari Yeah He's back Well you know Ari always gets too high in an hour He just shuts up Don't fall off the table Hey He looks like the Ayatollah now Have you seen him? He's got the beer And he's getting He's getting out too Yeah the Ayatollah Oh the new Ayatollah Yeah Is that real? It's a Trump's ad I think that's his real He's never lied Oh Haha I think they're just trying to fuck with the guy Because if you get if you're gay in a round They just throw you off a building right? He's got to throw himself off You know there was like one of the first places Or the number one place in the world For transgender surgeries I heard that Because you couldn't be gay So you'd rather be a woman You say you have to be a woman You gotta get fucked in the ass That's kind of progressive I can't get fucked in the ass Well you can't I guess They don't check Right You get fucked in your fake cooter Haha Fake cooter that's only gonna Leave it off the bar Haha Fake cooter It probably will be Yeah After this Uh I ran I mean they've got to be terrified I don't know much about anything But uh I would be scared to fight a country That is having a fist fight on the White House lawn That's how bad ass and crazy we are Like we're fighting at the president's house Each other Yeah We're gonna fuck you up I'm not thrilled about that You're gonna be there? Yeah I'll be there but I'm not thrilled about it You just Doesn't seem like a wise idea Yeah It looks like they're targeting the fucking reporter Whoa Hey Charlie Come here buddy Uh this dog's gonna be a Uh it's gonna be a hold of a show here No he'll come down He just has to relax He's never been with me alone before Oh he's only been with my wife alone But he loves me He slept with me last He sleeps in the bed With my daughter So he slept with me last night Oh boy Yeah Little bit It's good We get diversity here It's a brown dog Haha Yeah they attacked that reporter man Crazy I mean unless it was a wayward missile Which is like what happened to precision strikes Oh yeah They were surgical Remember they would call them surgical? That's right Imagine calling a bomb that's going like 5,000 miles an hour surgical I think they got old equipment over there They got a tarry and shit They're way behind But we hit a school That was on us I think Yeah Yeah but 100% Even in our other countries were shooting schools Well the school was unfortunately What is it? James That's the right before it Whoa is that the red? Damn that's quite a hit Whoa That's nuts Jesus good It looks like LA Whatever It's crazy that you can capture it Like how could these cameras? Meanwhile they couldn't catch that plane flying to the Pentagon Haha True Right when you see that thing That thing looks just like a missile too Right What do you think that was that plane that hit the Pentagon? It doesn't really look at a plane Why would they be shooting a missile into a place that's already been hit by missiles? And why is it in Russia? Oh that's just the reporter Russia Russia today reporter Oh got it got it Sorry Yeah RT You know that channel I in Lebanon Oh in Lebanon I wonder if they're going after press Because they've gone after press before Interesting Yeah I mean they've been accused of shooting press in Gaza Right Yeah Smart because they want to tell their own story I don't want you in there with their cameras Yeah What do you think about these Netanyahu AI videos? I haven't seen them You haven't seen them? No Well they think he might be dead What? Yeah There's a bunch of AI videos That Israel is released That are like clearly AI What? Show him the one where there's in the cafe This one's nuts Like this one I would assume That some kid made Yeah Just fucking around on his computer All right I saw it I was like there's no way they're really trying to pass this off As an actual video of Netanyahu at a cafe In the middle of the war like everything is a common peaceful Yeah this one Well that's just a clip Show the actual Yeah it's not good Um Bebe It's on the Israel website Or the Israel Twitter page Oh really? Yeah no they released it Holy moly Yeah it's good that's crazy Oh Well his brother's dead His brother got killed in a missile strike Recently? Yes What? Yes What? They struck his uh Are you just not on one? What's going on? I just watch funny shit and goof around Poor someone that Let's switch to the baby Come on give me some Oh I thought you quit the sauce I got back on Hey I think you turned Muslim or slept with him I didn't know what I had I'm back Hell yeah Alhamdilah Pull me one I'm easy Zoram Bojegakat Cheers sir Cheers hey good to be back When all of ouries did wait Hold this down I don't get drunk oof I might this off this stuff though But uh I have started drinking again I took like eight months off It was a good reset I mean I used so sure I'll take a week off But I'm like limitless Yeah Well I realized that Because of the club I was just drinking too much Right And I was just tired all the time Like you know go to work out the next day I was like god I feel like shit Why am I doing this to myself? And then I took eight months off Then I had a glass wine with dinner I was like Ooh I like it And then I had a margarita And I was like Ooh I'm back It's a great time This one So look at this This is AI That's fake Well people have zoomed in on the signs and stuff And it's not even real writing Mmm He's saying look I have five fingers We're joking Around You know because there was an AI video before That people were criticizing Because it looked like One of his fingers had grown an extra Upendage Right I think that just looked like the crease of his hand Honestly to me Yeah Any This looks fake It's fuck First of all It's weird because he sips out of the cup And yet the cup stays Exactly the same level And no matter where he moves The cup around it doesn't spill Right Like there's a moment where he turns the cup Like almost sideways It would get moves way too much for it to not spill at all And why would he just be doing it? It looks like an ad for this coffee shop Yes Hang it out at a coffee shop There's a war And also like how's everybody so casual? Yeah He didn't tip though So that's the duty as a big girl But yeah And also Looks like AI Like he looks like he's got a beauty filter on That doesn't look like a human being Totally This is silly Let me hear what he's saying What is he saying? Is it in Hebrew? Look everybody's happy to see you You imagine if you were in that coffee shop You'd be like please leave Please leave for the bombscom Please leave for the target They're trying to find that guy Everywhere he fucking goes Yeah They're so cute Look at that They've got the eye at Dolan They've too They've big that one Look at that They're just showing you how easy it is Yeah They're just really good AI Platforms now to know what they would have That they're not showing Who knows This is silly He's got come on He can't be dead He might be dead His brothers See that's like look at this Yeah Like the coffee Look how turned it is Right It doesn't spill at all It just wiggles to the edge And then they've also shown that like On the register And then some of the signs The writing's not real Hmm It's very um Very fucking weird Well all right Be Drink one for the Yahoo We hasn't been seen publicly In over a week Hmm So He might be gone Yeah there's a lot of crazy shit going on I can't give up with the horror moose I don't know what that's about It's completely closed now They even bombed Like the Saudis had another way To move oil Out into another direction Across the red sea I believe it is And uh The the Iranians bombed that Yesterday Oh yeah Yeah Whoo Yeah it's getting hot dude It's it's fucking scary Speaking live as we Oh Out in front of people He's alive In front of people I don't know There's We'll open Twitter back up And this was there I wonder So if he is alive I wonder why they would release that clearly AI video Because that like this looks like a normal human Right Yeah Kind of This doesn't look They said that privately But the little glossy The nose The nose A dead of deep indebtedness Deep indebtedness To President Trump For leading this effort To safeguard our future Mmm I am about this guy's been Trying to get war with Iran for decades man Yeah yeah he's loving us And if he's not By the way if he's not in war He's not in office anymore And oh And then he gets indicted Right He's in the middle of At least one case One corruption case Mmm Well this is super bowl He's in heaven So there's people in the audience Right so this is real I mean there's that They're not This angle doesn't show them It's like a static angle But you can hear people's voices Which you know If we're going to be Oh they don't show the people You can say that's fake Mmm I need to see the people I need to see somebody to hug them So wait why aren't you going to see somebody to jerk them off? One of those were real Let's see that no force again Did you imagine if they did show that? Did you just show them just blasting like 12 foot arcs A rope Just firehose of jizz I show how virul he is Managevets No Why are you not looking forward to the White House fight? Well it's kind of a gimmick You know Of course There's that And you know people are criticizing the card But if it was any other card It's a great card Mm-hmm Just they're criticizing it Because they said it was going to be the greatest card of all time And it's also it's just Gonna be a security nightmare That's true You're on the White House lawn Also they're fighting outside Whatever it rains What if it's hot? You're in the middle of June Right June and DC can get pretty warm Yep Yep That affects fighters Like we only did one outside fight that I was a part of And that was in Abu Dhabi And it was a nightmare Yeah It was really hot And there was bugs flying around their side of Besides the fucking birds Oof It was crazy It's like stand up You got to do it indoors 100% Outside is hell Yeah It's terrible Terrible Most shows are bad outside But Here's my idea We do White House fight But we fight politicians Again Bobert versus AOC Now that's a fight I like that But I think I think RFK would win everything I think Jasmine Crockett Whoops small Oh yeah She's feisty She'd take a shoe off She pulls the wig off Stuffs in your mouth She's a black breathe Takes her earrings off I'm terrified Well she's on a paul there's an emotion lost Right Yeah but she'll be around They never leave Maybe They go for ever these guys Maybe Bernie's still cooking Yeah but he's the senator He's been a senator forever I mean she's lost So who knows what's gonna happen now Hillary's around What is she doing? She's probably even pussy Ahh You think? I hope I mean she needs a relief This guy This lady I kinda like Hillary Just cause she's You know she got cheated on publicly With the Monica thing Now she's doing the Epstein's Island stuff She lost the presidential race And she's still out there She's kind of a badass I would kill myself at this point Well She's also got like a list of people that have mysteriously disappeared How's that right? That are attached to her and Bill Oh really? Yeah you know what I'm about? No For real? I don't know about the Clinton body count I know Norm was on the view Two years ago and he said Clinton killed a guy Yeah he said to a bunch of people I think That's where I get my information It's a good way to get it from the view But she was solid Detail information But she's getting like grilled by the Epstein people Or about Epstein And she's just like going off And Bill's reminiscing Well she walked she stormed out Because Lauren Bobert took a picture of her And posted it online Like that's it I'm leaving Yeah How are you allowed to leave? Yeah exactly So when he took a picture, sit the fuck down You're not even in office anymore You're just a civilian See you're fucking ass down and answer the questions Yeah I guess just an excuse to leave But you got to add to Bill he's denying to leave dies Yeah you did nothing I was only there for humanitarian purposes You got photos at everything I was just getting massages and hugging nice people Exactly Nothing untoward was done to me or anyone else That was theirs As far as I know Yeah that was pretty good I didn't see that side of Jeff That lady's smiling If she claims victim I call her shit She's like she's having a good time Also that's a woman You know that's true Once you're a woman Okay You know unless someone told her you to run to your hand If we're talking about children We're talking about a different thing But there's a lot of these ladies that were grown women When they were doing this And the emails that were exchanged Between Epstein and these women Like they were well aware of what's going on At least some of them were There was this Russian lady It was talking She was recruiting girls You're saying this one's This one's a fat ass She needs to lose some weight Now she's trying to get these girls to work with Epstein Right Who just lame? No Wasn't just lame It was some other Russian lady Oh damn Like these some of these ladies at least Were like look the real criticism The real legitimate criticism is Were there underage girls involved Now clearly they were in Epstein's past When you went to jail for it The whole Palm Beach thing When they were underage masseuses But some of these are just ladies Did bad things They made bad decisions And they probably wound up on that island for money Yeah Okay Couple of horror moves Oh hey where you going buddy? Charlie He snuck out little fucker I'm a little worried about I was hurtful Hope he looked like he was totally calm Just sitting in that chair Oh Jamie's got him now Bro you're locked up Jamie's used to having a little dog as I'm always giving you kisses Damn Not a Rogan fan huh? Unlike the body's bored No he just he just doesn't know this environment I think he's weirded out And then he was out there with the mountain lion Stuffed mountain lion St Whiskey in here he probably spangled that Speaking of which You got any of those stodie? Yeah, I would love a stogie Let's go Hell yeah Well I can't keep up with all the news You know about Epstein you know about Iran You know about Israel You know about Hillary This is uh I barely know I'm off of social media I've been off social media for a while The only time I'm on is when someone sends me something funny Oh yeah I'm gonna check it And then I'm sorry myself scrolling for like 30 seconds of me And I would stop That's how they get to it Fuckin scrolling It's impossible Um They're so good at it I used to say knuckle sandwich Where did these come from? Mmm Knuckle sandwich is uh That can't be the same place Because there's a Isn't there a place? There's knuckle sandwich which is the Sandwich truck in Austin which is awesome Chris Brown's album Oh Oh these are got fiercest Alright let's hope they're good Did you see that bat'sorette who got kicked off Or beating the shit out of her husband? Y'all Yeah My wife My wife's a big uh reality lady And uh That's healthy I know right She loves it All those 90 day fjats I love that shit They love it That and true crime Yes Right Yeah Isn't weird Oh yeah I get the true crime Because they don't really commit those kind of violent acts So they're really need to understand like the male mind Right That makes sense to me Yeah But what I don't understand is thank you I mean I don't know Maybe I'm just Stuck up It's almost time for spring break So maybe you're headed to the beach Or maybe you're taking the kids on a road trip Or maybe you're just taking some extra time for yourself No matter what You deserve a break And a reset And a g1 can help a g1 is your daily health drink Just one scoop Combines your multivitamin Pre and probiotic Superfoods And antioxidants To help support A healthy immune system And digestion Plus It travels really well So you can start working it Into your routine Even when you don't have a routine Just slip a few travel packs Into your luggage And have a nice flight Uh I've talked about a g1 for a long time And it's not just me I know a lot of people enjoy It's very easy It's very convenient And you deserve to take care of your health Visit DrinkAG1.com Last Joe Rogan And for a limited time Get a bottle of Omega 3 Vitamin D3K2 And an AG1 flavor sampler for free In your welcome kit With your first subscription That's an 111 dollar value At DrinkAG1.com Last Joe Rogan Well they say it's biological They're like Oh I'm learning how to avoid these Yeah Gary Moan No I get that Because it is like my daughters Young daughters They all love it Everyone loves it Their friends love it Yeah It's like the number one show with ladies Oh yeah Like the number one podcast with ladies Is True Crime It's great You know what the number two show for ladies is? What? You're on it Hey get out of here Really? Number one with black people too Hey! Take that, Chey-Chey Haha All right That's all on my African-American friends Hell yeah These are not bad Guy Fieri Oh, I love Guy These are fun dude Cool dude Kind of a bunch of yellow cars though That's odd Yeah Yeah, he's not the best fashion sense You know shirts with flames on it For us to dip Yeah but you're paying attention Yeah, that's true You want to be a chef And you want to be like a celebrity chef You got to Either be a great narrator And a great writer like Bourdain Yeah, or you got to be like angry Like a Gordon Ramsay Yeah That's true But what happened to show When I was getting chefs were like fact guys with beards And now they all have They're jacked with tats Yeah, well they're all they all look like artists Because they are artists I guess But I didn't really think of that Until I watched Bourdain show And I was like Oh these guys are making temporary art That's true And then you need it Yeah But it is art It is art Yeah they're mixing oils A lot of chemistry Mmm But they kind of with the same path as porn stars Porn stars should be like Well up to us and Harry, Bush And now they're all like They're all like MMA fighters They're jacked and Taking it in the ass So while they're all tatted up and pierced and shit One of the things that I've been watching a lot When the world is going completely crazy I watch people making street food in other countries Oh that's With no language No talking It's all ASMR It's all them cooking Oh yeah No regulations either Bring them over here I mean they're not watching hands over there And they'll use roadkill Whatever Like they don't give a shit No they're using good food It was Afghanistan They were making roast chicken Oh come on Dude I'm telling you I'll send it to Jamie And you'll watch it Alright It's exciting I mean I ate halal trucks for 10 years When I was broke And you're great They're great They are great But I could be eating pigeon And uh Probably our children Not children But definitely pigeon Probably pigeons made it into your mouth a couple of times Yeah Alright Let me find these motherfuckers I watch so much too And YouTube is my number one thing Because it's a lot of social media I love it It's my number one thing for distraction Whoa Oh yeah this is exactly Jamie You're the best This is it Most cheap food Afghanistan This guy He sets up They cook all this stuff And you want I mean it's like a 40 minute video or something How long is it? Yeah Yeah Like a 40 minute video I watched the whole thing Just like at home Chilling after a long day's work Just watching people cook street food In Afghanistan It looks fucking delicious Look at those spices My god Yeah And they have meat in this stew pot And they Well it's like You know a big wok It looks like Yeah They boil it up with all the salt And all these herbs And spices And then they got these roast chickens And they take these chickens And they stick them in spikes If you back up the video a little bit It's earlier in the video You show they take these chickens And they just have this big flame in the middle And then they stick these chickens all around the flame This is hell for a vegan The shape of that Fun fact I think if this is true That's because these to flip their shields upside down Whoa Oh It's really cool The gengus cons they're fried Oh yeah And they make sand I love it That makes sense Yeah That's a good one What'd it be great at the end This is a big drone strike Well we don't bomb Afghanistan You know we send them money Oh is that right Now we send the Taliban money Yeah We send them a ton of money We hook up everybody You crane Should go to back to the chickens So if you back up Wow It's got a little brush No you get there it is So this is how he does it So they have this fire in the middle And they just take these chickens on a stick And they just rotate them And they put them in the center They put the fire in the center And the chickens all around them And they rotate them I got so hungry How to go in the kitchen To make myself food afterwards This is a chicken holocaust Yeah it looks good Right Man it does look amazing Yeah too It looks fucking delicious I mean you ever get the rotisserie Chicken at the grocery store Oh There's nothing better Pretty good It's good You see the knife and fork No no nothing Yeah You like that's a good thing to do When you just want to be completely distracted That's what I like When I like watching people make like tables Yes Furniture and shit Is that That the horse hoof Cleaning is great I watch a tube Terriers What is that? Is that something? Some minutes I think I eat it Old times It must be It must be Like there's a nail on his hoof Oh get it out Get it out Get the gunk out Help the horse Yeah and the horse loves it That's a good one What else is good Uh the pressure washing is kind of fun That's what I'm really high I take an edible I just wash a guy He's just washing a wall And it goes from black to us To cement Yeah Very nice Thirty two million Thirty two million Okay So what is that? Why we so interested In watching people clean up horse hooves Well I think part of it is It doesn't hurt the horse And it looks like it would So that's kind of fascinating Because it's all what is that? Like cartilage What's all like fingernail stuff? I guess The giant fat fingernails Wow That's what it's like I mean that's what a horse hoof is And if they don't take care of the hooves They get real weird And they look like Like Arab shoes Were they like curl up at the tips? Right, right They're like that Like that There it is So this must be somebody just like completely neglected that poor horse But what did the horse is doing the They were off from running around Oh I see Yeah just like a dog's fingernails Like you have to trim your dog's nails Unless the dogs run around outside a lot And then you don't have to do anything Got it Dogs all hair It's like rat teepee now They never stuck growing Rat teeth don't stop going But beaver teeth don't right Is that right? I didn't know Shearing shoes Oh this is good stuff Wow Isn't it amazing how many views How many let me views is that how? I guess Yeah 23 million I'm gonna go on A million subscribers on the channel I'm gonna go on 80 million Three million subscribers 3.7 million Oh wow This is just a great guy Look at that There's another guy that I love It's the channel's called wilderness cooking Mm And this guy lives in Azerbaijan And he cooks in the mountains He always looks delicious And then at the end of it he has a bite of it And he looks at you and he goes Super He like, let's give you a thumb up Yeah It's a great channel And that guy's got millions and millions of people This dude So he's always like he catches fish And he does all the things He makes his own fire And he's always cooking in weird ways Let's see this guy's way happier than all of us Oh yeah, he's having a good time Well he lives in peaceful mountains He's making delicious food Imagine him on cameo Just saying super He could make a Billion dollars Yeah but It's his happy birthday Super Wow Who makes the most of cameo? They're still doing that Yeah Really? Who's like the number one earner on cameo? That's a great question Sure, Dino might had a run It's got to be somebody with a catchphrase Is Jimmy Walker still alive? Oh yeah Is he still touring? I had a badge and I don't know how he pays the bills These old guys you wonder how they have money Right Can that last Like how long does Dino might You know what I worry about? Guys were like middle acts 20 years ago And this faded out Like what are you doing? I assume Uber I mean, Uber I mean, Uber John Kirakow John Kirakow is number one That's crazy So he does cameos Who's that? I mean, who that is Who are all the John Kirakow Yeah Former CIA guy went to jail What? Yeah They put him in jail A golfer Oh you know him? And he's number two How much money is he making? I mean, he does a lot Of these He is always in the fight Like with Santa During Christmas time And John Grins been up here for a while But he's not currently on here Oh that dude soy Teet The guy who sings Oh yeah, he's fun Yeah And then Who's red? Is that one of the island boys? Who's that guy in the lower left corner? Oh wow, those guys are still at it Then the rest of these I don't know who they are So John Kirakow costs $179 For one of those Oh Bam And our garrows and bram Who else is in there? Anybody you know? No No Names they do not reckon I'm McFoeley Interesting Oh red dead redemption guy Oh Nick Foley the uh wrestler There you go How odd What did we're in odd thing? Who's buying a wrap-up port? President Donald Trump parody Is number three seven Rapper Rapper port He's screaming enough for free Why would you bother? Oh, the buffer is going to be up there Poor Spuffer Yeah Of course 49 I've seen people in a hotel They've heard him doing them Oh yeah, I've seen them I've seen them I've seen them I've been with them They're doing them How crazy is the story with his brother? Crazy Is it that bananas? That kind of shit blows my mind Didn't even know his brother till they were like 30 And they just found each other with the voice Both fighting Yeah Well he was like the budget buffer In the beginning Like he was like If you couldn't afford Michael You got Bruce But now Bruce is way better than Michael No disrespect to Michael But Michael gets You know, Michael's smooth Yeah Let's get ready to rumble Which is perfect for boxing But Bruce is perfect for MMA Yeah he's got more players Fuck in height Oh yeah he's got the suit on He's got to drop dead doing that one day We've all called it Because he gets beat red And now he's like deep in his 60s Oh yeah I don't know how old he is Any parties too I think Bruce parties? Oh yeah How do you know? There's a bunch of videos of him He got no fist fight In an elevator with an MMA fighter Oh that was a Frank trick Yeah Yeah Kind of a fist fight Like a little bit of a pushing shoving Probably Frank trick would literally kill him I know that's why I'm impressed Because he stood up to him Frank trick was a animal when he was young Yeah I would not find that guy I think it was when Frank was still fighting That's crazy I don't think Frank really fought him back Ah I think that was a very quick encounter But just the fact that he was up for it I don't know what really happened I think the story's online somewhere Yeah It's Bruce's version of the story Yeah that's true I mean I don't know Not that Bruce was lying Bruce might have thought he was in a fight And Frank might have thought it was hilarious Right I don't know Yeah But Bruce did martial That's true. I mean, I don't know. Not that Bruce was lying. Bruce might have thought he was in a fight and Frank might have thought it was hilarious. Right, right. I don't know. Yeah. But Bruce did martial arts in most of his life. The craziest coincidence of all and get your fingers ready, JMO. Dennis the menace the cartoon was invented in England and in America on the same day. What? Put that in your pipe and jizz on it. Get that cooking. Oh, yeah. Because they were like, oh, you must have stolen this. So they went back and researched it. They were both invented. Same character, same name on the same day in the same year. That makes no sense. Is that bananas? My brain blew up. That literally makes no sense. It's crazy. So that's a fun one. How is that possible? I don't know. Just, you know, monkeys right on a typewriter eventually get Shakespeare. Two guys think of the same thing. Same thing. Same thing. Cross the pond. Maybe that's one of those things. Like what is that called? Like, um, like, baron steamed bears, the mandala. Oh, yeah. That's not the same thing. Because that's like when it's not real. This is something that's real. That's true. Right. That's right. Right. No, I'm thinking of the wrong thing. Yeah. What does perplexity say? Our lovely AI sponsor, perplexity says there's actually two completely separate tennis, the men's comic strip characters that debuted almost simultaneously in 1951 created independently in the UK and the US. So how would they even know about each other back then? Oh, sorry. It's 17th and 12. So they're five days apart. Who started first? British was the 17th. Okay. On sale. Issue dated 17 March on sale 12 March, created by these guys, American on 12 March. No. Like basically the same day on sale on sale the same day. Unbelievable. One here. Overalls. I see my images. And it said, hold, go back to what the saying was again. It said, your son is a menace. Is did they both say that? No. I don't know. Wow. Both machinues, these little boys, but they look different. UK Dennis has black hair. Red and black jumper. US Dennis blonde hair overalls. They live in different fictional worlds. Creators worked entirely independently. No evidence either knew about the other before publication. So it's treated as a famous coincidence rather than copying. Wow. Unreal. There they are side by side. That kind of shit is kooky. It's weird. It's like when rats, you like, if you teach a rat how to get out of a maze on the east coast, rats on the west coast get out of the maze quicker. No fucking way. Yeah. There's a guy named Rupert Sheldrick who calls it Morphic Residence. He thinks there's some sort of like communication that all animals have with each other all over the world that we can't quantify. They can't measure, but it seems real. Yeah. Well, apparently I got caught in ant pile when I was a kid and all the ants swarmed on me and they all bit me at once. I felt that I was like, ah, it was just one big just wave of pain. Oh, yeah. They communicated. Well, ants just immediately attacked those since you've get on the ant hill. But ants are there on another level. You hear about the lady that fell. She was her parachute didn't deploy, but she landed in an ant pile of fire ants. No, she survived because she was bit like a thousand times for these fire ants. And somehow or another, the ant bites and he had dremelin that caused it. Help. Hey, don't jump down. Stay up there, buddy. Is what would kept her alive. What? Yeah. Wow. That's when you start going religion shit. I know like how did you that happened? Stay up here, buddy. Stay up here. Ant bites. Yeah, 1999. Her parachute malfunction. She fell 4,500 feet. Her backup parachute opened at 700 feet, but quickly deflated. She continued to plummet towards the ground at 80 miles an hour. Miraculously, she survived the fall. Thanks to the fact she landed directly on a mound of fire ants. Doctors believe the intense shock of being stung over 200 times by the ants released a surge of adrenaline, which cut her heart beating. Oh, it's like a clear, she got clear by ants. Then nuts. That is kooky. It's like when those guys jump off the Golden Gate Bridge and a seal, a guy jump off, broke all his bones and a seal pushed him to the shore. Whoa. That's in the documentary, the bridge. And... Fredimand did that, really? Yeah, he killed himself. It's the number one spot to kill yourself. Yeah, RIP Tony and a Goni. He's a buddy mine that was a professional pool player that I did commentary with him on a pool match in the 90s. He was in a book called Playing Off the Rail. There's a great book by this guy, David McCumber, who was Hunter S. Thompson's editor. Ah. In... I want to say Seattle, something like that. I forgot what newspaper, but when Hunter was off the rails and out of his fucking mind, it was another different kind of off the rail. Right. So he followed my friend Tony all across the country, gambling. It's a great book about like pool hustling. Yeah. Tony was like a world class professional pool player and they went around the country gambling. And I don't know what happened with him, but I lost touch with them. And then... Was he Golden Gate? Yeah. Oh, damn. It's like they all know to go there. Well, he was a San Francisco guy. He lived up there his whole life. And I got this message from a friend mine. Tony jumped off the bridge. I was like, no. Wow. Crazy. Well, it's weird. Because I watch matches sometimes on YouTube and he's doing the commentary for the match. Oh, that's crazy. It's so strange because he seems so happy. He's enjoying himself. They're cracking up. And I'm like, what is it that makes someone want to end it? You know, what is it? Like what was... I guess he had like some failed business ventures and he was going bankrupt. And... Well, depression is, you know, way more... Un-researched back then. Yeah. You know, he probably just thought, oh, something's wrong with me. I gotta end this pain. Yeah. But damn. But yeah, everybody who lived, they said, each of them said separately, right when my hand left the rail, I was... I regretted it. Oh, yeah. They all say that. Everything along. They all say that. Yeah. Everybody who lives. So don't do it. It's a terrible idea. Yeah. Do you remember the one in downtown LA where the guy was like on... I think he shot himself a shotgun. He was like standing on the edge of a bridge and it was live on TV. Do you remember that one? Yeah. He was like a standoff. They were trying to get him a not jump and he had a shotgun. I'm like... I think I'm conflating it. Pull it up. But I'm pretty sure he blows brains out on TV. Damn. I knew about the fat guy with the gun in the mouth. Oh, yeah. The politician guy. Was he a judge? Was he a judge? Was he a judge? Dirty judge? Yeah. Yeah. That song he made a nice shot. Exactly. Yeah. And that was a hot video when I was a kid. Oh, yeah. What is it? Taste of death or... Face is... Face is dead. But... That's it. Yeah. That's a good thing. Yeah. I mean, the round that he was supposedly shot with was a 30-odd-six, which is a big round. That's a round that you kill a moose with. Uh-huh. And it doesn't even have an exit wound. Right. It doesn't make no sense. It makes zero sense. Well, you hear about this joke, Kent? Yeah. Yeah, they told him not to research or investigate. Yes. So what's up with that? He said that they were told to stop their investigation and that they were going to handle it. And he just resigned. Meanwhile, have they handled it? Like, we haven't seen that guy. The guy who loves furries, who supposedly killed Charicar? Tyler Robinson. Yeah. Yeah. We haven't seen him talk. No. He hasn't said he did it. He hasn't said he didn't do it. There's no... No one, like, independent video of him talking about it. Yeah. And then there was footage of him, like, at a yogurt shop. Right. Like, way across town, like, 20 minutes later. The whole thing is, like, super sus. It's similar what the guy who shot Trump, whatever his name was. He had three names. Oh, yeah. That kid was in a black rock commercial two years before. Exactly. He had no silverware and, like, a... His house was professionally scrubbed. And no one can ask questions about that. We can't deep dive on that. Did you do your conspiracy theory? I shot a presidential elect. Well, not only that, but isn't that a fucking conspiracy? Like, that's a conspiracy. Right. Inspired to murder the president of the United States. Yeah. It seems like he had help. Of course. Did he get up onto that roof? How do they not have people on that roof? They said the slope was too steep. Yeah. And you know, there were snipers on another roof that had a sharper angled roof. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And then he has no social media. Yeah. And he has no history. It's all cookie. Super suspect. Yeah. We can't ask questions. Or else we're assholes. Well, not only that, though, the cookie people online now think that that was staged. Right. And that, you know, Trump had that guy shoot his ear. Like, you don't know. Jack shit about guns. If you think that that was staged. I will say the flag going up with the photo op was pretty, was pretty perfect. But sometimes that's like Dennis the menace. Shit just lines up perfectly. I guess so. You know what I mean? Sometimes weird stuff happens. Yeah. They like, how is this so perfect? Right. Right. But yeah, we got to get to the bottom of it. He got shot in the ear, man. I saw his fucking ear. He had like a little mark on his ear. Yeah, I remember that. Get Nick Shirley on this shit. He's cracking all kinds of cases. Bro, the stuff that he just found in California is bonkers. If you see that guy in your town, you're fucked. Yeah. Well, persistent little cleaf. Would you see what the governor posted with Newsom's press office posted? They posted a photo of Nick Shirley, like a fake Nick Shirley, like a meme. Like Nick Shirley peeking into it. I saw that. I was like, hey, he's doing your job. He's uncovering fraud. And what you're doing is mocking him. Right. You should go, oh, shit. This fraud. Yeah, I'm the governor. They should just open up the investigations into all these places immediately, if you care. But all they want to do is just obfuscate, cover it up, make it look silly. Yeah. Make it look like he's something, whatever he is. White supremacist. Right. Right. Right. Maxie, whatever. Magga, come up with a name. I don't want to get to it. My kids at a Somali daycare right now. So I don't want to. I don't want to say anything crazy. But yeah, that was that was all cookie. And look, I don't know what's real or what isn't anymore. You know, if you ask questions, you're this, you get labeled. I don't know. Yeah. So wacky time and yeah, it's happy. It's a time where we've never had more information and no one's less sure about it. Yes. And the same with loan, we're more lonely than ever. And we have more connectivity than ever. Yeah, but it's the kind of connectivity that people have. Just it's not. That's why I'm off social media. It's just not good for you. It's not. No. I hop on to post things and I get the fuck out of there. But you seem to know us a ton of stuff. So I'm like, how are you off social media, but also denolatable Google news feed and then things that inform people send me. I have rely on people sending me things now, which is way better. Because everybody's always sending you things that are you've seen this shit? Holy fuck. I say it's up yesterday about that. Always. YouTube. Delete it. I don't think they did. Oh, really? Yeah, I think it's back. Or if it was deleted, it was pulled back up. Mm. The Nick Shirley thing. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Because other people said I found it. It's right here. So it might have just been a glitch. Right. Or it might have been they thought about deleting it. And someone said, that's going to make it worse. Exactly. Exactly. It definitely makes it worse. But if it is true, I don't know if at all it all is true with the fraud and everything. But I'm like, can we stop it? Can we get the money back? Can we help people who are paying taxes, who are not getting anything out of it? And it's all going to some guy in a cyber truck? Like, where's the redemption? Where's the come up and so the? Well, this is the thing that Elon must told me about during the doge stuff. He said the biggest fraud in this country's Medicare fraud. Medicaid fraud. He's like, in that, if that gets, he gets like, yeah, I don't even want to talk about it. Because I don't want them to kill me. Well, he literally said that. He's like, we're talking about hundreds of billions of dollars in fraud. But don't we have the worst health care or whatever? Yeah. Huh. But it doesn't matter. It's not about actual health care. It's about using the system to extract money and pretending you have a daycare, pretending you have a hospice, pretending you have this and that. And really, you're just lying about who's there and collecting checks from the government. Because if you have a bunch of clients, like there was one place in Minneapolis that was saying they were feeding like 5,000 people a day. They never saw more than 40 people there. They investigated like, this is just, they're just taking money. Yeah. And they're getting millions and millions. Millions. It's crazy. But you got to think if this thing has been going on for so long, they probably have a whole system. No one's ever investigated it. It's been happening for over a decade. And they just like, this is what we do. And they're all just cashing in. Yeah, but I don't know. My friend lives in Minneapolis. He's an old pal. And he's like, I've known Tim Walz my whole life. He was always the governor. And he's a nice guy. But then you see this shit. You're like, so is he stupid or is he corrupt? Well, you can know someone and think they're a nice guy because they're a nice guy to you. You know what I mean? Right. I know a lot of people and people say that guy's a piece of shit. I'm like, maybe. But to me, all I can judge is how he treats me. And he talks to me. But he's going to talk different to me than he's going to talk to people that don't matter. Right. To him. Yeah. And you only know of his online perception. Tim Walz just seemed weird. Like, there's no humans that I know like that, that wave like that, that Walker like this. It's just not normal behavior. Yeah. And he stopped his run for reelection. I saw that. Because of this Minneapolis fraud. Ooh. So there's something to it. But he just wants some acknowledges. He just wants them to go like, jeez, that is crazy. Holy shit. But instead, it's like shut it down. Don't listen to that guy. Exactly. Just stop making me feel crazy. You're not crazy. It's real. It's real. I mean, maybe naturally, maybe 100% of it isn't fraudulent that he uncovered. Maybe some of it's legit. But there's definitely some fraud involved. And it's enough that you realize like, this is, you're talking about enormous amounts of money. And right. How long has this been going on? I know. And also, who's getting paid? Is anybody getting backdoor deals? Is there any offshore accounts that other people have access to? Exactly. And they're funneling money and no one knows about it. Well, it's paper trail to shit and get to something. We don't make any arrests. Like all the Epstein guys are out there. In England and Norway, they popped a few guys. Well, that was what the doge stuff was all about. That was the whole purpose for it all. Yeah. The whole purpose for the doge stuff was to try to uncover a lot of this stuff. And they found fucking tons of it, hundreds of billions of dollars in fraud. And what happened to those guys? Those guys are getting questioned now. OK. And the guys, the doge guys are having to give testimony. You shut down important government. Right. And they're like, actually, these fucking things then nothing was getting done. And these people were making enormous amounts of money. Mm-hmm. It's like, did you see that fucking bridge that they're building in California? I did. The wild line outlines. Yeah. It's over $100 million. I know. They need more money. For a fucking bridge. I know. Meanwhile, Colorado built one, a similar one, for a fraction of the cost. Not because $5 million. Yeah. Fracks on the cost. Yeah. And completed it. Right. And it's done. And in California, like, we need more money to save the Fox. Well, there's so many regulations that you can't get this so much red tape you can't get anywhere. It's a little bit of that. They're blaming tariffs in the government. But shut up. Shut up. I doubt that's what it is. I doubt it's $100 million. And you can't finish it because of tariffs that don't make any sense. We're still waiting on the bullet train. That started 25 years ago. That was billions. Billions. Billions. Still not done. Nothing. Meanwhile, Japan is whizzing all over the place at light speed. You're seeing, I think it's in China. There's one that they debuted. They showed in China. And it's just whizzing by these people. And you get to see how fast it is in real time. We're standing next to it. No. It's bonkers, dude. Man. It's just shiming. And you just think the problem with that is how much track is there? There's a lot of track. Yeah. How many psychos are out there? They could just lay something on the track. Well, that's more American. They don't do that shit. They're raised better. Someone can do it. They could. But they're Japanese. They're repressed. So they get it all out with those trains. It's like Nick Shirley. He's a virgin. So he's motivated. Yeah, that's weird, right? It is a little weird. But I rather an insult do that shit than shoot up a place. But there's a lot of these virgin influencers now. Yeah. Nick Fuentes is a virgin. Allegedly. Yeah. We skies of virgin. I don't trust. I don't know. What are these virgins? That feels unnatural. Come and lay. You're young. You're very unnormal. Very, very strange. Very. It's like Zoran. I don't trust it. Indian who never had a job. Ah. Is he Indian? Yeah. Mom Donny? I believe he's Indian. Is he? Oh, yeah. So what do you see in the US? I think he's from Africa. But he's from Africa. Yeah, he's from Africa. But have you never had a job? Every Indian guy knows the hardest working dude on the planet. He's never had a job at all. No. I think he was a rapper. Mom Donny's never had a job. No, I don't believe so. This is first gig. That's crazy. I know. It's. I think he's the first gig. You're the mayor of New York City. I want him super impressive. Very impressive. First gig. Why did it go? This guy's the limit for this guy. I know. His first job. He's the mayor. Of New York City. Yeah. It's like losing your virginity to, you know, Heidi Klum. I think he won because he said he's not going to Israel. That was smart. And affordability. Yeah. New York's so expensive. Well, so yeah, people were like, we're tired of the. Well, the narrative is the rich people are crossing on your problems. And we can tax the rich people. The rich people in New York are responsible for more than 50% of the taxes. Sure. Well, Hoku just said, please come back. Did you see that clip? Good luck. Good luck. Good luck. And I think he seems like a nice guy. I think he's got good intentions. But it just, you know, you need some experience and you need money because he keeps saying free free buses, free health care, free childcare. And you're like, stop saying free. That should be illegal because someone has to pay for it. Right. There's nothing free. Nothing is free. the bureaucracy. You're adding to the government waste. You're adding to the possibility of fraud. Yeah. And while you're just releasing people on the streets. Yeah. And I think I have a theory that Muslim is cool. Muslim is like the new black. It's cool. Muslims hip now. It's different. It's exotic. It's fun. I think the problem is people can flake Muslim and Islamist. And there's two very different things. I know a lot of Muslims. They're great people. Totally. Islamist are people that want a global caliphate. And they want, you know, they want death to the infidels. This is the difference between Iran and like Saudi Arabia. Mm hmm. Saudi Arabia or Muslims, the Iranians are Islamists. Right. State sponsor terrorism, the whole deal. Yeah. Well, any extreme, you know, like a Hasidic Jew versus Paul Rudd. Yeah. Paul Rudd's a fun guy has a cocktail. He's a funny movie. And then a Hasidic Jew is like, all right, let me cut your foreskin off and suck the blood. Right. Give your herpes or these crazy fucking right wing radical Christian nationalist. Mm hmm. That's the thing that we're supposed to be over in Israel so that Jesus can come back on a white horse. Have you seen that? Oh, no. Oh, Jamie, pull that story up that I sent you. I could resan it to if you want. There's a crazy story that was on Yahoo about this guy who's a non commissioned officer that went to a military debriefing. So it was like an operation readiness meeting or a war meeting. And one of these fucking guys, one of these high level commanders says don't be worried because Trump is anointed by Jesus Christ to bring back the return. Oh, no. To bring back Jesus's return on earth, commander claimed Trump was anointed by Jesus to cause Armageddon to justify the Iran tax. Wow. See, that's like up there where the Allah will protect me. Exactly. It's the same shit. It's just coming from a different religion. Yeah. But it's the same mindset. Like look what he said, um, see what he said. Did you find the actual quote? He urges tell our troops this is all part of God's divine plan specifically reference numerous citations out of the book of revelations referring to Armageddon and the imminent return of Jesus Christ. Oh, yeah. And he said at the superior had a big grin on his face when he said all of this, which made his message seem even more crazy. Wow. Bro. Scary. That's just scary. Those are just as scary as suicide bombers. It's like people that are like true believers. Yes. Something that objectively sounds a lot like nonsense. I would say this less blowing up shit with the extreme Christian. Sure. Because they won. Go back to the Inquisition. And they were fucking torturing people. And that's a good point. People for, you know, for God's word or for, you know, for God's service and service of God have done some wild shit. Oh, yeah. But it's just people, you know, it's just people when they get into positions of radical belief, they just, they go nutty. Yeah. It's like a cult. The cult is just a microcosm of a full religion. Exactly. You know, it's just some crazy guy who's like, I'm going to fuck all of you and then we'll drink Kool-Aid. I used to do a joke about it where I said, a cult is a thing where a guy creates it. And that guy knows its bullshit. In a religion that guy's dead. Wait a minute. Yeah. Oh, I see. The religion, the guy created his death. Oh, right. Right. So it's like everybody just believes. Yeah. But if in a cult, you know, like David Karrash or, you know, the, the, the, the blank, the moonies, whatever it is. Yeah. So he got created it. And he knew its bullshit. Yeah. So science fiction author completely. He's around Hubbard. But now he's dead. So it's a religion. They have tax free, exempt status. That's good. Did they're exempt from taxes? It's not a trilogy. No. Yes. That's not like an affordable, that real estate in LA. They have so much real estate. Crazy buildings. Yeah. Crazy, downtown. And that's the nuttiest thing about Elrod Hubbard. He's like, he was one of the worst authors of all time. Oh, he stinks terrible. And he's a weird-looking dude. I think he beat his wife. Did he? Oh, yeah. He's a bad guy. I'd say that because he's dead. I watched a little documentary on him. He's a troubled individual. Well, he was definitely troubled, which is why he came up with Dianetics in the first place. Where he's trying to self-diagnose. He was trying to fix his own brain. But it also shows how sad and sheep-like people are because we're like, we need something. I need something to believe in, something to go for. I'll support you. Well, it was so lost that anybody who comes along that confidently claims they have the answer. People just follow. Yep. Very good. Very odd. It's like, I think it's programmed into us just like from the time that we were in tribes and we had a count on the chief to be correct. Right. But I'm sure you got some, some psychos who are up your ass. Who believe everything I say? Yeah, because you're so big. You got such a big umbrella. Yeah, but I'm very clear that I don't know what I'm talking about. That's the key. And if I do, it's like very specific thing. So I'm like, I can tell you for sure that this is a fact. Right. But I'm an expert in a few things. But other things, I'm like, you know, don't listen to me. Yeah. But this is what I think. Well, you're one of the few guys who will go up. You know what I said last week? That was wrong about that. You have to. Nobody does that. You got it. Well, because they're all, they all just want to be right all the time. Yes. And they all, they all connect their identity with being correct about whether it's COVID. Right. I COVID ruined a lot of people's credibility. 100%. They were all in on the vaccine, all in on this, all in on the lockdowns, all in on the masks. And once it was revealed that all that stuff was bullshit, the vaccine did really prevent infection. Didn't really, those people just never came out and said, you know, when I was wrong, I know. And that would go so far, but nobody will do it. And then the right and the left, they both just want their side to win. So they're like, just exactly. It's like when the ball goes out of bounds on your team, you're like, I didn't see shit. Exactly. And then the other team's like, what are you crazy? We got video footage. Yeah. It's cheating. You're cheating in the game of discourse. Right. Right. Yeah. The game of discourse is you're supposed to say what you really think. And then when you think something, definitely say, okay, I was wrong. Yes. You have to be able to say I was in misinformed. I thought it was this, but it's actually that. Yeah. That's why those videos are so fun when they go to a college campus. Like, can you believe what this Trump said this? And they go, that's racist. He's a piece of shit. And they go, actually, it was Biden. And then they go, oh, what are you going to do? I got class in a minute. I got to go. You're all vote for me. You ain't black. Yeah. There we go. He's got a couple of end words too out there, buddy. Oh, yeah. Pull it up. Biden had a few. Well, I remember when he called African-American super criminals. Right. Whoa. Super predators. That was during the 1994 crime bill, which is he was really responsible for a lot of that. Mm-hmm. The 94 crime bill, and people forget about that. Like during the Clinton administration, like Clinton in a lot of, Clinton was a great president. Yeah, sure. What he did balance the budget. Great Godhead in the office, but yeah, let it go. Or a loss. Let it go. Yeah. Let it go. But other than that, like he did a lot of things that were really good. But one of the things that he did that wasn't really good was the 94 crime bill. So many people wind up going to jail for a few lives. That's true. That they ruined so many families, so many lives lost. Yeah. People that could have turned their life around never got a chance locked up forever. The end deported a lot of people too. Oh, yeah. That was much more. It was Biden. Excuse me, not as much as Obama. Well, yeah, he was the king of that. Not only did Obama deport more people than Trump, they arrested more Americans accidentally than Trump. Yeah, the percentage of Americans arrested was higher. And also the deaths were higher. Also, he had two terms. True. You're thinking about that. True. Yeah. But nobody got shot in the street. What do you mean? Like his ice didn't shoot anybody. That's I know of. No, they did. They did come up. People. Yeah, they killed people. Civilians. I don't know if it was civilians or if it was actual illegals that they were trying to port, but there was definitely a bunch of people that were killed. I want to say it was somewhere in the range of 30. 30. Yeah. Well, no social media back then either. Right. That's big. Big. That changed everything. They could cover up everything back then. But when you like to talk to Obama and go, ah, come on. That was crazy, right? Well, Marin talked to Obama and he just kind of softballed him. You know, he just was like, he let Obama just kind of talk. Well, he did it recently. He did it twice in both both times. It was kind of the same thing. But he is an icon and he was a good president and he seems like a cool guy. He was a very good statesman. Yes. Right. The way he talked was great, but he also said he was going to protect whistleblowers and he went back on all that. They even removed that part of the hope and change website. Whoa. The hope and change. His hope and change website when he was running for president was all about removing whistleblowers. So was it say here? No documented case of ICE agents directly killing anyone. There you go. Such as through shootings or excessive force during Obama's presidency. However, 56 individuals died in ICE custody over that period. Well, he did the case. Okay. So that's how they died. So it wasn't shootings primarily from medical issues. Like they had lead poisoning from bullets. Inadequate care or whoops, he hung himself in a two foot cell with reports, highlighting substandard medical treatment, contributing to at least eight cases between 2010 and 2012. Most custody deaths under Obama were attributed to natural causes, heart disease. Well, you definitely you're dealing with a lot of people that snuck in. Not suicides, hanging or violence by agents. Uh huh. Interesting. Interesting. And what's up with that wife dick? Ah. Just 11 ebooks. I wish that was true. I know. It'd be so fun. Just a goof. I think the French one's true. The chef? No. Candice Owens. Well, when she was saying that, uh, no, get out of here. Wife is a man. Come on. Yeah. No way. Yeah. I don't think so. I don't, I might be wrong. I mean, she's a little, uh, sometimes odd. She's odd. She's a little transy. Yeah. But I don't see the way she sits. Pull it up. I have not. She's like a dude. No. Well, man's spread. Yeah, man's spread. All right. Odd alignment of the hips. And she's very masculine. You know, that's why men sit like that. It's not because we're dicks. It's like her legs go out like that. Yeah. Women's legs go inward. Sure. Because they have birthing hips and the angle is different. I thought it was the ball bag. Well, it's a little bit of it. Yeah, you airing it out a little bit. Whereas a woman has a clams. So she's this. They have birthing hips and the angle is different. I thought it was the ball bag. Yeah. Well, it's a little bit of it. Yeah, you airing it out a little bit. Whereas a woman has a clam, so there's no resistance. Well, that's why you don't trust guys who sit like Ari. But that leg over the top, that cross-legged thing. Yeah, and ironically he's got a huge bag. He's got a big bag and a big cock. Crazy, you can chew hog on that guy. Little baby arm. Big old fucking sack. He's doing good. He's doing good down there. Watch how she sits. Boom. Oh, yeah. Yeah, wow. That's how a dude sits. That was a manly sit. Leaving the walk, even though stature, the skeletal frame, everything. Looks like John Davis. Looks like a guy with tits. Right? Boom. Look how it sits. But that's not the weirdest thing. Come on. The weirdest thing that everybody accepts the fact that they started their relationship when she air quotes was 40. And he was like 14 or 15. That's crazy. Ah, that's crazy. Is that was reverse guy to girl? Right. That would be a headline. Exactly. Big time. But it's French. It's in France. Right. Ah, we had different in France. They're sexual people. They didn't fuck with me too. In France, they were like, no, no, we like to be in. We take the whole country down. Yeah. Yeah. Man and women. Look, that's a woman's, right. Italy to take it down, take it all down. Italy's like we hit the ladies and we cat call. That's our thing. Oh, they're animals. Oh, yeah. I was in Rome with my kids in a taxi. It was just me and my kids. And this fucking driver of the taxi stopped the car in the middle of an intersection to cat call some lady. No way. He had a big ass who was walking with us. He's a monomone. You're a monomone. A me. Look at that. And he just kept driving. I was like, these people are animals. It's kind of charming with that voice, though. It is. But you got to realize like if you're in Rome, these are the descendants of the people that were there when the Colosseum was running. Sure. These are the people that were there when the fucking Roman games, when Rome was conquering the world, of course, they're savages. Right. Right. Of course, they're descendants of savages, direct descendants of some of the most savage people that ever walked to face of the earth. Yeah, those gladiators are Roman Empire. They fought lions. They took over everything. Right. And then they got the Vatican right there, which is a weird fucking country that's in the middle of their city. I think that's good balance. They got crazy shit with the orgies, the wine, and then the gay stuff, and then they got the Vatican. That's to me, that's kind of healthy. Jesus gives you a free pass. You just got to say you're sorry. Right. He's got to confess. Best loophole of all time was that confessionable shit. I think they did that just to get information on people in the town. Find out what they were doing. That's true. Yeah, God says it's OK. You still go to heaven. You're going to tell the priest and the priest like immediately went and told the mayor. Oh. Yeah. That's warming. 100%. Never thought of it that way. Of course. How else would you get people to tell all the dirty shit that they're doing, all the crime they're committing? Oh, God. That's the way you get them. I went to Catholic school. I told those fuckers everything. Did you? I was in the box going, I jerked off. If I had to, she's got huge tits. I really went off in there. It was like a podcast. I never got to sit in one. I went to Catholic school only for one year, when I was first grade. Did you make it out? Oh, I made it out. And I was like, I'm never going back again. It's queared me off of religion forever. That's a weird dirt because this is not real. Of course. This lady, I don't remember anybody's name from the time when I was six, but Sister Mary Josephine, I'll remember that cunt till the day I died. Oh, yeah. She was so mean. And I was so confused because I had only been with my mom and my dad and my grandparents were all nice to me. Yes. I'd never been around anybody mean to me. Right. And then all of a sudden around this vicious bitch who's supposed to be like the person of God. Exactly, but they would wrap your knuckles. I think they were all repressed or something. Oh, 100%. They needed some vitamin D. Yeah, get that dick. Yeah, get that dick. That didn't get that dick. That's a crazy rule too. You can't fuck. And you know why they came up with that rule? No. Because all the priests were fucking everybody. Because they were the rock stars. Whoa. They were the guy who talks to Jesus. He's the guy on stage. Yeah. The guy on stage. Homin is homily long. Right. And he's just, look, you know, more. And then they decided, hey, you can't fuck if you want to be a priest. But then they went to kids. Of course, that's what happens. You're only going to get gay guys or pedophiles who are interested in that. Uh-huh. The gay guys fuck each other. The pedophiles try to get the kids. Right. Because you get isolated time with the kids. Right. Like teachers. Like how many teachers get caught? One of my kids' schools, they just busted it. Get the fuck out of here. You can callabassas. Whoa. Do you point? My kid went and took this guy's classes for, I think, two or three years. What? Yup. He was taking up skirts, photos, inappropriate photos. He was jerking off to him and admitted that the photos made his heart race and seeing his kids as full on pedophile was a part of this very nice private school. Yeah. I think he was there for six or seven years. Did you meet him? I must have. Oh, my lord. I must have. You shook this guy's hand. I must have. He was my kid's teacher. I must have met him. I don't remember him. You got daughters. Uh-huh. Oh. Yeah. Mama. Luckily, nothing happened to them, but they remember he talked too much. Uh, and just went. My daughter said he just kept. He just wouldn't shut the fuck up. He talked too much. It's a bit in game. Ah. Well, what about these Florida horrors who keep banging the students? There's something that's like an epidemic going on. Can't even pass. I mean, look, I'm not knocking it, but that's different. I think that beats priests now. It's only OK if they're hot. Sure, but they some of them were like, damn, I fuck her. Exactly. Those are OK. I don't know about OK. But there's some big troll looking lady with their neck, their chin starts at her or neck goes straight down to her chest. Yeah. Some job of the hut looking beast. He'd be like, you monster. Right. What'd you do to that boy? But if it's some blonde lady with big tits and glassy eyes, like she's probably on SSR eyes. Didn't know what she was doing. Sure. And maybe like the husband can't get it up. And this is because the Vero 14-year-old basketball player or something. How about that lady who was a mayor? She was a mayor at some town in like Louisiana. And she was fucking some some some girls. That was crazy. And they show the husband all over the news. I'm like, it's poor fucking guy. What a cop. Poor fucking guy. Man. Fucking wife is getting bang by a high school basketball player. And she was pretty. She was not. Very pretty. Kind of milky. Kind of milky for sure. But that's the thing I have a bit about it. They never show the kid. I want to see that kid. Let's see. Is he in some kind of young stud? Yeah, a lot of them are. OK. But you just can't see them because they're in a it's an appropriate share underage and their victims. Of course. You're here Zack Galvanakis as joke. I died of high-fiving. Yes. That's a great joke. Great joke. He was a great joke writer. Oh, he's a great comic. Great comic. Alive from the purple onion. Yes. Great. I thought it's special. Right, especially. He had that thing where you could fake angry and play the piano. He was a good dude too. Good guy. He's a really good dude. Like every time I've had interactions with him, I'm like, this is a sai, he's like not Hollywood at all. No, no, he's a South Carolina guy. Bought a farm. Lives on farm now. Yeah. I mean, they're barely works. Yeah. He just kind of lives his life. I mean, he's kind of a phenom. Just stand up was good. And then he just like, you know, Todd Phillips fought for him in the hangover. They're like, we don't know this fucking guy. He's a nobody. And he's like, I'm telling you, this guy's good. And he stole the movie. Stole the movie. Yeah. No, he's a great comic. And that between two ferns then. Oh, it's brilliant. It's brilliant. Amazing. Brilliant. No, he's great. Yeah, he just gets you on. He got Seinfeld on. He's trashing him. He's trashing up. Paul Rudd. He's got like all these. That's great. He was a great friend to Brody too. Yes. When Brody was going through one of his moments where he got off medication and he got a little crazy, we started noticing it at the store. Like instead of being funny, he was on stage, he would actually get angry. It was like really weird. And he came back. But for there was a while where he was like really lost it and Zach reached out and he's like, don't interact with him. We're trying to get him treatment. We're trying to get him back on his meds. Like he went off his meds. I love it. He's a good dude. Good dude. There's a video out there. There out there. Yeah, there out there. He's solid people out there. He's a normal guy. And you could tell these Hollywood, I feel like Hollywood is like COVID where it fucks your brain up eventually. And he got out and moved far. Yeah. So that's how you know he's sane. But there's people that are in Hollywood that stay solid. Like when I had Matt Damon and Ben Affleck on, I was like, I'd be friends with these guys. Yeah, I listen to that one. They're normal off the mic. Yeah. They're cool. Like they're all over there and they're the lobby. They're regular. They talk to everybody. Like I've met Matt Damon a few times. I actually ran into him in Italy. It was really crazy. In a restaurant where he was sitting below a photo of him. Oh, wait. Because there's photos of all these celebrities that come and eat at this place. Yeah. And he was one of them. And he was there. And he was sitting there like, and then I met him before. So I go, he Matt. I go, he's like, oh, he's cool. He's normal. He's like a regular guy. Well, he hit the lottery with that script. I know, right? Yeah. Like good looking. They're nice. They're cool. They're smart. Yes. They're really like Ben Affleck is underrated intelligence. Like when he's talking about AI and what AI is actually promising versus what they're actually capable of what they're really trying to do is increase their market cap and get more money invested. I'm like, oh, clever. Clever. And I think he sold signed some deal with them for millions and like changed the game with Netflix. Big time. Yeah. I can try and dine to you. Big deal. That's what 600 million dollars I said. Was that for the rip? No, no, no, no, no, no. He sold an AI company. Oh, that's why you know so much about it. Oh, that makes sense. He kind of broke it down on here and then like two weeks later, he sold him. That makes sense. He's ahead of the curve of that guy. Yeah, both of those guys are good. And they just stayed friends forever. And banging JLo for that many years has got a, he gave it his best. I've maintained that horse. She's so. She's quite a glides now. Oh, I bet she's so fun though. Yeah, but I think she's malignant narcissist. Duh. But by the way, as soon as we stay that hot when you're 80 years old, Smokeshow. She's a Smokeshow. Yeah, that rump is a, a worthy. She could be a granny. And she looks fucking amazing. I want to put a blue ribbon on that, Heidi. You got to be a narcissist to keep that up. I guess so. I mean, the skin, her skin's perfect. How's it? And it doesn't look crazy like fillers. No. Naughty. It just looks like pure. Yeah. But it's just not aging. I know. That's, that's at the port of Reakin blood, I guess. It may be it's that's good genetics for sure. But it's also just upkeep and care and aware of where you look like and taking care yourself. Right. Like I saw one of those Instagram things where they showed people from like the 80s, how old they were. Yes, I see that. Like I see that bunker. Yeah. Archie Bunker when Ed O'Connell was playing garbage. He's 10 years younger than me. Carol O'Connor. Carol Connor. Yes, right. He was 10 years younger than me now. Whoa. Right. I think they did a cocoon one with pride. Right. And the at Bremley. Yes. See, like 48. 48. You know, Mrs. Robinson was 39. What? 39 in the graduate. And she's like the old bag. That's crazy. 39. I think a 39 year old is walking on six tree to look like, you know, Cindy Crawford. Right. I'm going to update my heart, women. Meghan Fox. There you go. I'm stuck in the 90s. Yeah. It's odd, man. Yeah. Look at that. She looked 39. I guess that's a Mel Brooks' wife, you know. Yeah, that's what 39 looked like. That looks like 69. I think she's pretty sexy. Not bad. Look at that. Not bad. Especially for someone who never went to the gym. Like 80s, they didn't do nothing back then. They walked. And the dudes too could be completely no definition and still be like a leading man. Right. The only way it was like really ripped back then was Charles Bronson. Wow. Yeah. That motherfucker. Yeah, but he wasn't even before he was an action star like that guy was just fit. Fit. He like, why are you? You know when he did hard times that movie? Yeah. He was 50. No. Yes. Wow. Yeah. That's impressive. Shredded. Well, all these, no TRT. That's not the golden girls. We're all playing like 10 years younger than what they were. Wow. That's nuts. Wow. That's nuts. 53. They were playing 79. She was 62. She was playing 53. But she was 63. Oh, wow. Wow. That was crazy. 53. And she was 52. That's crazy. She was one. B-Arthur. Rumaclanta. Wow. Fettie white. Is Betty white still alive? Nah, she kicked it. How old was she? I don't know. That guy. How? How? He's like J-Lo. He's the male J-Lo. I saw the stones at Circuit of the Americas. Mm-hmm. Couple years ago. Fucking incredible. Yeah. He still shreds. I know. Both of them. Funkers out there. Just dancing around. Yeah. You know, if Jack is not like standing still, like if you've seen, it was one of those old guys who was in Vegas. Like one of them guys from like the fucking 16. Like a way Newton type. Like a way Newton type. Yeah. What is his name? Paul Valley. Bro, it's like all lip syncing and he can't move his lips anymore. Yeah, I believe it. And he looks like a statue. Mm-hmm. It's odd. That is odd. Yeah, those guys are going to be in the middle. You know, Mick Jack is butt and yolleive. Banging, dancing, moving around. I mean, like, and they did a 90 minute show. Wow. Cranking it. He's got a very test tied to say this guy. Oh, this guy's dead water. Let me hear him in this. What is like Mitch McConnell? I mean, he's just stiff. But he's like a board. Yeah. You got any volume on this bitch? You're the best. I think we're going to talk about it. Oh, well, hats off. It's still go out there. Probably has to. He's got debt. Who's he? Barry, man. Oh, rough. Weird. Go to Barry manels Instagram. He sings, but he's got like filler. And it looks like his chin's disappearing. Ooh. And I don't know how old he is, but it's not that old. I go do this. Oh, they start to look trans. Guys, it's weird. It's like an animatronic. Yeah. It's like, that's what it's like. But that's not even a weird one. Go to his, his, the one on the far right. Whoa. Look at that. Listen to him talk. He's like Kermit the Frog. Look at his hair. Is there any chance? How much would you bet that that's a wig? Everything I own. It's all fake. Everything's fake. Everything. Face is like a guy. Let yourself just age. Don't do the filler in the boat. Now this is when he was younger. Yeah. This looks good. This looks legit. Wow. It's just when they start pumping stuff into their cheeks, it's just like look at you get stung by bees. It's just weird. It's weird. It's weird. Look. We all know just what he looks weird. It's like with worse. It's age. I know. We like age. With women it gets really strange because there's a thing that bodybuilders get and anorexics get body dysmorphia. Well, you can't see yourself the way other people see you. Right. So you don't realize that it's weird that your cheeks are that big. Yeah. Is that what it is? Oh, yeah. Well, you know when you're drawing something and you're painting and you're like, all right, it's done. I'll add a little more. I'll add a little more. And then before you know you ruined it. Well, you get obsessed with the little minutiae and you're just focusing on weird parts of your face. Yes. It's just maybe you got a weird little smile line right here. You don't like it. You're like, fill it in. Yes. It swells up. You're like, good. Yeah. And they get used to it. We see him after eight months and you're like, good God. Yeah. But they're just gradual. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So they don't realize how crazy. Do you know Ryan Gosling isn't our people accusing him of getting a bunch of stuff in his face now too. Like there was some photos of him on a red carpet. It looked real weird. I get the hair implants. I get it. Do that all day. But as a dude, you can age. Where I would look Jason Statham and all these guys. They look fine. Yeah. Let it go. Don't do the filler thing. It's just you're changing the shape of your face. It's also there's a ratio, the golden ratio of your face. When you do something weird to your face, it throws people off. Right. The width of your face and the closeness of your eyes, the size of your nose, all the fits within a certain ratio. And when that ratio is off, like when you have a really thin face with a small nose, everybody's like, hey, where's that already nose? Right. You see that big old beak that makes sense with this shape. We like a, I mean, look at Jennifer Gray. She cut her nose off. Lost her career. Lost her career. And she was a cute, you know, little... She's cute, you broad. Yeah, she had a big nose, like so much. She was beautiful. Beautiful. You don't have to like be perfect. Perfect. Ain't the way to go. Look at Bill Murray. That guy looks like an old fart. Yeah. I mean, he looks crazy, but it's Bill Murray. He's a cool guy. I love going. He's my childhood here. Are you really enjoy talking to him? Oh, yeah. You're a Bill. That must have been pretty nerve wracking for you, huh? No. No, it was cool. He was real easy. It wasn't nerve wracking. It was a little nuts when you first meet him. But he had no idea how it was. Whoa. He doesn't watch podcasts. Really? He had heard of me. He's like, your job? I'm like, yeah. Like, it wasn't bullshitting like some Hollywood people do. I'm sorry. Your name is? Right. He wasn't doing that. He's not, not online. Doesn't have a phone. He said he had to get a phone to talk to his kids. Whoa. That's a good one. Man. No, it doesn't have a phone. Woody. Woody, how else in? Really? You got to get a hold of him. You got to get through his wife. Damn. It sucks for the wife, though. He's happy. He's like, leave me out of everything. Yeah. You can't get a hold of him through email. Leave me out of it. He seems interesting. I remember that. That's an LED. He's just out of COVID shit. Yeah. That was interesting. Yeah. He's great. I saw my kill Tony once. He hangs out of the club all the time. Really? Yeah. He's in the green room all the time. But he hangs out normal. Like, talks to everybody. Doesn't big time anybody. Like, he's talking to door guys. He's talking to fucking everybody, normal. Damn. Yeah. He's cool. Cool. I mean, white man can't jump on my favorites. He's awesome. He's just, he's real. Like that guy's a real. I've hung out with him multiple times now. I really enjoy talking to him. There's a few of those guys. They may get through and they're still cool. But one thing that a lot of them have in common is they stay out of social media. They stay offline. They just live. Yes. They just live. Yeah. Well, how so? He's in the cloud. He meaning he's a pothead. All day. He's like with those rappers that call it, living in the cloud. I've never heard that. They're never not high. Like a little lane or something. There is a high all day. Constantly high. I don't know how they do that shit. I don't know how they do that shit either. Like those people just wake and bake and then go out and do stuff and then they just keep smoking. I mean, it's comics in the green room in New York. We'll just smoke weed for like three hours and then go on and do another set and they hang out. I'm like, if I smoke weed for three hours, I'd be crying in a fetal position. It's insane. Yeah, I wouldn't be getting anything done. No. You'd be so locked in your own head thinking about the world. But I think people's mental chemistry is different. For some people, I think weed is like a legitimate medicine that keeps them together. Yeah. And they're not hurting anybody. No. Why is it okay to be on SSRIs and Oxycontin, but it's not okay to just live in the cloud? It's a good point. Well, they're men. They're medicating a little bit. On a percent. I mean, that's what I was doing with alcohol as a teenager. I was so anxious and nervous and I wanted to fit in. I would just drink for like social lube. Most teenagers are doing that for the same reason. They want to be able to go to a party and relax. Yeah. I'm not feeling like everybody hates them or isolated or weird or who's judging me just weed. Yeah. Like my nephew, he's 16, never drank and he's a virgin. He's got no friends. He plays video games all day and he gives me shit for drinking. He's like, it's so unhealthy. But I'm like, this is unhealthy. You're just, you got, you got no friends. You never finger to girl. You don't go to parties. Nothing. It's weird that there's a lot of kids doing that now. 85% alcohol cells are 85% down with Gen Z. What? 85% is I just started a liquor. Yeah. So I'm fucked. But yeah, it's weird. I'm like, how do you cut loose? I think they're all scared of being cringe. They're all scared of being filmed. We were so lucky we could just get after it. Fuck up, drive drunk. I'm drunk. I think that's part of it. Somebody told me that kids don't dance at dances anymore because they're too scared of being go viral. Yeah, look at this white guy dancing like an idiot. cringe hashtag. I think that's part of it. So happy to catch people doing something. Yeah. And ruling their whole life. That gotcha culture. It's horrible. It's horrible. And the type of people that wanna do that, they should be shamed. Yes. That is a horrible behavior. 1,000% agree. That's where we're at. I mean, people scan videos just to be like, gotcha. Well, you said this. You said that. Let go through your old tweets, whatever it is. But we need to flip it and make those guys get in trouble. 100%. It's like when someone has a false rape accusation, how come they don't go to jail? You almost made a person go to jail. It turns out that they didn't do anything. And then you just skate. Yeah. That's insane. They were gonna go to jail forever. Forever for nothing. For nothing. For something you made up. Yeah. And then you just skate because you're a woman. I know. Or you're a guy. Sure. There's guys that have rape accusations against other men. Right. It's nuts. I know. It's a bummer. But I guess it's human nature. It's powerful. I don't know. I know. But we should punish the people that make fake claims. I agree. That's crazy. They should have to do half the time of the sentence. Like, think about the Amber Heard Johnny Depp thing. Yeah. He gets exonerated at the end of it. Everybody kind of sees her talk. And they go, oh, she made up a bunch of shit. He's okay. Right. But meanwhile, what happened to her? Nothing. Well, she was humiliated. But yeah, she lost the money, I guess. But when you falsely accuse someone of crimes, beating her. Like beating her? She got to make up lady to put shit on her. He could have gone to jail for 10, 15, 25 years. True. That's unusual. That psychopath. Tried to ruin his life. Like, that's what Jordan Peterson talks about that. That women are, they're experts in reputation destruction. That's what they like to do. And that's what she was trying to do with him. Well, they can't fight. Right. So that's kind of their way. You know when they kill people, you know how they do it for the most part? Any freeze in the oatmeal? Poison. Yeah. They get it slow over time. I was reading about this lady who wrote a book about helping her children get over grief. And she sold this book because her husband died. And then they just arrested her for poisoning her husband. Oh, my God. Yeah. Wow. Yeah, she killed them. She killed them in 2022. At least they got her. How they find out. She was like crocodile tears. It was so hard for me to lose my beloved Steve or whatever the same was. What did you see the Rebel Wilson thing? No, which one? Oh, J-mo. She's the cute guy of a sex trafficking. And she accused Sasha Baron Cohen of telling her to grab to finger his asshole. What? When meanwhile, what he really said, it's on camera, like she was supposed to grab his ass in a scene. And he said, you know, you stuck your finger right up my arse, like take it easy. And she said he told me to finger his asshole with something along those lines. Whoa. Yeah. Why would he say that? Well, he is Sasha Baron Cohen. Sure, sure. He says so. So what did she accuse someone of? She accused a guy of being a sex trafficker, I believe, with children. And they caught her on a hot mic or somebody on a hot mic saying they're the plan. They like spelled it out. What? And so she's in hot water. Well, she should be going to jail. Sure. Like that, you can ruin someone's entire life. Rebel Wilson versus the Deb. What's the Deb? I was the mother. Oh, OK. Four lawsuits explode as leaked audio, a legit smear campaign against producer. Well, she's another lady that used to be really big. And then she got kind of hot. She's slim, slim down a little bit. So what did they actually catch her? OK, it was. The producers. So she led just page six reported that dispute intensified after leaked audio raised questions about him. The alleged smear effort linked to a crisis PR team working on her behalf. Wilson used social media to accuse billionaire, Sir Len Blav Vaudevatnik, of funding both the film and the legal actions against her. Days back 2024, Wilson accused the films producer, including songwriter Amanda Ghost of inappropriate behavior towards the lead, played by Charlotte McInnis. She also accused them of embezzling funds from the film's budget, engaging in retaliatory behavior after she raised concerns and trying to block the film's premiere at the Toronto Film Festival. Yikes. Producers later filed a defamation suit against Wilson and Los Angeles. Wilson then filed a counter suit that expands it on her sexual harassment and embezzlement allegations. McInnis, is it McInnis? Yeah, McInnis publicly denied Wilson's claim that Ghost had sexually harassed her and then filed her own defamation suit against Wilson in Australia. Wow. So the lady she was saying was being sexually harassed filed a defamation suit against her. Another twist. This is when it gets good. Hollywood Reporter published leaked audio that allegedly captures members of Wilson's team discussing fake websites that would paint Ghost as a sex trafficking madam. Wow. In the recording, one person can be heard saying, we can't just do that. Like, oh, she's a bitch. She sucks. It's like, it's got to be really, really heavy and connected to something that heavy. Woo, me. Well, go to jail. Yeah. Go to jail. It can't swing work. She can use it. You can weaponize it. She dressed the comp. Wilson addressed the controversy. In a series of Instagram stories, she says, I was going to wait to take the stand. But the absolute bombardment on me as a person via heavily paid crisis PR firms recently has taken its toll. And it's impossible to say nothing. She wrote, she also said, everyone who knows me knows I a true rebel. Oh, she's a rebel because her name's rebel. I say it how it is. Oh, wow. Another post added, I am pretty strong in all caps. And when push comes to shove, I'm going to get on the stand and tell it like it is. Holy fuck, these people are fucking crazy. Scary stuff. There's so many of these people that are just not just narcissists, but sociopaths at the same time. Right. Narcissists and sociopaths and then recently hot. Yeah. So it's like new powers. Exactly new powers. New hot powers. You know what I'm loving though is this dojakat. What about her? So she's some pop star. I don't even know. I'm an old boomer cliff. But she went after Timothy Chalamet when he made fun of ballet. Did you see that whole thing? Oh, and then she said she was just virtue signaling. Yes. I commend her. I'm like, she apologized. She goes, I was just trying to get clicks. I'm sorry. That's so hilarious. That's great. That she she backtracked. And she came clean. I love that. It is funny that she just made it. She's probably high. She's probably high. Like, what am I doing? Either way. It's wrong with me. I'm on board. We need more of that. We need more people going, ah, fuck. I was high. And oh, yeah, Louis C.K. said this about social media stuff. He goes, it's just talk. But the problem is it's written down. Like people say things all the time that aren't right. They should have said it. But when it's written down, it's like, oh, it's documented. Yeah. You know, and then everyone can read it forever. He goes, but it's just talk. It's just talk that you could read. That's true. It is true. And it's in stone forever. Forever on the internet. And people are never going to forget it. You could say something retarded at a party when you're drunk. Yeah. And then call your buddy the next one. But I don't know what the fuck I was saying. I'm sorry. But if it's written on Twitter, like they'll never let you forget it. Again, why kids can't fuck around. They can't cut loose because they'll get written about. They must be so paranoid. I feel bad for them. They can't enjoy youth. Youth is when you do stupid shit. Then when kids do get shamed, like it will. Like if something happens you in high school. Oh, it's traumatizing. It's traumatizing. And you can go back to high school. I remember going back to high school, like years later, like driving by. that we're getting nervous. Yes. Yeah. The same feeling that you got when you were going to school there. Totally. And I didn't have a horrible high school. No, me neither. But still still. Now imagine if I did. Imagine if something terrible went down. Right. And I was there. Like, oh my god. Well, you see these poor girls who get bullied for being fat and they become anorexic or whatever. It goes all kinds of different ways. Guys, you've got beat up. I got bullied pretty bad in school. Yeah. You can fuck with your confidence forever. Of course. If there's some guys who get bullied in high school and they just never recover. Yeah. Now you can do that on social media in two seconds and some kid will kill himself. Yeah. It happens all the time. And then there's like pile-ons that people get. Yes. When comics do pile-ons, I'm like, good Lord. I have like a mental list of people that do pile-ons that I'm like, I'll never fuck with you again. I don't want to ever talk to you. Right. If I ever see you, I'm like, you're just, you're waiting to turn on people. It's strange. Yeah. And as Bill Burrows, they were all eating a shit sandwich out here. Like why do you have to make this harder? Yeah. We're trying to be comedians. It's like a crazy job. And as the Bill birds, they were all eating a shit sandwich out here. Like why do you have to make this harder? Yeah, we're trying to be comedians. It's like a crazy job To go for well one thing that they all have in common is they're all not doing well Mm-hmm. It's all comics that are failing. I guess so Yeah, and then they're seeing all these other people that are taking off and doing really well like when Shane when they piled on Shane Yeah, it was because Shane's talented and that they were really kind of scared of him right because when someone like I could take off and now he has taken off and now that another fucked they can't say nothing and then we all remember Of course, yeah, you're the cunt that piled on. Yeah, all that shit was going on with SNL You got you you got mad at a comic for saying something inappropriate. That's what we do not only that It was completely out of contact Pretending to be a person who'd never been in Chinatown before Right was a racist exactly that was his quote, but they could get him because he had a big gig He got a break so now we can take that away and that's kind of the root of it It's losers, you know, it's not like Chris Rock's not trying to take this gig away You know me. Yeah, of course only losers. It's only people that don't have anything going on well Shane's got a he's got a he's like Fucking Buschemi and Billy Madison. He's putting that lipstick on and he's he's got a list Good. Yeah, he knows everybody. Yeah good fuck those people You don't have to do anything to them But just know them know them for what they really are and never fuck with them again Yeah, void. I'm just keep writing jokes keep killing and live your life You know need those fuckers and there's always gonna be people like that in every business and every Industry there's always people that aren't doing so well that haven't got their life figured out They want to attack the people that do yeah Bro, why do we have beers? What's up with the beer? I brought up a few in if you want to I don't star I don't like that Bud Light shit no offense I don't know any I don't mind it, but I'll prefer a little star same cheers say We're now we're mixing lickers here Dogs finally went to sleep. Oh, hallelujah. Oh, yeah. Oh, she's gonna say something don't you get that was good A lot of constant the world. Yeah, there's a lot of great people I think concern port and because they make you appreciate nice people right, you know I just didn't know any concern. Maybe I wouldn't like you right, but I See the cuts that I want to hug them. I want to go come on. What are we doing? I do too, but it doesn't always happen You know I made up with Marin I heard yeah good on you Well, the funny thing is you never really started anything it was all him But is that thing? It's like he wasn't doing so good and he's also separate from us. He's doing great He's in movies. I know, but it's like he's not doing as well. I get it's all comparative Ah, so sad I mean, Harrison is the thief of joy. I agree, but he's in the joke or he's talking to Obama He's like yeah, he's killing it. He should be killing it. Yeah, but it's like people compare themselves to other people It's very it's very toxic. It's very bad. It is it is but it's a compare yourself to who you were yesterday Right do a better job. Yeah figure out what you just fucked up yesterday do better Compare yourself to your friends and get inspiration from it. No, were you ever jealous of a guy? Oh, yeah And you go guy I wouldn't mind taking that guy down or that guy. No, no, I never thought I don't have that I think you know I never want to take someone down, but I definitely felt jealousy But then I realized that's a bitch feeling Mmm, you know and I like don't like you should be inspired another comes from it nothing But it's also I came from a martial arts background where you have to have people better than you or as good as you Around or you won't get better like if you're like in competition So if you're competing against like elite people over the country like I was doing on some high school and afterwards If you don't have people in the gym that are better than you you're gonna get fucked up Like you need to be around the best people in the world like I had national champions in my gym right because of that I had to rise to a very high level so they were very valuable to me Sure, so instead of like being jealous like what is you to trip and I'm not Instead of that you like I see what this guy's doing. I see what he's going through I want to mirror his behavior or be inspired by him step it up and you can do that with comedy do Yeah, but I will say martial arts is a more objective that guy pinned you that guy not do out This is this comedy thing is subjective and people got funnier than that guy. I'm like I'm never see you kill right So that's true that's true. That makes it harder. That's why we love sports right does an ending. Oh, they got more points The basket goes in the net exactly the ball goes in the basket. That's it. Yeah Yeah, yeah, but that's the problem We're so tribal now that like people vote the right way or they tweet the right thing But they're still mean as shit Like as Ari would say good politics bad people. Yeah, I'd rather you I'd rather you tweet some horrible slur but be a nice guy Our priorities are out of whack in society I think we were rewarding the wrong things. Well, we're really confused because social media is not real Right and it's not real human interaction. It's not normal You're not supposed to be able to just write something and the people that respond just write something back It's supposed to be dialogue. Yeah, people are supposed to communicate the way we're doing That's some normal people talk that way when someone says something nutty instead of letting them go on for paragraph After paragraph you go no, that's not true. I never said that. Yes. I never said that No, you're mis-enris first of all that you're taking something that was sarcastic Yes, and you're making it like a quote as if this is like what my real feelings were yeah And they kind of want it to be real which is strange. You like oh we hate racism I heard this thing where they're like Bill Burr's a racist and somebody tweeted his wife's black and they were like well sometimes you'll marry black women to dominate them and you're like And then you know that you're a lazy Well his wife tweeted after shut the fuck up. Yeah good for her and you're like there you go. Yeah good for her Just go. Oh, so don't interact with those people. Right. It's not these are not good faith conversations So do you feel good? I mean it must be a load off with the Marin makeup. Yeah. It was nice I never hated that guy it was in it was a nice conversation Yeah, and we're gonna get together when he's in town. Oh my god. This is amazing. I'm a great friend of dinner I've even invited him to the club. I'm gonna come to the club. It's not what you think it is Yeah, all walks of life. There's a ton of lesbians and gay people and it's like the most diverse fucking place on earth But they're all talented right. It's only diverse by accident. Yeah It's diverse just because the talented people all happen to be diverse. Yeah, it's like UFC Yeah, it's like a Russian guy fucking money But that's what it's supposed to be it's supposed to be diversity is supposed to occur naturally if you just let the best people excel Right especially in something like comedy because there's no buried entry. It's an open mic night Oh, you're right on a pad come up with some ideas Right you don't have to have a lot of money to do it everybody there that starts out as broke What did you see those Oscars regulations? That was a bummer because I'm a big movie guy and at that really really bum me out good fuck the Oscars who cares I mean I grew up watching it. I love movies But like the godfather all these movies would never have been made or one never there's a ton of movies that you could never make you never make Breakpart yeah, right or apocolipto or what about all brown people? Yeah, yeah boys in the hood. There's a new Asian guy in there. It's a great movie It's insane that you would have diversity quotas when you talk about art because you're gonna have a what if you're doing a film about Scotland in the 1400s exactly you can't bring Asian people into the me They don't they weren't there, but now you got to write one in like oh the nation guys the best doctor in Scotland And you're like wait what yeah, it's the 1400s right if you're gonna write a you know a thing about feudal Japan It's gonna be all Japanese people squid game. That's right squid games. It's that's okay. Yeah, that's okay. I love that show Yeah, but just like sinners is okay. Yeah, I like moving with all black people like it doesn't matter Right, it's just like just make movies and if people like it they like it But it's like you have having a diversity quota where you have to think about that because I've Talked to friends that have pitch shows and when they pitch the show like Bert was telling me this It was pitching a show and they're like where's the diversity? Mmm And he's like sitting there like I don't know what to tell you it's a movie about Russians in Russia What are you fucking saying to me? Where's the diversity? Was that even fucking mean? I know It doesn't have to be diverse. It just has to be good And then if you have enough good things you're gonna have diversity across all these different films Yes, because there's gonna be films about black ballerinas right films about you know people You know running in the Olympics in 1936 and in Germany. Yes You're gonna have films that cover all the bases. I know and let it just happen Let it happen. Let it happen. Let them movie be good. Just let people create what they want to create and then I Think judging art is crazy anyway. I think awards for art are crazy. It's all political too It's just you know, oh, he just Exact course Daisy wins for the departed and that's not his best movie like when we were doing the Golden Globes for podcast My good luck get out of here with that right. I don't even submit. I heard I'm like get out of here I'm not gonna be a part of your bullshit. I'll give you just aside who's the best and who's deciding? Yeah Exactly Awards for art are just nuts. It doesn't work and Then we all go how'd they win is that is that because of this? Is he actually really good? You know, and now you're questioning it. You can't even get into it Well, do you remember Cisco and you're burnt? Yes. Well, they were the guys. I love Cisco I love them too. I was on our way. We didn't realize they were both cuts. I know there's fun going after each other Those are YouTube outsticks are amazing amazing. Yeah, fucking hated each other. Oh, yeah But that was a fun show two thumbs up though. It was it was lighter. Yes. It wasn't like this movie was racist right right right good or bad right they just Judge did based on what they felt watching the movie and then they had they had educated takes. Oh, yeah Yeah, but that's where a fool that's where that's where that Not awards for art, but recommendations for art. Yeah, people that you appreciate. Yes I just picture the Academy going damn. That's a good movie, but Trans going a wheelchair and this one does that they used to do it with retards That was a big thing with Oscars. It was like oh this guy's playing a tard we got to give it to him Exactly, and now it's more skin color based I got to drop like thunder with a never never go full retards. Yeah, yeah Exactly kill that genre. Yeah, you never see people playing handicapped people in a film anymore But that movie's great because it shows Robert Downey's in full black everything. Yes, and everybody's like he nailed it I asked him about that. Oh, I think you could do that movie today goes well you could do it Be a fucking problem. Yeah, he was the last guy to do blackface and not get canceled Yeah, and he fucking killed it killed it. It was amazing That movie was fucking amazing It's the last completely politically incorrect movie and it is hilarious. I know it's so good You know kills in that movie Tom Cruise killed it as the Chelsea agent the dancing that guy's so good He's good. He's so good. I was just talking the other day about that movie collateral. Oh My man great movie that movie. I just watched it like a couple of months ago I was like this movie so fucking good. Yeah Yeah, yeah, so convincing so scary a complete psychopathic killer. Yeah, and there's not much going on But they those two together the chemistry was amazing. Well when things happen there's so crazy Yes, yeah, seeing the alleyway where we shoot those two guys and try to rob him great Like fuck yeah, yeah, and and hats off to Jamie Fox. I mean he's so good in that movie He plays like a kind of a nerdy skier guy and then he can play Ray. Yes, that guy can do anything. Yeah He had a money. Yeah, I love that guy. He's great. He's a talent. He's a super talented guy and a really nice guy Oh, yeah, I've met him off like I made him at a gas station once He's taking his daughter of home from a martial arts class Wow, we were just pumping gas next to each other in some guy pulls up in one of those Have you ever seen those resvani trucks? Do you know what that is? No, it's a crazy like futuristic looking bulletproof car It's like a resvani tank It's cool looking is it electric? No, no, this is a long time ago before electric cars. This is probably 2000 well there was some Tesla's the real small one that were based on the lotus platform back then But this is like 2014 or 15 or something like that that thing whoa That's Jamie Fox's car. That's like a bat mobile kind of exactly so he pulled up next to me And I was like who's driving that fucking thing and Jamie Fox guys. I was up Joe What he did, but he's cool. He's like a normal dude. Yeah, and he did it all He did stand up. He did it living color. He'd had his own sitcom Ultrital to Consaying oh, yeah, and he can act in comedy. He can act in drama. He can play a nerd He can play a killer. He can play anything. I just rewatch Ray. It's incredible. It's amazing. Oh, yeah He kills that role. Oh, good as he's singing it. Yeah, I didn't realize Ray was such a junkie But was it yeah, that's right big heroin guy. That's why that's why he was all moving like that And he was all walked out on the on the H. You know people say Stevie Ray wanted consent or Stevie wonder rather Can sing can see I've heard that he catches the right talk from trust the microphone falls and he catches it So that's a big conspiracy theory, but Looking back that's like the such a gentle light conspiracy compared to where we the fuck we got going on today I know right Yeah, that that Elvis is real like we used to have a fun kind of playful It's too much a lot. Yeah. Yeah, and then and now it's all out of whack. Yeah, it's my cons got a dick Exactly I've heard Erica curse got a dick over that one. Whoa she seems thrilled right now She's an odd duck. She's a coke for sure. Have you ever seen the compilation of her making crazy eyes? No, this is a video of her make a demon eyes and every time she makes the eyes the music Hmm Possessed well, she just gets intense. She's like the guy with with the gang gang guy with that guy Uh, oh my god. Look at that. She's gonna tell a baby give me some volume. She's talking to Barry Weiss. There you go Let's just pay attention to her eyes That they believed were controversial or even hateful that he somehow had it coming What do you say to people who justified your sick? Hmm He's a human being Nobody Yeah, exactly one Barry is saying they basically said that because Charlie said or bull All right, I don't need the that's not the one that I wanted here. Okay, but yeah She seems she's having a good time. Well, she was on a reality show. You know, yes, so she's a star fucker a little bit Maybe there's also in some weird CIA documents or CIA films is there right? Yeah, you don't see those films now now Serious I know those films. There's some weird like internal films that they made that she was a part of She looks like if a pageant lady a pageant girl was grown up 100% yeah, look at that Yeah, well, I mean she essentially was a pageant lady. Oh really right wasn't she in like Miss USA or one of those? I don't know maybe wasn't she? Yeah, that kind of face Well, there's a thing that People want right that attention fame thing. Yeah, yeah, that is what they really want. Okay. So Jamie will find it It's got fireworks behind her. She's just a while Erica Kirk CIA video releases serious questions. That's the one I just played Yeah, I didn't had it had a five second clip and the rest was not oh, but there the full video is out there I watched it and it's very weird So see if you play it it's about EMP attacks and power grids. Oh, rest. This was not that clip not of it Well, it gigs a gig. I think it would be a struggling actor you take any kind of employee video or whatever I guarantee that video is out there. I mean no one could have pulled it Well, there's a Jimmy door video there here it is here it is look at this That we've presented to congressional officials one being cyber two being hackers three being physical threat fourth one is solar EMP and the fifth one is man-made EMP So the concern that we have is that we put out this critical information and when we go over this risk analysis They hear what we're saying, but they don't want to take action Well, they're making critical infrastructure She's doing a CIA informational video Giggur is something else perhaps or you know a bit even so you're doing an acting gig for the CIA Who calls you for that yeah, you ever get one of those calls now? No, I never go on those calls in my age It never hit me with that one. Yeah, it's odd Well, there's a lot of people that think that she was his handler. Oh, it's Charlie Kirk said, but of course There's a lot of people think I have handlers. Yeah, you know We got about nine Navy seals out there. Then I'm here. They're my friends. Yeah, I know those guys. Okay We're letting do it. They're there. They know some stuff was a lot of cooks out there, bro True, I mean you said a shooter on six street. Yeah, finally a guy in Austin kills People To get to the Austin New York debate, but I'm pumped. That's a stupid. Yeah, it's all silly. What do we do? Lewis Jay Gomez get him Yeah, yeah, just more comedy the better keep putting in every city. I know right. Yeah, give me more good clubs How was New York these days? New York's good. I mean we're humming. We got all these clubs opening up still and More opening. Yeah, it's crazy and Comedy's hot as you know comedy has been the more fucked up the world is the more hot comedy is That's probably true. Yeah, yeah, but it's it's legitimized now You know everybody takes it seriously before you were kind of a clown now. They're like oh, let's go see some comedy and listen to them talk about I ran one thing one of the things that helped his podcast because people Yes, comics talk about it and you realize like oh, these are thinking people that are going through this like very bizarre art form That doesn't have a playbook. Yes Yeah, and we could we have no rules right now Oscars have all these rules. We will never have rules Thank God We do the whole art forms fucked well, they've tried to put rules in in certain clubs and those clubs always fall apart That's true You know you can't do that. Well, it's so fucking gay cuz they're all like we love Richard Pryor I'm like if he was around today you'd hate him right he hit his wife. He was a drug addict, right? Oh, right he was psycho Canison canison one of the fucking greatest comics that's ever lived at completely out of his mind And also the best example of someone who did not punch up Yeah, he punched down all the type punched down about starving people. Yeah, yeah I love but why what do we decide punching down was not funny. They're stupid. It's hilarious I had a guy on once that was a professor the talk comedy and he wrote a book on comedy and he tried to tell me that punching down It's never funny. I go that is wrong. It doesn't make sense. You're wrong I go because Sam kiddison one of the grace bits of all time was him doing a bit about the starving people in Africa Right yeah, it's a legendary bit. David. Tell us 18 minutes on midgets. That's literally punching down like it's They're little but it's funny if it's funny it's funny if it's funny It's funny. It's funny. It's funny. It's funny and sometimes it's funny because it's wrong. Yes Sometimes it's funny. It's like oh my god. What are you saying exactly? I know or Holtzman Holtzman hollering for example people try to take Holtzman literally I've seen comics complain about the mothership because they let a guy come up and say these things right what guy Brian Holtzman right like talk to Brian Holtzman off stage. It's Jacqueline Hyde completely nicest guy in the world Sweetheart of a guy. Yeah, friendly. Every loves everybody super kind. He's like a camp counselor He's wearing a polo and slack the nicest fella. Yeah on stage He becomes this character. He's created over the years. It's amazing But we do the hierarchy thing and by that logic I should be able to make fun of Asians because they're doing the best They are doing the Asians are number one then honky and then who knows but so by that logic I should be able to do a Ching Chong whatever right because you know by your logic. Hey, I'm punching up Right they're killing it. They are especially academically. I mean, they're they're killing it so hard They've made rules to try to eliminate Asian people. Yes Yeah, there's fucking lawsuits about it. Yeah, made it more difficult. They have to get higher scores That's crazy. It's not because they kill it. They work so hard But what a crazy kind. Hey, you look like that guy. We got too many of you guys who look like this. You're trying too hard It's like a union job. Hey slow down. Right. We're fucking it up for the rest of us. Yeah But yeah, let them keep killing it. Let them be smart and vet shit and run the country I don't care exactly make make it so that you know There's a legitimate competition where the other people realize okay, we're not working it's hard. They're working harder We got to catch up. Yeah, yeah, you can't just slow them down and remove There's too many Asians and Harvard fuck you. Yes. That's why Japan you can leave a Rolex on a bench Yeah, because they're they're better in a lot of ways. Let them be better We don't have all to be the same. You know, that's the same thing about Dubai Buddy mine moved to Dubai and he said He's black and he's saying that in America goes dude I go to nightclub. I worry about being shot He goes there's none of that there and he goes and if you could just leave a diamond like a diamond ring on the ground Someone will pick it up and turn into the police. Damn There's no theft. How do they do that? Is that cultural? Is that raised better? What is that? Laws hardcore laws? They have minds They have kings they have a king over there Like you can't fuck around there's no fucking around Right fuck around they will lock you up and that's it and there's no if ands or buts There's no social justice warriors Right no people that are gonna give you no cash bail and let you out because you know, oh my god the the systems racist No, no, no, you come in the crime you go to fucking jail So nobody goes to jail because nobody commits crimes Damn is that what it is? Yes, yes, but you fuck around over there like there's a American lady went over there and she got an arguments with people at the airport. No, you're going to jail She was young the people she was trying to do the thing to do its period air in America like uh-uh Not here well the fist fights on airplanes has gone up from if you go 1960 to 2025 it's got to be up 8,000 percent. What happened? I don't know what happened? What happened? Why we why we lose our fucking marbles? Maybe because flights got cheaper and you get bus people on a flight Right bus people with the people who cut people's heads off on Yeah, I assume that's what it is because you're back in the day. They wore a suit and they're cocktail and they smoked But taking a flight back then was a was a big game. Yeah You ever traveled by bus? Oh, yeah, I did a few I did a few bus gigs back in the day because my car broke down on Nemeny money and so I had to travel by bus it hurts The people you have to hang out It's like the drags of society were on these gray hounds. It really you know Where else you see that is uh I still do the free breakfast at the holiday in oh The characters you see in there. It's like a family then it's a guy with a neck tattoo an ex-con a Tweaky meth guy and then me I was watching a video about how people that don't stay in that hotel sneak into these hotels I used to do that did you yeah? I think just walk right in you got pajama pants on you pull them all night or you go get the free breakfast Stop you they assume you stay in there. Yeah. Well. Just want to make it nice for everybody. Yeah, you can make a waffle Yeah, but staying in a shitty hotel teaches you a lot about humans That's true. That's what road gigs are really good for you meet the people that are working the fucking counter right I'm sad Yeah, you frowny face dude work in the counter the crazy ones of those like what do they call when you like you can kind of live there They have a kitchenette. Oh, yeah, you know like standard stays in yeah Everywhere and it's like people making making crack on the stove and shit You know who's in a hotel now make your work really yeah He's in a hotel in Hollywood now. You got evicted Huh doesn't have any money anymore. What? Yeah It's a sad story. Oh, he was a hot guy and a great actor. Oh, he was great rumble fish. Oh my god Dude so many films in the rest of her. Yes. Oh my god. He was incredible Well wrestler was when he was making a comeback right so he made a comeback for a little bit. He was an iron man Remember mmm-hmm. It was great, but you know, I don't know man I think he got a lot of work done. He did but he made it after he got a lot of work done He still the comeback the wrestler and everything was after the work. Yeah, you know, but the thing was like he did a lot of boxing Remember like he didn't like the fact that he was like a big actor He wanted to be more of like a real person and a man So he started having fights so he's having like legitimate boxing a little allegedly legitimate. Yeah, someone looks us Yeah, some of them look like people laid down But when you think about that if he's sparring so he was sparring like James Tony and like real people Mmm-hmm. I get in the fucking brains beat now from and he probably went a little squirrely. Yeah CT's no jokes No joke dude. I mean the Aaron Hernandez all these guys. Oh, yeah. Oh a lot of these MMA fighters that I talk to like, you know They're struggling. Yeah. Who are these ladies who are like oh date this guy because they're exciting and dangerous. That's why Dangerous they'll fucking hang you I think you hung himself actually Who hung himself Aaron Hernandez? Oh, yeah, right be it killed a bunch of people already. Yeah He was killing people while I was in the NFL Yeah, he was a wild motherfucker But then they said when they checked his CTE after he was dead like yeah, like some of the worst CT they've Really? Yeah, his brain was gone. Well, there you go. The friend of mine who has CTE was explaining it to me and the way The doctor was explained to him like most people have Several steps to go to before they lose control of their impulses Like you have an initial thought and then your brain comes in and goes don't do that. Yeah, and then there's another one It ramps up a little bit. This is getting serious, but let's not get out of hand But someone with CTE first initial thought right in the DEF CON 5 Immediately go no buffer no buffer no no impulse control cocaine women Whiskey right what are what it is like the moment especially when booze you add booze loss of inhibition. Yep. No impulse control Poo shoot out with the cops, you know, it's like yeah right right to the worst case scenario Remember that bill of bird bit he's like I'm driving on the street I see a bunch of people on the sidewalk just quarter inch turn to the right. I'll just mow them all down Yeah, you have that thought, but they don't do it everybody has those thoughts. Yeah You go up on the top of a building and you're like ah Good jump. Yeah, you have that for a second then you pull back some people just don't have it I guess especially well brain damage is basically like think about like if you have a fucked up phone Like I drop my phone once and I was in Hawaii and it just started calling people Really I was showing my wife like look at this. This is crazy. I could hang up calls another person Hang up calls it. It was just broken whoa So that's your brain right right all the wires are all fucked up and you got holes in there. Yeah CTE and Wow chronic traumatic and in saffla apathy and yeah, you know your hormones are all fucked up Sure as all's all fucked up. You got to put their head and rice any of you just like all of a sudden You're just running through red lights. You don't even know why you're doing it. Yeah Whoo probably got a fun in the middle of it You probably like am I in control of my own destiny? I'm not oh man. Yeah, we're lucky. We're saying you you've taken a lot of blows Yeah, I mentally and physically after right amount of brain damage. Oh Not worried about things. That's good. I don't concern myself about things that I think would cripple a lot of people right It's just I think it makes me a little more fearless. Yeah, it's like autism If you have a just to write them out you're a genius a touch of the tism a touch just a touch Yes, you don't want to be non-verbal, but you might be really good at math. Yeah It's almost like blind guys who can fucking do other shit right like they're here better. Yeah, yeah Like a location there you go. Yeah, I mean Stevie Wonder and Rachel. Yeah, I think I've just enough brain damage That's that's very interesting because you wonder how could you Do this for so long and do comedy and do UFC and Drink and spoke weed and all run a club You got a lot of iron and kids and a wife and the fucking dog and you got J mo and cars You got a lot of plate spinning But I'm still just me because I don't have to ever be anybody but me But you also do a ton of work on you You do the fucking coldplons the sauna the working out that's kicking the fighting the comedy that helps That's I was tell everybody that's going through anything like difficult in your life do something more difficult voluntarily Mm-hmm It makes the difficult thing easy and so like a career in the public eye is very difficult psychologically Yeah, so do something like my workouts are way harder than anything I ever experienced in a really regular life And you do it to yourself. Yeah, I do it to myself. That's the key Yeah, so that when I'm done like I can kind of tolerate a lot Like if you do juju juju like I did juju for what 25 28 years or something like that yeah like just doing that all the time is so hard The rest of the world seems easy, but were you beaten as a kid? No No, no, you gotta hit it a few times or your mom got hit. Yeah, okay Not me not me that could I could have scrambled some stuff definitely did well, may me more attuned to the potential I thought you got hit if you know. A few times. Or your mom got hit? Yeah. Oh, got me. Not me. I could have scrambled some stuff. It definitely did. Well, it made me more attuned to the potential domestic violence, which scares a shit out of me. But I got hit a lot. OK. But in fighting. Right. I mean, I started, started training when I was 15. Seriously. Yeah, yeah. So for all my 400 years, I was getting my brains punched. Whoa. I was getting kicked. I was getting punched. You know? Have you thought about getting like, that'd be cool to get a real brain scan exam on you? I don't know what's in there. All right. I just keep writing it out. I don't want to know. Because it's going well. It's going well. Yeah. So I leave it alone. But I think like you have to have tools for managing stress. And one of the best tools, I think, is voluntary adversity. I would use the force yourself. Because it gives you discipline. And you understand like that you can control a lot of the way you think and a lot of the way you behave by your actions. Right. And it's also like, I don't want to do it every time. Like today. Yes. Today I got in the cold plunge. And I was every time I do it, I'm trying to figure out ways that I could talk myself out of doing it. Yes. And then I have one part of my brain that's talking like a bitch. And the other part of my brain's like, shut the fuck up. You're just going to do it. Yeah. And not even going to think about it. You're not going to hesitate. You're just going to lift the lid off of that thing. You're going to set the timer in a slide into that 34-degree water. And you're just going to fucking sit there. Well, yeah. And I'm going to bitch and complain. You're just going to breathe and don't overreact. Just deal with it. And it keeps you in reality. Yes. This is real. I'm freezing. You're dying. You could die. You could die. Or you're lifting weights. You're like, this sucks. It sucks. I'm doing it. When you're doing sprints on the air dye machine, it sucks. Well, also, the society, the population, is more comfortable than ever. I mean, over each, you got Netflix, you got all these comforts. So they're going the other way. Yeah. And then we're kind of decaying. There's a guy named Mike these two. He's been on my podcast before he wrote a book called The Comfort Crisis. Great book. There you go. He's a professor in UNLV, I think. But he talks about it from a perspective of how to really manage and balance out life and that comfort is your enemy. It really is. It's 100% your enemy. There's no way a fan's or butts about it. The desire to constantly be comfortable, it doesn't get you anywhere in life. And it doesn't make you happy. You think you're going to be happy if you're comfortable. You're not. No. You've got to be comfortable sometimes. But you have to earn that comfort. Right. I still watch T like I told you, I watched that guy cook fucking on an ostrich. He baked an ostrich. That's crazy. Yeah. And I watched the whole thing. Looks at it. They look at moron. Yeah. Because the world's on fire. I'm like, let me watch that guy cook. And as a bajan, it goes super. Let us better watch that. I love his blind or some horseshit. I can't watch those things. I can't either. I don't like watching people behave badly. I get, I feel myself being dumber. Yeah. I feel slower after watching. Yeah. I like watching interesting things about space. I was watching something about the James Webb telescope. What they're finding out now. Yeah. Some new guy that has some theory about how the universe is not expanding and is I I'm fascinated by really interesting things and just people doing things that they love to do. Well, Jimmy Carr said the key to life is two words. Prioritize later. And that's big. You don't want to exercise, but you do it. So you're healthy. Yeah. You know, you don't want to eat healthy or eat right. You want the pizza. You want the stickers. But you think about later. Right. And I think that's a big one. Right. You want your comedy to do well. You got to write. You got to write. Sit down and find that fucking computer or the notebook and just concentrate. And then do those sets that you know. Some of the best sets that I've ever had, the ones where I'm sitting in home going, can I get an excuse to not do this? Of course. I would be in my house not wanting to go to the store. Yes. I don't want to do it. And then I would kill. And you're always happy you did it every single time. Every time. Yeah. I'm a big introvert. So I would always go, I can't go to that party or that thing sounds annoying. But if I go, I'm like, that was great. I swear you're an introvert because you're so good publicly. Well, I mean, we do an art form that's pre-written. Yeah. So, but you're also good like this. But it's me and you. But you're also good in interviews and like good morning in America. When I was fucking talking around, I mean, you know. But you know what I'm saying? Like you're really good at those. But I can do a one-on-one. But in a group setting, I'm a mess. It's not pretty. And I sit at home and I go, I can't go. I can't. What if I say something stupid? Nobody likes me. I'm annoying. And then everything tells me to stay home. But I just push it. But don't you think it's healthier to have that perspective? Like, oh, people gonna hate me? They're gonna, then everybody loves me. Of course. Yeah, I don't want to be that guy. That doesn't work. Right? That's like, whenever I talk to people, they say I got an imposter syndrome, I go, good. That means you're healthy. Oh. Everybody who's doing really well gets imposter syndrome. Right. Right. David tell things he's a hack. He's a funny guy on the planet. Right? Everybody who's really killing it in life, at certain point, this doesn't make any sense. Yeah. Why am I even doing well? Why is this so good? Yeah. Yeah. But no, are we just blessed in that way? Are we hate ourselves or insecure? Or are we, did we have to find that out? Well, because I'm jealous of the guy who's cool and collected. Yeah, but that probably tells you because you're talented. I think that the thing about it is it's like, if you really believe you're something better than you are, that prevents you from getting better than you could be. I agree. Yeah, yeah. If you think you're great, you're fixing something and you go, that's good. I did it. Right. It falls apart. We all remember that from the beginnings of our career, like this guy's have thought they killed. Yes, yes. And they were terrible. Yeah. They were bombing. No one was laughing. I was like, oh, that was a great set. You're like, what did you hear? You see all these 400 pound skanks? They were like, I'm a 10. Right. They're like, what are you kidding? You're an ogre. Right. But that's that weird, those shows where they sit, those ladies down. And I don't like those shows. I don't like those either. They're too mean to the gals. But I'm like, I've called everybody skanks. But I'm not going to just say that to a woman's face or whatever. So those make me uncomfortable. Yeah, even the girls that deserve it, I'm like, oh, God, don't just don't talk to them. Yeah, don't do that to them. No, no, no. It's what people love it. They love it when people get shut down. They really do. They love it. They love it when a really stupid person with like delusional perspective talks to a genius. It's just annihilated. I know, but I feel icky leaving that studio. Oh, I would. I feel icky watching it. Even like the little clips. I'm like, oh, what are you doing in that poor lady? I know. Some of them deserve it. Sure. Or do you believe? Yeah. You know, they have ridiculous perspectives. They're vocabulary sucks. And they try to use it anyway. Yeah. Yeah. And like, maybe they should be, it's like cops. I see them shutting criminals down. And I'm like, thank God, they're here. Because I don't want to do it. I would never want to, Magic, give it to one a parking ticket. I'd kill myself. How about pulling someone over and thinking they're going to shoot you? Wow, that's a whole number. I don't know. Thank you. They're all, they're all those guys at PTSD. How could you not? I was talking to a friend of mine who worked for the Austin PD and he said, listen, Matt, and he was in the, he served overseas and was deployed several times. And he said, I saw him way more shit. He's not working for the police department than I ever saw overseas. Oh, wow. Way more murders. Way more crime. We're more dead bodies. Way more fucked up behavior. And then we should on we go. Do fund them. They fuck cops, a cab or whatever. I'm like, we need them. We need those guys more. That stupid, virtually signaling. Because those people remember that lady who was the mayor of Chicago was like all. Oh, like, yeah, all about defund the police. Meanwhile, she had her block shut down. And she bomb guards with her everywhere. Come on, lady. And I get cops are perfect. We got to have different money allotted to certain things or whatever. But they need to be trained better for sure. Yeah, but you can't just shit on this guy. He's he's taking bullets to the head just so we can be safe. It's literally one of the most important jobs in a functioning society is to stop criminals from ruining everything for everybody else. And the only shield between us and them is police officers. Yes, you don't appreciate that. You just don't know. You're either delusional. You're you're arrogant. Whatever it is, you need you should go on a ride along. Yes. A lot of people that have been on ride alongs, they go on ride alongs. I haven't been on one. I should just say that right away. But I know enough cops are talked to them. But if you go on a ride along, you'll go, oh, he's guys are dealing with this for decades. Yeah. Not just one night, not just a couple of nights. Yeah. Decades of fucking chaos. Why would they do that? Because it's a good, it's a good job. You can pay your mortgage. You can, you know, raise your family. And you know, you come out of the military, right? What you're going to do? You got a job in the police force. And you feel good, probably. You go, I'm helping. I'm saving a lot of times. A lot of times you are helping. Yeah. A lot of times you're stopping bad guys. Well, I've noticed a lot of people who hate cops are very cop like, you know, like these people like a defund the police and they're like, don't do that joke. Don't say that word. You're like a cop. Right. You know, it's just a lot of that. Like a lot of people who hate Trump. I know it's a lot like Trump. Like I'm not a Trump guy, but these people like they're also kind of a narcissist. Right. You go maniac. And I'm like, you're like him. Like girls who are promiscuous, you talk shit about girls fucking other guys. Right. Right. Right. That's always the case. Always. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's always people like that. I think you hate yourself. Yeah. Kind of like like Jew Palestine. They look to say it. They're not that different. I just do talk about that. No way. Yeah. I said, when I look at Israel versus Palestine, I go, it's like the the Williams sisters playing each other in tennis. You know, fuck is who? I go. There's a brown skin guy with dark killer hair throwing rocks at a brown skin guy with dark killer hair on the machine gun. Exactly. What the fuck? I have a similar bit about how the people hate each other. The most they look alike like Ireland's been fighting North Korea, South Korea, right? The North Korea is the best example. It goes on for days. Yeah. They hate each other. You're literally in the same patch of dirt. You look exactly the same. You look the same. You look the same. I know women. Yeah. They hate each other. Yeah. Competition though. That's primal shit. They want prime dick. Yeah. I'll get mad and someone's getting the prime dick. Hot girl walks in a party. My wife hates her. Really? She's like, fuck this bitch. She's like, she gives me the poor. She's charitable. And she's like, I hate her. One of my wife's friends got super upset because someone showed up at her wedding. Oh, this guy brought a date. The date was super hot and she had her tits out and the lady was furious. Yeah. It's an eight. She just over did it. Right. Right. Exactly. That lady could show up with a fucking job of the hut outfit on. Yeah. She would hate her. She's hot. She could have a cloak. She could be dressed like a monkey. She's beautiful. In college, I lived with a guy who was six nights. It's like this big beefy midwestern football player guy. And every bar we go to, guys, we try to fight him. Of course. He was like a Birkenstock wearin. Kind of as weed smoking guy. And everybody, every guy was like, you got a problem. Well, you think you're tough? You think you're hot shit? You think you're better than me? And he's like, dude, I'm just sitting here drinking. And he would have to fight these guys. Bro, I've seen that happen with MMA fighters. Really? Try to pick fights with MMA fighters. They get drunk and they're retarded and they just go, fuck, you scoot. Oh, yes. That's crazy. Stupid. This is a lot of morons in this world. It's too easy to survive. It's too easy to do more. We need wolves in the streets. We need predators everywhere. Right. It's not like a real fear of the consequences of your actions. Yeah, that's what animals stay in line. Exactly. You know, we talk all this shit about animals, but they're like, they're keeping, they got gender roles. They're doing all the shit we're not supposed to do. Not a lot of non-binary wolves. Yeah. They don't make it. The male penguin gets the fish. The female watches the eggs. If they go, if he was like, I want to be a graphic designer, fuck this shit. Like, it collapsed. Exactly. It would all fall apart. Yeah. The idea of gender roles. Like, you know, I had this lady on who was explaining the roots of feminism. It was the strangest conversation. Because she was talking about how all these people that started like radical feminism were all completely fucked up. They were all out of their fucking minds. Right. They're all like having all these affairs, not raising their kids, like completely self-obsessed. Right. And they're the ones who tricked all these women into being girl bosses. Oh, wow. Anytime someone is too outlandish about something, there's always a trigger for that. There's always a reason. No, no matter what it is, I'm going to take down these pedophiles and you're like, what's in your basement? Right. You know? Right. I mean, I'm against pedophiles. Well, we've seen like when they did this, like when Pizzagate was happening. There was all these people that debunked Pizzagate. Four of the journalists that debunked Pizzagate got arrested for either child sex crimes or child porn. Wow. There you go. Isn't that crazy? It's guys are like, this is an unfounded conspiracy theory. This is all bullshit. Right. They were purves. It's like the same with Bill Cosby. Why is he so gung ho about you pulling your pants off speaking? Right. Don't curse. This is something behind it. There's always something behind it. Yes. He's the best example, right? Yeah. Ellen, Ellen is up there. Be kind. I'm dancing. And then just the coups of the year. Yeah. Why knew about that a long time ago? Because if it's Simmons work for her. Yeah. That's right. It's old everybody. Oh, he told everybody. He told me like fucking decades ago, he's like, she's such a cunt. Yeah. As a really, Ellen, I was shocked. I'm me too. He's like, she seems so sweet. Yeah. He's so nice. He's like, dude, she's fucking horrible to her staff. She's horrible to everybody. I'm like, wow. There you go. And it's his love. During the pandemic, when everybody was bored, Ford all came out. Right. He's like, hey, let me tell you something about that lady. But what an interesting takeaway is the fact that she was kind of canceled for being gay in the 90s. And then she came out of it and became a star. And then she got canceled for being mean. That's progress. Yeah. Yeah. But people celebrated her because she got canceled for being gay. They canceled her show. Isn't that nuts? Like, you could get a show on the air now if you were playing a gay care. Right. They were like, ooh, diversity. Yes. This is like gonna get greenlit. Yeah. Well, it's funny how that gay used to be the ultimate insult when I was in high school. And now I got friends like, tell them them by. I'm trying to fit in. Right. So it went for an insult to like a cool thing. I'm pansexual, but I'm pretty sure. Yes. I'll fuck everybody. That's what it is. I'm attracted to everybody. Like that's nuts. But in 20 years, you're going to be like, tell them I'm a child, I'm a lister. I'm trying to fit in. Like, where does it end? Well, there are academics that are trying to say that these are minor attracted persons. I've heard of maps. That's bananas. Insane. Why are we talking? Why isn't that a big story? Dad's sad calls it suicidal empathy. You get to a point where you're trying to justify everything and revise with everything to the point where you make horrific actions and terrible crimes justifiable. Well, does it kind of horseshoe? You know, like you see like an alt-right guy, a LaDraw swastika on a synagogue. You know, like all right, that guy's a big shit. But then a liberal guy will do it on a cyber truck. Exactly. And you're like, what you guys just met in the middle somehow. Exactly. You're crazy. You're putting cyber truck swastikas on cyber trucks because you think Elon Musk is a Nazi. Because he said, my heart goes out to you while he's trying to stop fraud and waste. And they're using the whole political machine to paint this guy's a Nazi. You're buying into a diverge of signal. And so to show that you're buying into it, you're keying Teslas. But when you look at the steps of it, it's fascinating. Well, it's the same thing. So we can get this. The same thing we were talking about earlier. Like the religious right is the same thing as the religious left and the Islamists. It's the same thing. It's like patterns of human behavior. Where you want to point at other people and not look at yourself. And you want to think that your radical beliefs are fine. Right. Everybody else's radical beliefs are wrong. But we've gotten it with politics. And that's what's scary. Because people aren't, there's not even two parties anymore. There's two algorithms. Everybody's just seeing two totally of realities. Yes. Like these Iranian soccer player ladies who are too scared to go home. And you're like, where's Rapa-no? Right. Where's that Lesbow? Right. That's loudmouth. She's a Justice Warrior. This is, do some justice. Right. These people, they're fucking family back homes being kidnapped. Yeah. But these people are in like real danger. Yes. And they're no one supporting them. Incredibly brave to do that, to show the hair, whatever they do, and they're scared to go home. And then like their family members get tortured because they won't come back. Exactly. It's fucking horrible. Exactly. I think those people sought refuge in Australia now. That's right. That's right. I mean, their whole life has been ruined. And they're fucked. And no support from the left. Yeah, give it to you. Something. Hashtag. Like how do they like pick certain things to support and other things they just blatantly ignore? It's fucking fascinating. And it's so contradictory. And you know, the right will be like abortion's bad, but then I'm on abortion behind the, behind the, you know, behind the curtain. Yeah. Or like the left, like get horribly mad at like the George Floyd violence. Right. How do they do that to him? But then that lady in Charlotte gets stabbed on a train. Not a pee. Oh, yeah. Not a pee. It's getting released from jail. Like fucking 40 times is a violent offender over and over again. Stab some random lady who survived the Ukraine war. She was a refugee from Ukraine. And not a bad looking. Hot. Very hot. That's the problem. But we feel sympathetic for a hot lady. She's got it too easy. Well, that's great. People are people. Not damn nuts. And then I feel like some of this we're saying is controversial. But how is this got to run? We're just saying what is in a world gone crazy. Speaking saying is controversial. That's why it feels so fucking good when shit comes back to real. Like when, you know, we had to call fat people beautiful. Then there are all on a zipping. They're all zipping. Like what are we doing here? So now it's okay to go. All right. I like being thin. I want to be hot. But they never go. I was lying. I lied a bunch. I know. I was a fat piece of shit. I hated it. Lizzo is losing weight. She was the fat champion. I know. She's lost a lot of weight. She's good now. She looks great. But I like fat. It's just probably a lot healthier. So I'm sure. Of course. Yeah. I mean, it's very strange. People are mad at Jelly Roll for losing weight. Well, it's named Jelly Roll. You know, he fucked up. Well, now he's a jelly churro. He's lost 300 fucking pounds with pure discipline. Is that? Come on. Yeah. No, it's epic. Really? No, it's epic. What's he doing? He does testosterone placement and exercise. That's it. And change his diet. Eliminated sugar. Eliminated everything from his diet. If he was a big boy, he was 500 pounds. Wow. He lost 300. He's in the twos now. And 35 pounds of it is extra skin. Ew. He's got crazy extra skin. He worked out with me in here. He ran six miles the day before. Came into the studio before the podcast we did. He ran two and a half miles on the treadmill. I watched him. Wow. I mean, talking in great shape. He's talking while he's running laugh and joking around. Hey, good friend. Super nice to everybody. Nice to sweet. The sweetest fucking guy you ever want to meet. He's a very nice guy. To everybody, man. Everybody sees you hugging everybody. He's like a sweet kind guy. And he's on the right path. And he's lost 300 fucking pounds. Wow. Good for him. Yeah. He's got a change the name. No, you can't be jelly rollin' than thin. Just calm jelly. I can't tell you anyway. Jelly's even that. What is his real name? I've known that guy for fucking seven years. I don't know his real name. Jason. Jason, you're Jason now. I'm sorry. No, I'm not known for seven years. I met him at my club. So I'm known for three years. All right, Jason. I didn't know that. I would have guessed like Brian. Yeah. Yeah, who knows. Who knows? But it's cool he's got a fake name, though. That's a good move. Yeah, that's a black guy move. Yeah, well, vanilla ice. Black guy move. You know, earthquake, they all have cool and a little wane. You got a cool name of your black guy. Right. Very few comics have done that. earthquake's one of the few. You know, he had hamburger for me. You're the cable guy. There you go. Yeah. There's a white guy doing it. Dice clay. Yes. That's a fake name. Right. So a couple guys did it. Yeah, dice clay is just dice. I just calmed dice. He just kind of turned into dice. Yeah. It's just his dice now. Well, most people don't know that he was Andrew Silverstein. Yes. And the dice man was one of many characters that he did on stage. Travolta, Jerry Lewis. Yeah. He's got a bunch of guys. Oh, he's got great impression. He's a talent. He's a talented guy. He's not just a talented guy. That guy is a legitimate performance artist. Yeah. He does. Yes. Performance are on the street for fun for no money. And he's literally mocking the fact that he's not famous. Yes. That's comedy. The most ego free version of that shit. I opened for him once and I was kind of nervous. He's, you know, he's a legend. And I went up to him. I was like, hello, Mr. Dice. Just letting you know him. Your opener goes, you want a picture? I'm like, oh, just let you know. Your opener, how much time you want me to do? He goes, you want a picture. And I'm like, I don't need any picture. How much time do you want me to do? He goes, get over here and he gets me in a headlock and takes a picture. And I never did not much time to do. But I was fucking with me. He gave me great advice in the 90s. I was doing news radio and I was just doing the store and the laugh factory and the improv. He was like, you should do the road. And I said, really? I go, why? He goes, you don't want to be relying on these fucking jerk-offs to make your living. He goes, you're a funny comic. He goes, you could be a headline in all over the country, making a good living. You don't need these fucking people. That's really nice. It was the smartest thing that anybody ever taught me. You gotta do the road. I had to do the road. Because I was doing like 15 minutes sets. And then I never was really headlining for like a few years. And I did back when I lived in New York. And then all of a sudden I was like, you know, he's right. And then I started really putting together an hour. And like a solid hour on the road. And it got way better. Like my act got way better. And then I realized like if a show gets canceled, I can still make a living. Right. Like whereas everybody who just works in those poor comics that stop doing the road and then become writers, that's even worse than being an actor. Because nobody knows who you are. Right. And you're completely reliant on the scene to feed you any of a mortgage. Right. You have a family of a wife and kids. I know. But if college you have to pay for. Those writers are cushy though. You get air conditioning, you get snacks, and you get a health care, you get a paycheck, and you go into an office every day. But you're writing the funny stuff that other person says. True. And in the back of your head, you know. Like the reason why it's funny is because of my mind that no one knows who I am. I know. It's a velvet prison. And then you see these 65 year old comics back on the funny bone train because they got to make money. And no one knows who they are. And they can't sell a ticket. They can't sell a ticket. That is a bummer. It's a bummer. Yeah. And all these guys that missed the podcast train too. Ooh. Wow, those guys. Like they've kind of abandoned the bitterness, but years ago, guys were really bitter. I remember that. Are you a comic or you a podcast? Right. Well, I can't do both. What am I doing all day? Yeah. It's a cheat code. People get to know you. They listen to you every day or every week. And then you get to go to their town. Yeah. And in conversation with people, you come up with ideas. That's true. That's a big one. That's true. I mean, I think the podcast saved the store. Oh, yeah. 100%. I was a part of it. I know for a fact to do. Yeah, there's everything. You had all those guys. And Tina, Theo, all those. 100% of 100% changed the store. And it changed everybody's attitude towards each other because instead of being competition, like we're all struggling to try to get this one spot on a sitcom where there's one host of a show, instead, we're all like an asset to each other. Cause we're guests on each other show. Hey, could you help me promote my Netflix special? Yeah, come on. And everybody's an asset. Yeah. Everybody helps everybody. Yeah, you're guest on theirs, I guess on yours. And it's so low maintenance. Yeah. You just set it up in a hotel room. And people love it because they love real conversations. Yeah. It's hard to get those in this weird world for everybody's communicating on social media. Well, it makes you think that maybe that's why actors have to play ball because they don't have this thing to rely on. So they got one play the game and bullshit each other. The same ones that I talk to, they talk about the deep pain that it gives them. Having to fucking acquiesce to these people. Yeah, yeah. Well, I just did, you know, I'm doing this crazy press tour with the special. I just did a late night show and it was fun. You do the couch. Yeah, you put makeup on. You put on a nice jacket and you yuck it up for the live audience. But you're just sitting there going, that guy's got a headset and a clipboard. What is she doing over there? The he's like a page. He's a interior. It's so much wasted money. So much wasted money. Hey, you're like, no, one of these are kind of going away. It's unnecessary. Well, that was the thing about the complaint about the Colbert show being canceled. They're like, you're censoring, you're censoring speech. But Colbert show is losing CBS 40 to 50 million dollars a year. Jesus, that's what I'll tell. Well, who watches it? I mean, no offense to these guys. They're all super talented, whatever, but it's like... But the idea that they're supposed to keep that thing on the air while they're hemorrhaging money from it is crazy. And the guest is just like a crap shoot. Who are we getting today? Spooky, oh, great. I'm not gonna watch that. I couldn't think of anybody relevant, but they gotta sit and talk to us. You gotta book out, huh? Who's gonna watch that? That was Bill Hicks' old joke about Jay Leno killing himself. Do you remember that joke? Yeah, yeah. So now next to Joey Lawrence, you got a girlfriend? Yeah, exactly. And he sticks in oozing his mouth and it blows out his brain. That's right. They form an NBCP talk, because he's a company man to the bitter end. Well, that's why Conan, he's still running on the wall. He said, I'm starting to pod. Yeah. Well, he also left into the TBS show, which was like way less pressure. You know, that was a good move. Because he's still good to do his own show. And people watch it that are fans. It's still kept in audience. But he's still stayed himself. Yeah, yeah, that's true. He's a smart guy. He's a smart guy, and he's super funny. Super funny. Very funny. He helped me a lot in the early days, too. Yeah, I was on his show way, way back in the day. A friend of mine was a writer on the show in the very beginning. And when I went to the filming, their banter was all planned out. They had these big, like, post boards with all the dialogue. And someone would be standing behind, what was the other guy's name? Like Richter? Yeah, Andy Richter. Some would be standing behind Andy Richter, and some would be standing behind Conan. And so they would read the things that they were going to say. It was all scripted out. I was like, oh, this is crazy. That's funny, because what I did this late night show, they call you like 10 in the morning, like what do you want to talk about? It's what do you call those guys? Like the producer guy who gives you the, and he's like, what about this? I'm like, nobody cares about that. He's like, what type of your writing process and how you got in the stand? I'm like, that's just hack shit that's been done to death. Exactly. Let me riff. Let me riff. Well, I did the Bomb and Tom show once. Oh, they tried to do that to me. The producer got upset at me. Bomb and Tom were great. Yeah, yeah. They rose. The producers were upset with me. He like visibly upset. He goes, well, what are you going to bring up? Yeah. And I go, I don't know. He's like, you don't know. I go, we're going to have fun. Don't worry about it. I've done this with fucking million times. Exactly. Going there and have a good time. I didn't worry about it. I did it once. I was so green that they made me write on loose leaf setups. And I wrote like eight setups. So then he'd be like, so here you have a dog. And I'm like, yeah, I do my dog bit. Oh, it's horrible. I know. It was like school. That used to be all morning radio guys doing their act on the radio. Yeah. It was terrible. Terrible. Fake. You know what changed that? Opene Anthony. Opene Anthony. Opene Anthony was the beginning of podcasts. Not Stern. No, Stern was the beginning of free speech. Stern was the beginning of like being wild on the radio. He's the goat. Like if it wasn't for him, none of this. We would have no podcasts. Well, I don't know if we wouldn't have a podcast. But the evolution of it would have installed radically. Yeah. He was the guy that stuck his neck out. He was the guy that got fined like during the Bush administration. People forget about that. They were going after him for decency. Oh, yeah. Well, not boss me. obscenity. They were finding the fucking stations and insane amounts of money. But he was so big that he stayed alive and survived that. But then, Opene Anthony came along and it was totally different. It was just wild and loose. Yeah. It was just Norton and Voss and Patrice and Louis and all of us. And we would all go in and I love going there. Yeah. And then when Anthony started doing live from the compound. So yeah, this sick house in Long Island, they made it ton of money. Oh, yeah. And he had this sick house in Long Island and he built his own studio in his basement so he could live stream. Oh, well. And he had like Guinness on tap. He had like real professional microphones and cameras and it was nuts. Freedom. And I was like, wow, that's it. Like, and they were trying to get him to stop doing it. Really? They were saying, yeah, this is violating your car. He was not making any money off of this. Yeah. And they were doing it. Love of the game. And they were upset that he was doing this on the internet. Wow. Yeah. And so he and then Tom Green. Tom Green was big. Oh, yeah. That was a big one. He did his internet show. But it was just totally loose. Like, there was no asking you what you wanted to talk about. Right. And you were sitting on the couch. Just came in and hung out. Tom Green's a funny guy and he's smart and loose and we're having a good time. And I was like, this is it. This is the future. He was weird. Innovative. He got ball surgery on air. Remember that? He got he had ball cancer and he did the surgery on the show. Did he really? Yeah. He was ahead of the game. But these TV shows are so weird because they want comics on, but they don't want you to be a comic. Right. These morning shows are like, oh, what's up, funny man? And you're like, well, I had tole. And they're like, cut it. Cut. head of the game but these these TV shows are so weird because they want comics on but they don't want you to be a comic right these morning shows are like oh what's up funny man and you're like well i told and i like got it got it you know like i'm just big me they just scared you had me on they get scared you know they get scared losing their job any those people are really scared because they they don't nothing all they have is like hey good morning right it's five past the hour you know here's tom with weather yeah it's like a bullshit fake gig yeah anything could take it away from them so all the stuff that they rely on they're fucking membership of the country club all that stuff could go away at any moment so they live terrified that's a prison he might be a weatherman yeah and even the weatherman same thing yeah that's a good gig though i guess i mean you just eight minutes to go have the doppler huh you do some hand movements and then you're done it's just you live in hell we're lucky as fuck we're very lucky and i'm very grateful we're lucky as fuck but this this platform like the podcast platform that we all enjoy that we all do wouldn't have existed without opening Anthony opening Anthony was the first time our comics got together and was it was completely loose yeah it was just there was no figuring out like what we're gonna say everybody was just riffing yeah shit on each other and then when it went to xm it was amazing yeah yeah you can swear right right oh my god if you'd crazy if you've never heard it go on youtube and watch it there's some fucking comedy gold on that gold i mean we're actually the Patrice episodes yes oh my god he was so good that's where he really shined you know him and Louis together talking about black verse Mexican yeah amazing and they they do one episode where they talk about where the n-word came from and Louis goes wow he was just a bunch of guys being inwards you never heard shit like that right let me call it a gold well you be free and then tough crowd yeah that was another one another kind of situation yeah yeah yeah yeah where comics just got together and just and Colin Quinn was hosting it he's hilarious and everybody just riffing and fucking around and Norton's chime in yeah to polos chime it in and Greg D'Raldo when he was alive oh brilliant guy oh he's great yeah but comedy's weird because like i got my special out it's only been out like a day or two but i'm getting all these nice messages i love that bit i love that bit and those are the bits it didn't really do as well as some of the other ones it now we're not at work well sometimes people just like something clever it's different than the way they think like oh right right it isn't you know there's the bits that are just hilarious and there's other bits that just make me smile like that's fucking great that's a little bit that's true just like Hicks said that once like if you're if it's not gonna be funny at least make it interesting yeah that's good yeah be funny but it just be you but if you can be both yes that's the winner that's the key yeah and it's just this fucking constant dance and then as soon as it's over oh my god i'm starting from scratch oh that's where i'm at i got the special item back to square one i'm the worst comic in America right now you can be the club tonight i'll be there joey's at the club tonight oh joey d is his headline i don't want to follow it with my hardship no he'll be headlining okay correct no one has to follow me's a fucking animal he is he's on fire right now really he's on fire yeah because he's been doing these residencies he's been doing casinos and Philadelphia he's been doing shows all around New York and New Jersey he's killing it right now oh good i'm still trying to get him to move out here i'm trying i can see you i'm gonna have to get him a place i think i might have to buy a place little warm out here though is a sweaty qubit he'll deal with it too much hot too that was good point i mean it's really right now he didn't really complain about heat that much jerry complains about assholes pussies these fucking mokes these white people to robin around these fucking white people too much yeah well New York's the weirdest because that you'll walk by a hobo jerking off and then i'll tell a zinger and be like easy and that weird like there's a dead guy on third street and you uh in the subway you took here and then i tell a joke be like whoa buddy well it'll turn around it just has to like culture goes in these big waves it's like a seesaw it goes up it goes down it goes back it goes forth it just filled it with young people is an hr vibe in the in the in the young world we think that's the world they have to live in every day it works hey that's a good point they go from the university where they're taught that shit and then they go to a job where they're taught that shit and that shit can actually help them get ahead right and if you enforce it like people are like oh scare they'll help you move your head yeah now if you push these values and push these ideas like it'll help and then there's people that are their whole job is just enforcing that stuff in your way and those people are fucked up there's a scary p hr people are the wacky is nuts on the planet oh those are scary people because those are the fucking the hall pass monitors right you know here right it's it's kind of like a Asian porn you know Asians are the most repressed people and their porn is bananas because they got to get it out you know it's nuts about some of their porn they have to blur out the genitals i know silly help me out what are we doing here help me out yeah i don't get to see her asshole where she's shitting in a guy's mouth this is crazy that's legitimately crazy yeah yeah yeah you know like in any in the 90s you couldn't say fuck but you could say the n-word on tv interesting yeah saturday life exactly right say the end of that chevy chase richard prior thing yes exactly but you couldn't say fucking it right at all so it's funny how we we take certain that's okay but not that i know people are always looking to tell people what to do yeah that's really what it is and it's not new there is looking to define people as being worse than them like that's a bad person right like a person yes and they're always looking to tell people what to do yeah that's a little bit time you know sure these old you know but it just keeps shifting like in the 50s you couldn't have a man and a woman the same bed but you could smoke in front of a baby and now you can have a people fucking on tv but smoking is like they have a disclaimer this is going to be bitches in this world ruin it for anybody no matter what you do there's always going to be people that try to find a loophole try to find some fucking cheat code sneak their way to the top take goes epic do what they got to do i guess so but we're all gonna die one day folks it might as well have a good time you should be having a good time before you die don't wait till you die and go i should have had more fun yeah well don't have too much fun burque ryshers uh you could drink it you had to he's dying blood clots yeah and look probably from the facts he took four of those fucking things really yeah you had to keep taking them because he was doing projects oh yeah he can tell tell me needs another booster in order to do this new thing well what happened it was tour bus what happened to our bus oh j mo i mean these tour bus caught on fire when does this happen i think three days ago oh i got a lot higher and then it just randomly like i think they got another ride and like while they were getting the ride of colin fire what happened they could have been in there i think he's uh he might be smartly saving it for a podcast or something oh what's all over the news too they just showed the fire but i don't think that they've said like we caused it he did a big instagram live about it i didn't watch it but uh yeah that thing is torched it's it looks like gaza foot hurts the type of guy might light his tour bus on fire this reflects look at that whoa comedian bersh crushes torbles destroyed by fire in minnesota yeah the fucking antifa got him yeah i'm gonna sell this curse fires on no yeah antifa i'm calling it uh i'm calling it's anti ice people we're all safe but my bus is gone god works in mysterious ways what oh he lit it on fire well as you say god works in mysterious ways look at that thing that's nuts something can't stop the machine wow that's crazy something's burning that's got a suck because that that was a very expensive expensive tour bus yeah he was always on that thing oh my god that is crazy i've never had the desire to get a tour bus i don't like it either i i've opened for burnt on the bus and it's fun but i couldn't do that all day every day well i don't get hammered like he does so it's like this idea of just touring around but like my friends that are music like sturdle simpson he loves beyond the bus yeah some people love it he said it's like it's like a living room to travel around and they're all strumming along singing songs partying laughing watching movies i guess that's nice i give you a flight i get there in ten minutes exactly you're traveling all night i need to go to the gym i need to eat steak right restaurant i don't like doing that i'm with you and that bed is like a coffin yeah and you feel the bump of the road you're like oh he just turn off any minute no the highway you think about crashing exactly one of the guy driving falls asleep oh and those aren't the most stand-up guys driving those but they're like ex-cons and pedophiles and what not it's weird also i've never done those long tours like that i don't like those i don't either i think they're bad for you well also we got kids so i like to get in get back get in get back yeah i've always done that i've always done like a week except one time i did the maximum comedy tour with charlie murphy and john heffron whoa we did uh we did twenty two dates in a month and i hated it because i'd be waking up and i'm like where am i i didn't know where i was you're right because you're always on the road twenty two dates is crazy it was nuts in a row you don't know what day it is but by the end of that month who you're sharp you're tight oh you're sharp yeah out there murdering it is like your timing is on point everything is just rock solid and in a weird group heffron murphy and you yeah that's a lot of range it was fun heffron funny he's fun he's very funny clean too yeah well he mixes it up he's not clean off stage obviously hilarious he's just hilarious period he's a really good joke right or two and this is like he had come off of last comic stand right he won that right and then charlie was the best charlie she was never met him such a good dude really such a real man yeah a real solid dude well any murphy always talks about he was kind of his protector like if he talks about any murphy he would just go beat you up oh yeah well charlie was a legitimate martial oh is that oh yeah yeah he fought karate tournaments and shit yeah yeah we we talked a lot about martial arts wow he knew his shit for sure oh I didn't know that yeah he was a street guy no he knew how to fight he was a dangerous guy but just a nice guy just a solid human being I didn't even know he was sick man I had no idea until he was he'd till he died and he kept it quiet just like norm did yeah no one knew norm was talking about moving to austin no way coming out here yeah wow and then just fucking died that's so commendable and this like victim culture he could have gotten so much so many points off that and he just wrote it out apparently he had been fighting cancer for a long time yeah and if you look at him like when he got real puffy for a while that's yes probably what was going on uh yeah it was probably battling cancer if you watch his old I'm talking 80s clips he's holding his stomach like on letterman because he had stomach cancer wow and that's why he always touched his stomach because that he got hurt he had it for that long he had it because he had it and then he kind of beat it and it came back yeah crazy he's a hero is there a funnier guy the norm I mean one of the funniest guys of all time funny on a podcast funny on stand up funny in movies funny talking to him in the hallway of the store yes he has exactly just a great guy man oh yeah a great guy and you know and would go after people were cons online too yeah he did some time and guy went after him oh really yeah one day I'm gonna meet you in real life whoa he wrote Shane a nice Shane show me the email after he got he was a solid he was a solid dude he was a real solid and fucking funny man so really funny and light and he was like a dosto fski reader you know and everybody thought he was just you know dumb guy I sat next to him randomly on a flight twice don't do the smoking story I did already all right all right we've all heard it to but he died sorry but just randomly sitting next to him on a flight it was like it was such a treat that's a gift to hang out with him for fucking hours on a plane just laughing talking yeah just over here solid dude there's good people out there yeah he was great and he changed weekend update oh yeah I mean the fact that he got fired for being funny he told the truth he told the truth about OJ killing his wife and he got in trouble is that what happened that's what it was we can up because all mile was like the head of NBC and he's friends with OJ so he was like stop sitting on OJ's a friend of mine he's like I can't he's a murderer that's crazy yeah and stop shit not OJ and he kept doing it and he got fired really that's what it was that's crazy let me hear what he said bring back it up can't play it okay okay oh we're getting trouble yeah you can see it it's amazing it's he's got a whole compilation let's wrap this bitch up bringing home all right mark Norman you're the man hey you're brother do special special out on Netflix I know it's hilarious I watched you work out some of the material it's called none-too-pleased it's available now as of the time we're talking it's number five I'm sure it'll boost the fuck off after this hell yeah kick it up a notch all right I'll see you tonight thank you sir that's fucking good comedy bye buddy