Go run run run! The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night! All day! Oh shit! I didn't know we had bells. Yeah bro we got bells. It's probably super annoying to people listening. For that. It's fucking Christmas. The war is. Christmas must end. How dare we say Merry Christmas. How dare you say that? It offends me! May you ever see Kamala Harris do that? When she had the speed? She said out dare you say fucking Christmas? You ever seen it? No. Oh my god. Okay let's start with this. Because it's so crazy. I don't understand the context. So like I wish I could be charitable and say well there's probably a context where this makes sense. Yeah Satan is the Lord of the Earth is the context. But you know he sees something and it's only a 15 second clip and you go like okay. Let me just be the nicest person possible. Like what could be the reason why I would say how dare we say Merry Christmas. Yeah. She's playing a character. Right. Well she's on stage doing a play. She's like I want to read from my college play or I was the Grinch. Can you imagine saying that? Like it seems like a nightmare that you would wake up from. It says Harris fumed at American saying Merry Christmas before illegal migrants were protected in resurface clips. Oh you're not allowed to say it until there's absolute peace and harmony on the planet then we can start saying it again. This is so scolding and weird. See when they cleared that vet did we give them DACA status. And now we're talking about taking it away. It is morally wrong. No thank you I didn't know. And when we all sing happy tunes and sing Merry Christmas and wish each other Merry Christmas these children are not going to have a Merry Christmas. How dare we speak Merry Christmas. How dare we. They will not have a Merry Christmas. Who are you to say that? Don't know if they will be here in a matter of days, weeks and months since September 5th over 12,000 have lost their status. This is the here's why you can't be charitable because it's just a bad perspective. It's just a bad perspective. Careable. Because if you wanted to like like what does anything she's saying makes sense? You they're not mutually exclusive. Right. You can't it's like celebrating joy and happiness and some people suffering. It's like you can't you can't say no one is going to suffer anywhere before I celebrate. Because that's crazy. Now you're taking in the entire earth's consciousness and all of its decisions. As to whether or not you will or we not will not be happy like you and I didn't force anybody to work in the cold ball mines. Not yet by these fucking phones. We buy these fucking phones and we know we know that electronics that have cold ball dinner were probably pulled out of the ground by slaves. Should we never celebrate anything again until those people are free? No. Never. Never. We should just be shitting in our hands rubbing in our faces, whipping our backs until the whole world experiences the simultaneous orgasm then Merry Christmas to you. If you're a drone, so let's just say they really are intergalactic beings and you're watching all of our hypocrisy and our scolding of each other and these like untested perspectives just jizzed out into the world and you're looking at all this craziness. The manufacturing of almost everything that we have that comes from overseas is probably from horrible conditions. We've just accepted that. If aliens were watching this, they'd be like, who are they bullshitting? Who are they bullshitting each other? They're bullshitting themselves. They're trying to figure out how many genders there are. They're trying to decide who is the most protective status, who you can't discuss about anything. Currently that's illegal immigrants. Yeah. Well, you know, I was just, dude, for I don't know why I started doing this. Highly recommend it. I started listening because I forgot a lot of the new age ideas. So I started listening to new age channeled, Audibles, aliens channeled through new age people. Cheers, my brother. Cheers, Merry Christmas. I'll talk it. Isn't that Seth Speaks, isn't that a whole genre? But is that Seth Speaks person? Is that that's the whole deal behind that? Right? Again, I'm like, my mom got into it briefly because she dated this new age, dude. And I fucking hated it. He wore Birkenstocks. He'd forced us to go on hikes. He would let me take my fake gun. You know, your kid, you want to take your fake gun on the hike. He's like, we don't do that on hikes. Oh. The fucking fascist hike where you're forced to recognize the beauty of nature. And it's like, you don't put that on me. I'll find it on my own. He got my mom in a new age stuff. And this was prime new age time. This is like, this is when they all killed themselves. It's like they were part of it too. Remember they were wearing the sneakers or they called? I have in skate. New age. That was a new age called. So I remember like watching these old grainy VHS tapes with my mom and this dude. And thinking they were cool. I mean, like there was some sound that was playing in one. And my mom looks at me like, hopefully like, do you recognize that sound? Because I guess here's the thing about all this. I think some telepathy is real. It is real. I think it is real. Have you listened to the telepathy tapes? No. You haven't? I haven't listened to it. It's a new podcast. And it's all about this scientific research that was done with nonverbal autistic kids and their parents. And they were able to go into another room and they would bring up things to one. Whether it was, I think they would bring things up to the mom or the mom would say things. The kid was accurate 95% of the time. Wow. With numbers, with colors, like three numbers in a row. Yeah. You know crazy that is just to guess three numbers in a row, 95% of the time. Yeah. Like whatever it is, they think it's real. I'm only on episode two. So but it's really fascinating, man, because it's a dismissed thing. It's a woo-woo thing. Sure. But if it's real, shouldn't scientists study it like it's real. And it seems like through scientific study, it's real. Yeah. I think it's definitely, you've probably experienced it. I've experienced it. I think it's an emerging part of human consciousness that we don't agree to or we don't admit to. We know there's something there, but we're not like that's too silly. It's just, there's so many people that fake it. That's the problem. Right. Everybody wants to have some special thing that they have. I always have a special thing. You have a special thing, Tom. Can you have a special talent? I mean, think of a fire starter, carry, stranger things. This is the fantasy. When I was a kid, dude, I would sit when my dad was working in his apartment and try to make shit on the table move with my mind. Because I've been reading books on telekinesis. One day, you know, like when I, when like you've got a cold drink and it gets a little wet on the bottom. One day as I'm doing that, because of that, it slid forward. I was like totally freaked out because I thought I'd use telekinesis to slide. It was just luck. It was just a badly balanced floor. It was just a shitty fucking apartment, college station. But, you know, that's the, that once you recognize the flaw in the operating system in humans is a kid. Like for a few days, I was like, shit, I might be telekinetic. People like once you know people want that or want to believe in it and how easy it is to manufacture those moments and then claim responsibility. Holy shit, dude. You can really pull some strings on people because there's an assumption. Let's say some, I do know, I really believe in telepathy and positive it exists. But the assumption then would be like you get around to telepathic person. Well they must be good because they're telepathic. Right? They're, they're, they're magic. So we should trust them. This is where people get real fucked up. These are called an India they call them cities, which is if you meditate a lot, you begin to like, well I would say comedies of city. Oh, you know, it's not special. I was talking to Lewis Gomez about sales, you know, that's, that's the really good people in getting your head and get you to buy shit. He was saying it's like basically magic. And it's like, so hypnosis. Hypnosis. Yeah. But man, I've never been hip and touched. Yes, I have. It's interesting, right? Dude, my mom hypnotized me when I had a wart because she had heard you could hypnotize people and the wart goes away. Hypnotize me. Said something about the wart going away within a couple of weeks. I swear to you, that wart fucking dried up and just fell off my hand. Whoa. Yeah. Whoa. What the fuck? Whoa. What the fuck? Well that's the placebo effect. The placebo effect is real. You know, I had a guy tell me this once. He was like a kind of a wacky healing chiropractic type guy. Yeah. And he was telling me that if you believe what I'm saying is true because I was asking him like, how does this work? Like how, how is this working? Like how are you healing people by, by working on my passing on things? If you believe it works. So it's a lie. But if I believe the lie. So what are you selling? What do you use? He's just like fucking manipulating people and saying mumbo jumbo muscular structural words. Yeah. And you're doing, you're doing hypnosis kind of because you're, you're sort of admitting that by healing, like a person who's going to heal you with words and talking and touching you, they're tricking you into doing it yourself. Well, I mean, the placebo effect is real is real. It's, I've heard it's one of the most powerful effects in medicine. Is it really? Yeah. I mean, yeah, you think of like the new cancer drugs. They tell your immune system what to attack, right? So if somehow you could do that without the drug. If they're, and that's where it gets interesting, right? Because we, these are our bodies. Perfectly metabolizing, transforming so many things instantaneously, the heart effortlessly beating all the fucking time. So theoretically, purely theoretically, you got what if you could control more of it? Like how much of this thing can we actually control? And by the way, that's a really fun thing to think about because like not much. And so you ever think about that like you sort of think like, okay, like I'm, how much of my body can I really do anything about? I can eat good food, I can exercise, but all the quantum processes that they're happening within, all of the things, you kind of realize you're just the tip of the iceberg. You're just the yappy tip of the iceberg. And underneath it is all this stuff that is you, but really isn't you if having control of yourself is like a way to identify this as me. So what are you in that swirl of particulates? Like what are you in there? Yeah, what are you? Yeah, it's most people. And that's one of the reasons why ideologies are so interesting because it's the same thing. It's the same person. It just they've agreed to one thing or they agreed to the other thing. And it could be how you arranged or could be you rebelling or it could be, but people find a way to fucking slip into a groove. Yeah. And it's so much easier than trying to look at like, what is this? Yeah. What is this thing we're doing or I'm making noises with my mouth, you're reading my mind. Yeah. And we're like broadcasting it to the world by making noises with your mouth where we're speaking through each other's minds. Yeah. And also though, you know, when you get into the telepathy idea, which is sort of like the question is like, you know, right now we identify our minds as some kind of neurological process, right? So the idea is like we have this like biocomputer and somewhere in there is our mind. Everything out here, not our mind, even though everything out here from a neurological perspective is our mind. Everything you're seeing is an instantaneous interpretation of a variety of phenomena that gets compressed into reality. And then you say, oh, out there is that's not me, but it is you. It's like it's you and the way if you put on VR goggles, you know, except in this case, the VR goggles, it's your neocortex. It's all the processes that are making color, lights, sound, et cetera. So if we're sort of sharing a dual reality, which is all the phenomena that's being interpreted into our minds, somewhere in there is the possibility that we're kind of share a mind. So from that perspective, all these other things become possible to lap a fee, all of this stuff. You know, you get around funny people, you get funnier. When I was doing the midnight gospel, I was around all these artists. I got better at drawing. Like you share a mind. It's the Gestalt or you know what? The three or two or more of you got how there will be that something else comes in the room. And I think we're collaborating with something that we're we don't truly understand because we're still trapped in prime aid bodies. Yes. So I think we have these moments of recognition of these connections, you know, and great moments in life and these beautiful things that can happen. And it's all being twisted up by this ape, this wild ape that had to survive for thousands and thousands of years by killing its neighbors. Yeah. And eating monkeys and fucking running around and clubbing things to death and eating raw meat. Yeah. Until it figured out how to harness fire and then it had to deal with neighboring tribes coming in with hordes of people with swords and spears. Yeah. You had to run for the hills. They killed your kids in front of you. They fucked your wife in front of you. Yep. They cut your dick off and stuffed it in your mouth. And this was thousands and thousands of years. Yeah. I think we're doing right now is so recent. Yeah. This thing where you can meet strangers, you don't have to worry about killing them. Yeah. Super recent. Dogs aren't there yet. That's why dogs freak out when someone comes to your door. They're not there yet. They still remember the old days. And the that's a great point. They're still like, dude, usually someone's coming up. We have to kill it like they're reminding you of that. You know, it's true. I mean, but if you look at that collective epigenetic trauma as an agrogor, as a ghost, a ghost haunting the planet, the ghost of like not that one. Yeah. The ghost of primate past, the ghost of primate past haunts us. Yeah. And that's why it's so easy to slide into aggressive patterns and defensive patterns that are completely unnecessary. And that's what they are too. This is what you have to realize. It's not you. It's patterns that you've selected and you've selected them over and over and over again and they've become you. It's like you went down a groove. You don't have to stay on that groove. Yeah. You don't have to. But I think you have to find something in life that's physical that you enjoy. Because I think that's one of the best ways to manage this fucking weirdness. Of absolute best way is through getting physically exhausted. Just get on purpose, get physically exhausted. And then you can manage the craziness of existing. Yeah. Because everybody wants to pretend that it's normal. Everyone wants to pretend that existence is like, oh, get up on the morning and have your eggs and your bacon and your doo goo. You hear my chaperones that? Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. It's like every day. It's like, oh my God, this is happening. And what do you think the drones are? What do you think the drones are? How much to dance? He blows. He makes this week in the stock market. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Even I like what is this? Right. What are we doing? Did you see the new shit that they found out about consciousness in the human brain? This popped up on my feed. This dude, Penrose, this guy used to be an anesthesiologist. He already knew about these neurological structures that are these quantum tubules that apparently anesthesia impacts. And he began to think maybe consciousness is not associated as much as we thought with neurons, but is a microstructure within the brain. These quantum tubules that get shut down when there's anesthesia. And so there's this new controversial sort of emergent theory of consciousness, which is that when you are awake, you go from being away to a particle. In other words, the whatever you want to call it, the I am, the all one situation that we actually are experiencing gets compressed into a particle, which is your experience of reality. But when you fall asleep and take enough acid, you go into a superposition. When that's that feeling of being connected to everything, part of everything, not even being there anymore. So were those things simultaneously? And I guess as far as the default reality that you're talking about, that's a situation where it's a bunch of particles that have focused in on like a buffet of moments that the news curates. So the news is like, okay, be mad at this person. This person's wrong. This person's right. Here's what you should be afraid of. Here's a celebrity that sucks. Anyway, that's the whole business model. Business model. That's the way we get the news. That's it. And that craze and sponsored by pharmaceutical drug companies. There you go. Everybody else. I was watching a regular movie the other night. I was in a hotel. And so it was the only thing that had when an hotel was regular movies. I'm a TV TV. So I was watching John Wick on TV. And it's every five minutes. You're bombarded with nonsense. They stop the show and give you five minutes of nonsense. That's right. Just nonsense about the end side effects. It's unnerving. And also when you realize we think the show is John Wick. That ain't the show. The show is the nonsense that's happening in between John Wick. Because when you see go out when you're watching a good movie, you relax. You calm down. You open up. It's the perfect, perfect state of consciousness to manipulate people. I also thought it was incredible that they bleeped out all the bad words when the commercials were far more offensive. They bleeped out fuck. They bleeped out this. I was like, how are they going to handle the scene? Because there's a scene where the Russian mobster, his son comes home from this job. And Atlantic City and after he did this thing with John Wick. And the guy's like, who the fuck? No money goes that fucking nobody is John Wick. And it's like the whole set up of John Wick. And it's that nobody like no, you're gross. You took out the fuck. But meanwhile, you're telling me about a bloody diarrhea that might kill you. You take this drug. Yeah. You're telling about side effects that are like suicide. All kinds of like wild shit, depression, anxiety, fear, violent tendencies. Dude, gambling addictions. This is. So when you think about the idea that if, you know, a group of witches is called a coving, a group of Christians is called a church. The idea is sort of simultaneous prayer causes change. Now there's different words for some people call the prayer spells. Some people call the prayer a pep rally. You're gonna go. You look at the football game. You're seeing covens of witches cheering to direct energy at the team they want to try to like move the needle a little bit. But when you consider the power of directing little bubble universes, which is every single human, focusing that beam of attention on to certain ideas. Dude, you're, you're, you're not only are you going to create whatever it is you want to create in the case of an advertiser, make some money. But theoretically you could guide history that way. And the, and the last thing you want them to figure out is if they all stop focusing on what you're telling them to focus on and trust themselves enough to focus on what they want to focus on, which is usually not bad. Then all of a sudden you would lose that kind of magical control. You lose the actual steering wheel of the, of the weird vehicle or, you know, and, and we, you know, they're like, it's democracy. The steering wheel is your vote and the president and elected officials who guide the country. But the real steering wheel is here's what we're going to get you to pay attention to. You need to pay attention to this right now. And if we all pay attention to that, it like where attention goes energy flows. Now, you know what I think it is? I think it's like if we're in a factory, if we're in a factory and there's certain gears that turn certain machines and they think they're the only thing that exists. Yeah. But it's a chain of things that have to take place in order to manufacture something like a Tesla. Yeah. Like imagine if you are, if we just don't realize it, but if everything has a consciousness, at least in some sort of a limited capacity. Yeah, literally everything, even tables. Yeah. Everything has something. Yeah. We're just, we're super, we're go test and we believe that only we possess this. But we know dogs have it too, which gets where it gets weird. Yeah. Animals have it. Yeah. We know that. You know, but this whole thing that we're doing is trying to understand how we, we interface. Like how are we doing this? Like how? If we're in a world where it's 2024 and there's drones flying over New Jersey and they're gaslighting us saying they're all airplanes, they're saying we have it under control. Yeah. And then it appears there was a satellite that we shot out of the sky. Yeah. Have you seen that? No. No, you haven't seen that. I missed it. So this is the big conspiracy. And again, I have done no research. So do not believe me, ladies and gentlemen. Okay. Health, the big conspiracy is that these are Chinese drones and they're being piloted by a satellite that they shot out of wherever that's the, and this is a conspiracy unfounded conspiracy. Unfounders. But I'm just for fun, these for funsies. Well, I mean, do you remember when those weird green fucking lights showed up in Hawaii? Well, I remember where there was a ship, right? And there was like these triangle looking things that were flying over a ship. Laser lights that shot out of the sky. Oh, yeah. Remember that? That's right. What was that? What are the drones? I mean, that's what's what I love about the drones is, I mean, aside from the obvious, like, you know, getting to imagine fantasize it could be their chasing orbs and the orbs or whatever. What I love about the drones is that it's another step in shaking people awake. You know what I mean? Because it's like part of living in deforestation reality, I think, is you sort of lean into the idea that the government is you could trust the government. Of course, like you have just the people that make the weapons. You could trust them. They're really good guys. Sure. Yes, some of them, you know, are hyperbiling. A little, yeah, but ultimately we can trust these people. And to then you have over a fucking New Jersey, experimental vehicles that people are filming. Welcome to Earth Bitch. Do you see that one? And it's so funny people in New Jersey are reacting to them. It's just that guy shooting into the sky at the drone. Of course. I mean, I'm surprised more people haven't. Well, the problem with that, you fucking idiots, is that bullets fall. Okay. And they fall with almost the same kind of velocity. I mean, sure, they lose a lot of steam. But it's enough to kill people. People definitely die from bullets fall. You know what else falls? Drones, experimental fucking drones. The government's flying over fucking New Jersey, hoping those fuckers don't crash. They're apparently half the size of a car. You know what I mean? Some of them are suburban size. And these are flying over houses. Flying over houses. Oh yeah. So it's just like, no, listen, number one, most of what you guys are seeing. It's stars or you're seeing commercial vehicles. And the other stuff, we don't really know. And so that's where you're like, wait a minute. I'm paying almost half of my income in fucking taxes. So you know what the car size mystery things flying over the cities are. And you don't know what that fucking is. What am I paying you for? You know what I mean? You make a lot of money, man. You should know what the drones are. And so, but then when you see what this name is, is it Bolton? Did it, got it with the mustache? It's not Bolton. When you see, I don't know, the DOD dudes up there in the way that they're just lying their fucking asses off. Did you see the press secretary talking about it? And she's wearing a necklace that looks like a UFO. Is it Korean jonpier that lady? Not jonpier, it's another one. It was some of my... And what? It was a... How do they just shuffle do people in without an answer? No, I don't think they got rid of Pierre. Okay. I hope not. Because most of them don't last as long as Pierre. She's like the marathoner. Oh, dude. I just have them, they quit that job. They're like, fuck this job. I just got a lie all the time. Horrible. Horrible. Imagine like Duncan, this is what you're going to sell. War with Sudan. Okay. Here's the reason why. The rebels, children, problems, problems, economy, pollution. Okay. We got a vaccinating him. Got to tell this. We got a lot of data right now. But I got them then. What about the data showing vaccinations are bad for you? No, no, fuck that data. These people are in trouble and we need to help them. We need to help them. So war, Sudan, war, Sudan. War, Sudan, war, Sudan. Okay, no problem. So, okay, I got it. I'm so excited. I have no idea. You just put on your Rachel Maddow glasses. The Rachel Maddow glasses. Everybody's wearing them to look super serious. Well, this is part of the costume, isn't it? And, you know, we also buy the wearing costumes while we're saying this. Yeah. We are in health costumes. But yeah, I don't understand the Rachel Maddow glasses phenomena. But I have done research into it because I wanted to create a vision board of all the people wearing those glasses. And it's a thing. It's like a thing on the left. They wear those fucking glasses that identifies that you have a certain set of beliefs if you're wearing the Maddow glasses. I mean, it's a real thing. It is a real thing. Yeah. If you have those glasses on and you're a Republican, you're an assassin. You're a killer for a living. You're a very strange person. Dude, isn't that, but that's to me the invasion of the body snatchers experience. I've used that movie in a while. The remake. I saw the remake, but it was a long time ago. Right? It wasn't like five years ago. I think it's from the one I like is from the 70s. It's almost something one. Yes. That one's amazing. Amazing. Yeah. Right. You make that noise. Yeah. Oh, that's it. Oh, my God. I'm suddenly killing it. Look how creepy his eyes are. Yeah. That's it. Bro. Imagine you imagine you imagine that reality. And by the way, not that hard. You know what's way harder than that building a planet. Right. This plenty of planets. Yeah. That is not that hard. That is essentially what happens all the time in like the insect kingdom where they get infested by another parasite that controls their brain. There you go. Dude, I went down a deep rabbit hole with this shit because, you know, I was like looking right after Trump won, which by the way, can I want to remind you I'm sorry I don't want to pat myself on the back. But when we were hunting for Bigfoot, do you remember I said to you one day you're going to get a president elected? Did you say that? No. Back then that would have been the least likely scenario. I'm in the woods with the fear factor guy. I've legitimately looking for Bigfoot legitimately with Bigfoot. That was one of my favorite camping trips I've ever had in my life. Fun. I would love to do that again. Hunting for Bigfoot. It's like because hunting for animals, which I know you love, I have nothing against it, but you still got to kill an animal. Hunting for Bigfoot. You just like look for a twig out of place and you get to imagine he's nearby and that it's really fun. Squatching is fun. Somebody asked me if I saw Bigfoot would I kill it? Because if I could kill it, then I could show people that it's real. Interesting. Interesting. Would you? No. Why would I kill Bigfoot? Well, but this like why would you do that? It doesn't make any sense just to prove that it's real. Well guess what? Guess we can't prove it. There's no other way. It's not like I tell you where it happened and you fucking close off 1000 square miles and start pushing in with soldiers. Well, if don't kill it, why would you kill it stupid? I'm telling you where it is. Why do you want me to shoot an arrow through it? You know man, why don't you just trust me and spend a billion dollars on drones and imagine like why did we spend all this money? Oh Joe said he saw Bigfoot and so we weren't looking. But by the fucking way, if you don't want to spend any money to go look for Bigfoot. You can fly a swarm of drones over fucking New Jersey. You could find Bigfoot. You could fly him in the Pacific Northwest and we'd know once in fucking for all. See this, you know, they talk about democracy. Sometimes I like to think about what would actual democracy look like. And you know, it wouldn't look like some dude getting in front of a microphone and gas lighting your ass about experimental craft. It would be like, all right, I'm just going to tell you guys, we figured out anti gravity. That's anti gravity drones. We wanted to show you and tomorrow we're going to drop ketamine on the next one. neighborhoods. Democracy. Democracy. But you know what I mean? Like that would be true democracy versus what we have right now, which is sort of democracy. It does work. The voting works and all that stuff. But ultimately our impact, the non political classes impact is very little. And the political classes impact is very little when you consider now there's a security class. If you have the politicians like Harry Reid trying to figure out what the fuck is going on with the UAPs and even they can't do it because there's another level in that level is like that's that those are the people controlling things because they know the secrets. It's just so infuriating to me that now they feel comfortable enough to fly whatever the fuck these things are over a major city and not tell us what they are. And then say we don't know what they are. Because if the reality is they don't know what they are. If we're going to believe them, which I guess you're not just not supposed to. You know what I mean? You're supposed to. I don't think you're supposed to. I think at the point where they're just telling you it's like stars. But let's be honest, if you are in possession of the actual information, you know what it is. You know it's China or you know it's aliens or you know it's a combination of both. Yeah. Or it's US government or it's all three. Maybe it's all the above. How the fuck do you tell people that? How do you tell people that while you're also governing? You're also doing all these different things. You're very busy. How does the president get on television and say ladies and gentlemen, aliens are real? We are being visited on a regular basis by non human intelligence that is far superior to our own. We don't understand why they're here. We have been working with them. We have back engineered their products. Yeah. And that's how you got fiber optics and capacitors and all these things that sort of emerged after Roswell. Yeah. That's the most fun one. You were buying some engineer. They have every seat in your culture, whatever religions. It's for a good cause. Yeah. You were a piece of the fucking factory dude. That's what we are. We're a piece of the factory that doesn't recognize it. There's a whole other building connected to this that's filled with machines. Yeah. We're a piece. Well, that's okay. So that is exactly what you want pieces of your factory to think like. And that is why at any moment anybody can actually just turn the channel. You're not a piece of the fucking factory. Actually, you're the universe. You are the universe. And you're the universe who has been, dude. I mean, look what they, what they could do to lions. It's circus, deadly fucking thing. They can make it jump through hoops. They can make it catch a frisbee. Right. So think of this. Most of the time. That's right. That's right. They can't. Those make for some wild Instagram videos. Oh, they do. And wait. There is. It's the assassination of a fucking CEO. And by the way, like I am not like assigning any kind of like, I think it's a slippery slope. If we start publicly fucking executing CEOs, like if you start that, you know what I mean? That's a, that's a real slippery slope. Super slippery. But I'll tell you, if you sort of look at the factory, the way it works is like, number one, you really aren't supposed to identify the actual, like what's causing like a lot of suffering. Like you, once you start making those identifications, then, and you follow through with some amount of action based on those identifications. Number one, the action can't be the based on the rules of the factory. Of course, the factory is going to create, create rules. You can go out with your fucking signs or whatever. If you're at the right place, not at a Amazon where they arrested those people protesting. But there's places in the factory where you can go and be like, I need more oil. I'm squeaking. But only once in a while and only in the right way. It's a peaceful protest is what we call it. You do it at the wrong time. It's a fucking insurrection. You know what I mean? So the factory's got rules about how we do this. So the moment you go outside of those rules, the moment you like actually, and to do that, you have to somehow really think outside the factory, then you see something like that happen. And then you see the way the factory responds, which is the perp walk they did with that dude. They've got fucking SEAL team six walking that guy in. He's handsome. He's a movie. If you saw that handsome guy getting arrested and there was like SEAL team six behind and protecting him, you'd be like, that's no way they would do that. That's right. It's just a regular killer. Yeah. There's no way they would have that many guys guarding that guy. Well, they're not guarding that guy. Look at that. They're sending a fucking message. They're saying, listen, we will surround you. And like that, so because what's really scary about what he did is like, and I think if you want to like take murder, cold-blooded murder, and just for a second call it activism, what that guy did is he didn't just like, you know, send a message which is really scary for people like CEO, which is saying, listen, man, like you can't keep fucking us with the insurance. If you do, you're not safe. And so that's scary as fuck. The CEO's of course are the ones who pay for the lobby and who pay for the laws. And so he sends a message of a methodology, which again, I think if we're going to get into a better place, using violence, I just don't think that's the path. But just as an analysis, dude, I would say you could expect more of that to happen. And that is going to lead to the Darth Vader people coming out. You're not co-signing it. I'm not co-signing it at all. No, no, no. It's a realistic assessment. There's something going on. People are very upset and they've been able to do this to people for so long. Did not people treatment for so long? Like, you remember when you're dead, had to come downstairs? Like you're fucking up or you're like, miss bathing with your brother. You're doing something really bad. You set something on fire. Your dad comes downstairs. He's been at work. He's fucking pissed. That's how you know you're really fucked. When people start doing stuff like that, then the dad has to come downstairs. And when the dad comes downstairs, it looks like the dudes in the Darth Vader outfit. All of a sudden, this facade for a second, they have to stop the show, turn on the fucking lights. These guys in fucking full body armor come out, spray chemicals into your face and drag you away. And then, alright, start the show up against, start the show up again. It gets memory hold. So that is an example of what happens when the factory isn't balanced. And right now, the factory is unbalanced, dude. It's just, that's the problem. There's a reason we need the middle class. There's a reason you need some path forward that is there's a reason you need to be able to buy a fucking house and aside from like the human comfort and it's starting a family and all that stuff, the moment you pull that away from people. Now what? It's like, so wait, what am I supposed to do here? Now again, I'm not advocating violence. I think that if we keep doing violence, we're going to keep getting violence. But it's a really scary thing when shit gets so unbalanced. And when you hear about like the insurance, like I'm lucky, because like I'm on crap and I'm on a pop list. I'm on Fox. I have incredible health insurance, dude. But like you read about the people denying like really important medication, really important procedures to people sending them stacks of paper explaining why we're not going to pay. You know, I got my colonoscopy recently. It cost me $100. You know, actually charge my insurance company $9,000. Have you ever talked to Brigham Bueller about this? No. He should, you know, because he understands it from top to bottom. He can tell you exactly what's going on. He's talked about it on the podcast. But it's, you know, it's a giant machine. It's a giant money machine. That's right. That's really what it is. It's not really about making you better. It's about it's a giant money machine. That's right. Making you better is what they sell. But it's about making more money. That's right. They can make incredible amounts of money for surgeries that maybe you don't need. Yeah. I'm not saying everybody does it, but some people do it. It's been, there's a guy that just got arrested recently. I don't know if you heard about this guy. I sent this to Peter and T. I could send you Jamie or maybe you could find it. This dude, he was telling people they had cancer and they didn't. And it was like a ton of cases. And you give them chemotherapy, man. And he'd make them like severely ill. Yeah, demon. He did it to like, I don't remember the number because I think the numbers stunned me so much. I didn't want to remember it. But this guy told a ton of people they had cancer. He scared the fuck out of them ruin their lives. And then gave them poison. That's designed to kill cancer. It could have been, someone decided to be on Instagram. It was a news story. Oh my God. He got 45, that's all he got was 45 years. This is a pretty long time. He's 50. That's a life sentence. Well, yeah, man. I don't know if this is the same guy. Maybe more doctors. I did sure. You know, this is one of the things that I found out I was doing a bit about this fertility clinic doctor that was using his own giz. That's not one case. No, look, it's shit done again. I wonder how many of these doctors were there's this creepy doctors that just like there's creepy carpenters. Like just like there's some doctors don't give a fuck about people. Why do they use their own giz? Do they run on the babies? They want everyone to have their baby. Oh, so it's not like psychos. People aren't coming in. No, there's women that went in with their husbands giz. And he's like, I got a better up, she's fully a sweetheart. That's what this guy did. He did. ran a fertility clinic and I think people started figuring out when 23 and me came around. And this is just one of these guys. There's been a ton of those guys. Yeah. That fundamentally is the difference she met in women. Could you imagine a clinic where a woman was getting other people to carry her babies? That's hilarious. Yeah. Not a chance for the fucking world. No woman want that. Yeah, take my baby. I trusted with you. You don't even know how a baby went baby. Have the most precious thing you could have it. You could have it. You could have it. It's literally the fundamental difference she met in women that a guy could run a sperm clinic and think, I'm going to get away with everybody having my babies. And he doesn't give a fuck. What happens to those kids? Because they might fuck. They might fuck. They might not know. They might find out to 23 and me. They're cousins. Yeah. Like all these shit where cousins when you find out everyone's a cousin, because his creeps been just using his own jizz for 35 years. Dude, that guy could be like, you know, based on the depopulation that's happening, based on population decline, that guy could be like the next Genis Khan. Like in the future, like, we want like 80% of the planets related to this dude. I think he's got a lot of catching up to do to get where Genis Khan's numbers were. I mean, how it is interesting. It's like, you know, you read Elon Musk is the top Diablo player in North America, right? Which I think in the world, dude. In the world. I think he's the number one in the world, which is fucking insane. And dude, and I know you, and I'm not trying to high road you hear, but unless you've played Diablo 4, you can't understand what that means. I absolutely accept that. I do not understand what that means. It is insane. Like, when I was addicted to that fucking game, like, I just wasn't sleeping. Cause, you know, I had to do dad duty in the day, Diablo at night. And I sucked. So when you realize this guy shooting rockets into space, making e-vehicles, starting a new fucking department of the government is also the top. It's so crazy. It's the one time. I actually let myself think maybe he actually is an alien because there is no, there's just no way unless he's paying people to do it for much. Obviously he's not. That is insane. Man, that is insane. So dude, when you, when you consider, I don't know where I was going with that. I look out lost in Diablo 4 and just thinking about it. What we're just talking about is the number, he's the number one player that Elon, how preposterous it is. It's it? No, it's that I don't know. I don't play Diablo 4. I really don't know what that means, but I believe it's huge. You know what I'm saying? It's crazy. It's crazy because you know, Diablo 4, it's all about your build. It's all about like, I hand coordination is obviously a big part of it, but then it's just, and then you see the chopsticks catch the fucking rocket. Yeah. Oh, that's side job. Side job. He's had more space innovation in the last five years than NASA has since the Parliament It's amazing. I mean, I'm just saying that. I don't know if it's a true number, but he gets rockets to land and rockets get caught with robot arms. Like what? And that to me, it's like my God, you know, you get those feelings like, okay, I'm on the right timeline because if the guy who's going to make us a galactic civilization is also a master Diablo player. The number one. We're on the right timeline because it seems so unlikely that if it was in a movie, I go shout the fuck off. He's not the number one Diablo player. I don't care how smart he is with rockets and electric cars and satellites that give broadband internet and tunneling under the earth and also owns X. It's suspicious. I must say. And he's tweeting 48 times an hour. He's so prolific. It's like where? Where's your head? He's in another dimension. He could be, he could be by locating like this is one of the ideas. Where are you actually physically? Is this a is this a avatar? Okay, here's an here's something. I just thought he believes it's simulation by the way. Oh, he does. Oh, fully. Not only does he say fully, but he says the chances of it not being a sim, he said this publicly the sand chances of it not being a simulation are in the billions. I mean, okay. So we talked about this in the green room. Willow, the new quantum chip that Google wants. So and I think you and I both do the same thing with our minds. Again, I think anyone who is exposed to the Atari 2600 does this naturally, which is like we played the Atari 2600. Did you have an Atari when you were a kid? Oh, yeah. And you remember how that blew your mind. Yeah. You control the thing with the toys. It was insane. You can control it. Oh, fuck. What the fuck. Yeah. Incredible. You can only play for a second. I mean, of quarters suddenly you could just do it at home. You could play till you fainted. Oh my God. And so we got to witness like every phase of that technology to where it is now, which is just fucking insane. And so you just take the Atari 2600 model and apply it to any new thing. And so you think, all right, what's it going to look like in 10 years? Can you take musks, neural lace, some kind of brain human interface, mix that in with some quantum chip that yeah, right now, right now, it's apparently unstable. It's like you've got to keep it at it. Like you have to keep it at the low. I don't know what it's called. It's like colder than space or something. Like it has to be basically below freezing. And then suddenly it can do things that all the supercomputers on the planet couldn't do. But you know, there's a trajectory here between the human brain and this technology and it's getting closer and closer and closer together, meaning that we are, and you know, a lot of people are like, look, that's probably like 20 years away. That is not that long. We are, when did teen wolf come out, man? I don't think it's anywhere near 20 years. I think it's way closer than that. That's right. That to me when you just do the math and you realize humanity is about to merge with a thing that is solving equations that all the super, that take a supercomputer, what is it? Double trillion, a million years. That's going to be us. And so then to answer the simulation idea, of course we're in a simulation. If we were just monkeys and now we are using qubits, using super positioning to create some infinitely faster way of calculating data, then obviously once we get that thing connected to our brain, we will be able to simulate any reality we want. If this is truly our past and you wanted to like right now the way I remember something, we've done as if for most of my life is very foggy and kind of like, my memory isn't the best. Every once in a while have a very clear memory of things. But with this tech, theoretically, it could reconstruct memories in your mind and not just that, put you into them and allow you to experience them in real time. Meaning in a few minutes you could live your life over a thousand times. Easily we could just be in the future and this is a memory that some quantum computer neural interfaces allowing us to experience totally all-encompassing memory. And that would be a form of eternal life because in every second how many lifetimes could you live based on merging with that kind of chip? And you wouldn't want to know it was a memory. You might want to be like, you know what, let me just live that life over again. I just want to feel the whole thing. Well, you know, that's one of the scariest things for people to consider is the, there's just, I ask someone once, would you rather die or would you rather live your life over and over and over again forever? Why they say, oh my God, I couldn't do this forever and ever and ever. I'm like, why not? You can do it now. It's not even hard. Are you enjoying life? Like, I love it. I'm having a great time. I have great friends. I have a lot of fun. Lots of amazing things. I have a great family. I enjoy what I do for a living. Like, why wouldn't I want to keep doing this? But the thought of keeping, even for me, the thought of me doing this forever and ever and ever is fucking terrifying. Yeah. For some weird reason. Well, that was like Nietzsche had this whole thought experiment, which was, I don't remember it was caught something like infinite return. But basically, the way he put it is, you don't live it again and again and again and make changes within the echo. It's exactly the same over and over and over again. In other words, it's a rerun over and over again forever. That's what we're in. His point in that was like, therefore, if most of your life you've been miserable, you're in hell. I know. Oh. Oh. I know. Oh. But he wanted to use that more as a kind of to leverage people out of despondency, to make them understand. Get going now. And happy now because if we do repeat, yeah. But dude, I divide all this measure of talking about quantum computers and artificial intelligence and all these emerging things. Isn't it more likely than that a lot of this shit that people are saying is human created? Because isn't it more likely that if we really do get to some sort of quantum computer AI civilization. So you attach quantum computer with AI like 20 years from now. Like what does that even mean? Did you just make it God? And if you did, it can this thing just completely travel between dimensions and understand like everything about every subatomic particle that exists in the entire universe. All at once. If that's the case, why do you need people anymore? And maybe you don't. To make like maybe Australia, Pythicus isn't around anymore. That was our guy. Right. He was our guy. If it wasn't for him, we wouldn't be here. Allegedly. Well, I mean, I think the model you could use for that theory would be the various, like you look at the embryo and then you watch the way the appendages change, then you could look at it that way, which is like, well, I mean, you don't want, I met someone out of tail, by the way. What? Some people get bored. I think it was at that party. Yeah. That's a little bit of that in tail. It's because something happens. How big was it? I didn't look at it. It tastes like, oh, the cinnamon. It tastes like cinnamon and whiskey. Yeah. Yeah, dudes are born with like a stub. Right. You know, like a regular tailed monkey bill, you look at this bit, just tail. Yeah. But there's something to it. So, you know, yeah, there it is. There you go. That's so weird. There you go. That is like an ancient sick, by the way, if you're born with a tail, I'm not trusting you with my taxes. Oh, come on. I don't care if you got this surgery. Well, it's weird now there's like some of those tails look better than others. But some of them are clearly, I've got to be fake. Yeah. Some people probably got surgically put the, take off my big toe and stick it on my ass. It's psycho out there. Your alliance fucking bit. I still think about it sometimes. What would you do with your out of tail? Like give me a break. If you could get like, if you know, they're already getting these body suits, you can wear it out. It'll be lift shit. They have the new things for your legs that like, oh, you know, but dude, if there was some cyborg tail that you could attach with a belt. What if there was a way, what if genetic engineering and AI merge in a way that like Duncan, we can switch you one time to anything you want. And one of the options is you could become one of the Navi. What are the Navi? The Navi from the movie Avatar. I'm not. I don't want to be a Navi. Not interest giant giant blue people. They're cheesy. They're cheesy. They're fucking live in the forest. They're not in the trees. They're connected to the earth. Now they dance together. No, thank you. No, thank you. I'm going to pass on the Navi. I don't like it. You like dragons. I don't know man. I do. I wanted to be one of them people so bad. Everybody did. There was literally a psychological condition called Avatar Depression. I know. Yeah, I do. How many people just let's just have a guess. If I said we could do that to you, how many people do you think would sign up? I think the streets would be filled with giant blue people. Well, I mean, if it's only once, we can't do it again. It's too dangerous. Your DNA gets followed. It melts down. You can become a frog. You can't control it. But we can switch you one time. Yeah, it's not going to be one time, man. It's one time. One time. Why? Because you either stay a person or you become a werewolf or you do not be. Imagine if that was an option. Every time the moon goes, you have to lock yourself in your house. Yeah. Are you able to let people know? Or you can be happy. Or you might jump through the windows of the second floor and roam the streets. And it's going to hurt when you change. to painful transformation. Oh, you're screaming in your back. Yeah. Remember the movie, American World from London? What he's like on his back? Dude, the best. Oh, my. Joe. Oh, fucking great movie. Here's a movie you got to watch. Really? The substance. What is that? Dude. I don't want to ruin it for people because it just came out. But it's, um, you ever watch any like Cronenberg movie? Sure. Okay. So it reminds me of that. It's got Demi Moore in it who, by the way, looks so great. And she's like, like, dude, it is so fucked up. This movie is so fucked up. But it's got the effects. Something that happens in it is very similar to an American World from London. And it's basically this star. She's a fading star. And so, um, oh, and he kills it too. But like, she's like a fading star. So it's called the substance. Oh, my God. It's fucking trippy man. It's so good. I'm going to make a note. Don't get me. You will love it. I can't use. I have to take my gloves off. But it's really wild, man. And it's very just like there's parts of it. There's so disturbing. Really? Oh, maybe they're going to shell it. It's substance. No spoilers. Uh, what? You've seen it. No, but like if you say it's that good, then why? Okay. Yeah. I was spoiling. I'm sorry, so what is it on again? We had to get it on prime. Oh, okay. So it's out. It's out. But dude, like the, the, this is again, like, and I think one of the fun things about being alive right now. And it's a fun time. And one of the fun. It might be the funnest time anybody's ever had. Dude, really? Cause like if I had to pick time periods. Oh, we picked the right one. Well, the second one I would pick is uh, when cocaine was legal. I don't know. No, no, no. I think we would have been dead already. I would. Yeah. But I mean, I was. Can you tell me about my buddy Steve? Is ophthalmology. Uh, he was, um, his residency. He did in Miami in the 80s during the cocaine days. No. Oh my God, dude. He said every day it was just gunshot wounds and guys with things stuffed up their ass. They would get coked up and they'd shove something up their ass to try to come harder. And they just got things stuck up their ass. Wow. That's a part of Joe's. Oh, yeah, dude. He was my friend, shout out to Steve Graham. He told me like all kinds of, they find light bulbs. It's like a positive light bulb. Like a twisty little pinecone light bulbs. It's stick those up their ass. You know, it's going to break like that's going to break. Part of the fun. Part of the fun. Yeah. The, the, the risk. Well, they're coked out of their fucking minds, dude. They don't know what they're doing. This is the 80s in Miami. Holy shit. Yeah. And there was more, more banks per capita in Miami at the time. I don't know if it's still the case, but more banks in Miami per capita than anywhere else in the country because it was all just moving in that. Yeah. Oh, so I move in it. Yeah. It was a cocaine city. That was where it was probably somewhat common to find like a bag of Coke on the beach. Right. That was where we just. You have to get your kid. Yeah. Your kid would bring you a bag of Coke. Like seashell. Yeah. I see a cocaine Cowboys, right? Yes. Oh my God. And both one and two, both are equally good. Dude, I've heard stories so insane. I mean, again, like the I would never. I'm too much of a pussy to live that kind of lifestyle. But when you think about the possibility that once we do get interfaced in some way or another with these new computers that are just right around the corner, we will be able to simulate experiences like that. Yes. I will definitely I would be into simulating the experience. And then when you consider, yeah, but you're going to simulate the experience, you know, it's a simulation. At some point, you're going to be like, you know what, let's just turn that off where I know it's a simulation. You know what I mean? We would all be doing that shit. Like yeah, and I don't just mean like literally like, I mean, at some point you've done 20,000 lifetimes. You've experienced what it's like to be George Washington, Genghis Khan. You've experienced what it's like to be Joan of Arc. You've experienced being one of Jesus's disciples. Imagine if that's one person and that's your backstory that you've done all of those things. What a timeline you're on. That's going to be everybody because it's going to be fake. Well, I mean, that's where it gets really is it. Is it going to be fake? It was reality anyway. And what is data? Right. What is data? That's the real question because it's like how much of data can we recover from light? And if we get faster than light travel, can we get ahead of light? We know that when we take a picture, that's just light. So if we can get ahead of light, we can go faster than light. If we can go exponentially faster than light theoretically, you're basically moving into the future, I guess, then couldn't you take pictures of Earth in the past? If you could take pictures of Earth in the past, why couldn't you recreate them with this new technology? There's your time machine. You're not, you don't have to worry about fucking up the timelines. You're just taking pure data, having it interpolated by whatever the next computer is after quantum computers, right? And then simulating that reality and traveling into it as whoever you want to be. I mean, it's pure, uh, hedonism. You know, it's like right now we think of hedonism as fucking great meal, making some money, not his car and red wine. But future versions of hedonism could really just be like, I just want to be a dinosaur for 50 years. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, for sure. Well, there's going to be, look, think about how many people play video games most of the day. Like how many young guys? So many young guys with no girlfriends, 100% you're playing some kind of video game all the time with your friends. There you go. And you're probably having the most fun you're ever going to have in your life. So enjoy it. Yeah. Before the prison comes. Oh, no, the matter. Why? Why did you say it? Before you get told that you're a toxic piece of shit. You can't. And that is by the way, I think there's a new phase in recently married dudes who, I think there's a new phase that happens. I think I went through it actually, which is like that experience you had. And when I reminisce on my life in the past, prior to having kids, which I fucking love. But when I reminisce on the past, the memories that come to mind, a lot of them are like snorting rails academy and playing God of War. It was amazing. Good times. And I really mean this. It sounds cheesy, but I really mean it. Like what I was going for there, that's what I get just on any given day. The most. Right. You're looking for highs and the highs of the love of your family is above and beyond anything else. Unquan of five. Did you ever tell you Chappelle's take on it? No. He goes not only did increase the love in my life, but it increased my capacity for love. Yeah. That's right. And that can hurt. But this whole like, romantic hippie-dippy version of love. It doesn't, I don't think that's quite what love is. A fairy tale love. Real love. It's like that, that expansion. Like, you know that thing where you go from one size butt plug. So that's. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But you don't even need it. It stretches you out in a way that nothing else could have. And when you consider, and when I think of like the past versions of me and realize in this confused way, that's what you're looking for. You're looking for that. And that impulse is being subverted or captured by, you know, hedonic technologies that are, paradoxically, probably keeping you from having that experience. You know, they're, they're, they're getting in the way of that experience. And then, and then like new dads, you got to shed that skin. Like, you know what I mean? Like, I had to like fucking like, let go of that, that it's such a habit. You know, that form of life, video games, drugs, like, you know what I mean? It's a real, it's a real life. You have to be responsible now. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. But yeah, it, it, and that probably sounds like a bummer to a lot of people out there. It actually, this is the way, you know, and it feels good when you're in it. It's just hard to convince people to do it. And that's why there's this, the Elon's terrified of this population crash, this idea that younger kids, young kids today are not having babies. And as they're getting older, you're less and less fertile. And so people are choosing to have kids later in life. They or not have kids, more people are choosing to not have kids. By the way, I'm not judging to do it now. You do it everyone. You should be able to do whatever you want in this life. And no one should force you to fucking live with somebody, have a family. I don't know what kind of anxiety you have or not. You're a real legitimate loner. You're like being alone most of the time. Yeah. But it's just like the amount of people that are like super bummed out all the time is quite terrifying. Yeah. If you really stopped and think about the just the number of people that are just running through life, bummed out. I know. And there were some obviously polls who knows who the fuck's running on. But there was some poll about liberal women and mental illness. It's such a meme. It's so unfortunate. It seems to like hold up to the meme. Yeah. It's so unfortunate. But the numbers like crazy high. Well, you know, man, this is the thing about mental illness. Like, and there's lots of studies that have been, what do they call it? A folia do right? That's the name for if you are around a crazy person. It's an you can actually like if you're around a paranoid person long enough, you really might start thinking the walls are bugged if they're charismatic enough, right? Sure. So there's a there's a quality to people who are charismatic and distorting reality that is contagious. And then when you add to it, it becomes a fashion statement, right? So basically the idea is if you have some form of mental illness, it's not like I should shame you for it. Obviously, like you need care, you need compassion. But one of the really, I think very dangerous things that is emerged into the zeitgeist is that compassion has been confused. Like so in other words, what you might call enabling, they are calling compassion because the idea would be you're right now, you need to get better. is getting you fucking better. Not like right now, this is just how you are and you really don't have any hope. So this is where and also I congratulate you on your courage and all that's good by the way it is courageous if someone has mental illness to announce it. But when you go to the next step, which is actually the fact that you're trying to lose weight, the fact that you're trying to balance your life, that is an aggression. You know what I mean? Like now you are aggressive against all the people who have this, it is a slap in the face to the people who have it. What I'm saying is there's a culture where the normal societal pressure to try to make yourself healthy, which by the way, if you go back a long time ago, if it's just like you and me and everyone in the green room and we have to survive in the wilderness or something like that, there really isn't time for somebody to, you know, it's dangerous if someone is doing things that keep them sick because we have to carry them. You know what I mean? We have to carry them through the fucking wilderness and that means we might die. That lowers our survival chances. So the idea is, you know, you don't want to enable people who are hurting themselves, you don't want to enable people who have a chance to no longer like continue the patterns or to take the medicine or whatever the fuck it is to feel better. You actually want to help them feel better, not keep them frozen in this thing, which is a demonstration of their enlightenment because that's the thing when health, when sickness is health and health is sickness, well that's the ant death spiral, dude. Like if that's how you create a very sick, unhealthy world and then you wouldn't want like, in other words, if you met some like raving paranoid person who was convinced that there were nanobots inside of them that were reading their minds and controlling their thoughts. Talking about tourism and private. I'm sorry, Joe, it's just not good that you think like that. That's scary. That's a sad place to be. We got to get you out of there. And we got to get you on Reddit. Exactly. Exactly. And I, nanobots are legit, dude. Shut the fuck up. Dude, the main, this is it. Well, you know what I'm really scared of legitimately, I don't think nanobots are controlling us right now, but that this technology that they have where they have these like little miniature robots that they can send into your bloodstream to repair tissue and repair. You've seen these, right? Yeah. Really. Once that becomes an actual thing, like what's this stop someone from injecting a few of those inside of you at the hospital next time you go in for a procedure? Right. And if it gets to that point like 20 years from now, where they could do that, they could just like, oh, we, we chip, Tonkin. Thank you. Yeah. Very, very important to find out where where this guy goes. Yeah. We have to track him. Dude, everywhere he goes. And then you're linked up to some GPS computer by these fucking nanobots inside of your body. And by the way, if you and I are talking about this shit in elf suits, you better believe somebody in the DoD, somebody in the Raytheon or Lockheed Martin is like, these little robots, they do work for a while. After a while, they decay inside your body and they create rampant inflammation, horrible, rheumatoid arthritis destroys all of your joints because they die inside of you. Well, you know, it's like we didn't know that. Yeah, it didn't know got to break a few eggs to make an omelet man that we regret. Yeah, the Tuskegee experiment. Sorry, sorry, sorry infected people with syphilis. I'm really sorry to tell people they had syphilis. We're sorry. In retrospect, it was a mistake. Like we shouldn't have done that. I mean, the again, first is that that's a real thing. Or when they release some shit in the subways, you know, whoopsie, whoopie, whoopsie. Yes, that was a big whoopsie's voice gain a function research. Whoopsie, whoopsie, whoopsie is true. So when this is where to me, if you do want to align with a classic paranoid state of consciousness, the way you align with it is you, and without having to go on infowars without having to go on reticensepiracy, just look at what is verifiable. What do we know right now? So what we know right now, there are unknown drones hovering over New Jersey. We know that the president of the United States has been incapacitated for years. For years. For years. Who saw that coming? Dude, we were conspiracy theorists. Yeah, not anymore. We were conspiracy theorists. How our shit is like mainstream just basic journalism. The fucking president of the United States has apparently been out of commission for years. By the way, I welcome them on my podcast. He has no temptation. God damn it, that'd be awesome. And you would be fun. Like, I hope so now. Dude, we'd have to give him a little nap in the middle of the podcast, but then wake him up, throw some water on him. But when he's all there, when they got the cocktail right, and he's like dialed in, and he turns into a warlock for a second. Like he gets me right at me. It's scary. When the eyebrows move up, dude, it's like something that's a linch. That's like if you were in a cursed tomb and that thing comes around the corner, that is scary. Like his, whatever the sore on that comes out of him before he goes back to sleep is terrifying, but even more terrifying is the network of people around him. You know, you see those, it's really cool. The dancing dragons. It's like six dudes in a dragon suit dancing and it looks like a real dragon dancing. Oh, right, right, right. Biden is the dancing dragon of presidents. He's got God knows how many people just fucking like work and so hard to get that thing to function just in like brief moments. You only need him to function for like 10 minutes at a press conference, 20 minutes here. Get him off the plane. Get him in the fucking building. If we can pull that off, we'll have power for a little bit longer, a little bit longer. Dude, when you consider that, we apparently live in a democracy, you elect this dude who makes decisions because in some way, shape, or form a lines with what you want the country to be. And the people fucking puppeteering that that poor old man or just like, no, actually fuck you. He's not going to make any fucking decisions because he's incapacitated. He's gone, gone with a fucking wind and now we're in control and you didn't vote for us. That is terrifying. That is so that's in a way that's worse than a coup because at least with a coup, you've see the military, they come in, the tanks are in front of the White House, some dude is suddenly the leader and you know it's not the guy you voted for. Well, it was certainly by definition. It was a coup against Biden. Oh, with Kamala. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, isn't that by definition? Does a coup have to be military? Oh, no, no, no. That was a definition of a coup. I think a coup is just like a some sort of a conspiracy to overthrow the leader and that's it. Right. It does have to be violent. That's right. And what a brilliant coup. It does have to be violent. A sudden violent unlawful. I guess we have to redefine that. Yeah. But because again, it's interesting. Is there any other coup d'état? That's what the issue is. Right. I know it comes from that, but is there a difference between a coup and a coup d'état? What's a coup? I think it is coup d'état. That's the actual definition of a coup. It's the same thing. It's that in violent. Yeah. It's essentially we shortened it. But so it does save violent, but if there's a bunch of people that conspire behind the scenes and they force you out and your wife doesn't want you to get forced out and then there's arguments and then you wear a maggot and then your wife wears red when she votes. Yeah. Like, yeah. And then your wife gives a speech where she's mocking Kamala Harris. Yeah. She's talking about joy and like the joy, like just nonsensical fucking word salad. Dude, I know. I saw that. It's like they're so pit. It's kind of a coup. It seems like it's kind of a coup. And also the right thing to do, that guy should not be, he might have won. I mean, it was the right thing to do in terms of like you can't have a guy who's just a figurehead. That's not what the deal is. This guy is going to be doing his best to look out for us and to make sure that he navigates this world of finance and environment and international relations perfectly where he doesn't blow anything up and he makes our economy happen. Yeah. Go. Go. That's the, that's the deal. Yeah. Well, but again, like, you can't like have only a mask. Like who's running the deal? Well, that was okay. So again, it's like, and this is the fantasy of any hippie or whatever. So the idea is predicted in the new age movement and I think you'd argue in the water religions, is the consciousness shift is happening. The age of queries, whatever the fuck you want to call it, consciousness shift. And so the idea is that what we're witnessing is essentially the collapse of a way of doing things that is collapsing and as it collapses, it starts making big mistakes. One big mistake would be people figure out that we have had a president who is basically incapacitated, meaning we don't really need a president. The whole model starts falling apart. Also when you realize like they like, if you watch basketball, or skateboarding, watch skateboarding now versus skateboarding when people started skateboarding, like the tricks like people are doing now versus what they used to do, right? And you see how quickly people when something's fun are important, how quickly it evolves, right? Well, the coup is problematic and that, again, you know a coup has happened. The ultimate coup is to have a figurehead. Now it's a hacky trope, I guess, the idea being that every president is just a fucking puppet, right? But the problem with that puppet is that these are puppets who actually do have power. they will make decisions. Even if there's a lot of pressure from God knows whatever the web of unknown people is that tries to like grab the steering wheel, they can say no. So that's a problem. So if I want to control the steering wheel completely, dude, what's better than an old man who has dementia? Because I could tell him shit happened that didn't happen. I could show him new sources. They aren't even real. You know what I mean? I could literally like, it just probably pretends to be able to read his eyes are probably gone. Dude, absolutely. Private tens. Absolutely. And then the other side of it, the side from it, it's a coup. It's completely unconstitutional. It's a fucked up takeover of the US government. If you just look at the abuse of like the right thing to do when you have a president, a bus driver, whoever who's got seen out of dementia is to say, hey guys, he's really sick and he can't do the job anymore. And we have to find somebody else to do the job now. That's the right thing to do. But these motherfuckers are like, no, no, no, no, no. We'll lose our jobs. We're in the fucking category. Exactly. They're like, we don't want to primary because of another Democrat comes in. If Shapiro comes in, if Newsome comes in, whole new cabinet. That's right. That's right. Everybody knew. They knew they were doing their job. It's so fucked up. Even if you are sad that Trump won and you wish Kamala Harris won, if she did win, it would be the first time that anybody won without winning a primary. And that's kind of crazy. And it's not a good precedent to set. It's not good to let people weasel around the system that we have in place. And by having a vice president and then immediately appointing them as the Democratic candidate, that's kind of illegal. It seems like it's kind of illegal. Is it illegal? Well, dude, I mean, should it be illegal? How about let me say this, that should be illegal. Right. You should have to have a vote from the people to decide who their Democratic elected person who's going to run for president is. Right. That's the whole deal. Right. Maybe people didn't vote for you when you were running for president, which is the fact. And so then when you ran for vice president or when he chose you as vice president, all of a sudden we're supposed to pretend that you're a really good candidate for president. And like, we let's find out what the people think. If you guys believe that she's the best person for the job, the whole idea is supposed to be sell it and then people vote. Like really vote actually vote. Don't vote. Yeah. Don't the mail in ballots seem kind of odd. Let's not do that. Yeah. Nixon was talking about how they could be rigged in the 70s. Yeah. Let's just do it in person. Yeah. We always do. That's right, man. That is like if I'm a kidnapper and I kidnap you and I don't know if knock you out or something you come to and I explain we're married. I need to pull that off. We're now married. I've just kidnapped somebody, but now they think that we're married. What I'm saying is, you know, if you're gaslighting, you really need to execute perfectly gaslighting. Right. I think this is the buried fucking headline in the drones in the Kamala coup. The president was seen out of the men's show is that all of these actions taken by the federal government have not just corroded people's trust in the federal government, but potentially like annihilated. The dilutive. Meaning now, you know, if I'm kidnapped by somebody and they're like, no, you're here's why I kidnapped you. Oh, God, there's that great movie where like somebody ends up in someone's survival bunker and you wonder, is it really the end of the world or is the person kidnapped? You think you can't go out there, but it's like the idea is the moment if I've been kidnapped and I actually buy into your shit, that's going to create a lot less anxiety for me. But the moment your kidnapped bee stops believing you, whoa, that's not fun for anybody. And right now I feel like that's the general mood is people just don't trust. I don't like when people that do have Stockholm syndrome, that's it, dude. That's it. That's it. Those are the people that are still getting boosted. I am up to date. I have all nine of my boosters. Jesus Christ boosters in their eyeballs. You can see them swimming around behind their eyeballs. And eventually they're going to be just pointing at me. Don't web it at your boosters. That is six feet this day. That sort of felt like man. That sort of felt like being unvaccinated in the pandemic. Well, it felt like some people looked at you like you were the dirty, like I heard dudes I know. I know them. I've hung out with them. They were calling people playgrounds. Playgrass. Playgrass. Playgrass. This is, and you know, maybe you're not supposed to do this. Like when you're saying like you try to find the compassionate way of looking at Kamala Harris. I try to find that with everybody, man. Is that as like an exercise that I've been doing more and more over the last few years? I try to push it all day long. Yeah. There's so many things to get upset about. But there's also there's so there's so many good things in the world too. And we can't fall into that we're not designed to soak up eight billion people worth of bad news. That's right. We're just not designed that way. That's right. And if you suck all that stuff in, you're going to have a lot of negativity in your life. And it's not about forgiving people for like even like CNN people that are spit now propaganda. Like your demise is self created. You will be punished by your own dealings. That's right. Respond to all that you've seen that's crazy interviewer Don Lemon interview some dude on the street. No. You haven't seen this? No. It's so funny because Don Lemon's doing like these on the street interviews and he's talking to this guy about the news and the guy is essentially telling Don Lemon like I don't trust all these sources you're saying. He's like, look here it is washed in post. I forget what the subject was. But he got Don Lemon to say I don't listen to mainstream news either. What? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Play this. Play this from the beginning. Because this is so crazy. What is the real president in the life? Do you think Donald Trump won't he believe? Democratic lawmakers in Washington are calling Elon Musk president. They're saying Donald Trump is a vice president or they had a communication. What's what's what's what's wait a second? No, no one's. Really? Do you not watch some paid attention? Absolutely not. I'm paying attention to what I'm doing during my day so I can try and get a better life ahead. Okay. Do you have your phone with you? Why don't you Google right now? Yeah. President Musk can see what comes in. No. But that's already a loaded question. You realize that. Tell me. Give me the sources. Accios, business insider. No. We don't trust any of these. No. The common man doesn't trust any of this. ABC News Washington Post. New York. What? New York. Oh, keep going. New York. You got to keep going. I don't trust any of these. Well, the common man. We don't trust any of these. No one trusts the government. No one trusts the common news. We don't trust any of them. Well, independent news. We are the ones that own the news now. people trust me they don't trust msmbc because i can't actually one of them it's a good okay well that's it i don't want to come to me i don't want to go to meet any oh he said that a lot of people coming to him i've missed understood i got a heart on my side dude that is it right hahaha well that guy just jianously broke down yeah this illogical assumption that because it's on these accepted sources it must be true right ago he's president must maybe we have the good guy super genius on our side and this idea that he's doing it for money hey you fucking half with he has all the money yet he has more money than anybody right he's simultaneously running multiple businesses at the at the the peak of the cutting edge of technology sure shot the fuck up and let him cook but yet i'm not also though when you when you realize like this is like whoa you know when the dn c starts asterisk herping read it when the dn c starts asterisk herping for chan when the dn c started doing that using all that fucking money and it's so funny because the asterisk herping after she lost her stopped explaining after her perfect so the ideas like i infiltrate message boards post uh... political messages disguised as like somebody just putting a post up i try to redirect the conversation or essentially imply a uh... consensus that doesn't exist and so uh... there's ways of manipulating the algorithm apparently on the dn c's uh... discord server they were talking about the best ways and times to post on reddit to attempt to move the fucking needle so it's kind of amazing isn't it it should be illegal it's so fucked up if like you are a lot of propaganda like if if we if i don't know we did a renegade roe commercial for uh... nicotine pouches on instagram you have to say this is a sponsored post so why is it that if you work for the dn c or volunteer for any state entity you don't have to say also i'm doing this is a volunteer for the dn c i that's why i posted this you have to do that right now that's invasion of the body snatchers that's the law i'm pretending to be a normal person i'm infecting the data sphere with propaganda and if i do it enough it will create the illusion that this is the consensus and the reason you want to create that illusion is because people like to sync up that's what they know love to sync up and release smart people like to get really good at syncing up you know it really good at it and really good at correcting others who don't sync up correctly here you go sync up yeah and you know what it is it's just dorks it's dorks and dorks have found a thing right now thing maybe you think it had been chest it's not politics maybe you know what to mean right whatever your thing is yeah that's what's really going on and you're denial of objective reality in order to win it exposes you exposes you to people in this new world that are recognizing that we are the only people that have ever gone through this and we are in this insane moment of realization about how much we've been bullshitted and manipulated in the past how much of all of our resources are going to things that we would never agree to yeah and and how much of this chaos is being pushed upon us by people who are profiting from it in a fucking spectacular way that's almost indescribable yeah insane amounts of money in control of the narrative and it's not working it's not working it's not working you and I and james in a fucking room yeah are working right that's not working what they're doing is not working because people are getting information from multiple sources now and the sources that aren't reliable like that guy listed off they're dying off yeah you know the new york times app is uh... more people use it for wordle than anything like new york times essentially become a gaming company easy see if that's true i don't want to do i'm pretty sure it's true well i mean wordle is fun i'm i'm sure it's fun it's a separate app is it a separate app or is it that wordle gets i do mind that's the entire day drinking no thank you is that what it is uh... so that wordle gets more activity for the company that's what essentially yeah there was a graph i was too lazy to read the whole graph but it was a breaking down how wordle is more used than anything well listen this is true let's make sure that's true otherwise we'll have to cut this out i don't want new york times on my ass oh my god i was so it's so bad they've done it before it's just that's their job let's their job you know they just like that shouldn't be a job where you're uh... you're at times games are more popular than the students uh... if that's what you want to be but here's the thing it's not necessary anymore and i think that uh... through the rise of independent journalism one of the things really realizing is that all something has someone has to do is be consistently objective and intelligent and uh... post things and post takes on things like colman hues or some of these people yeah consistently intelligent objective and then you'll develop a following and then you'll become a reliable source of news that's right because i know that i asked colman about x y or z and he's he's informed he's going to give me a very intelligent yeah what it is there's a few people in my life that i like the like and you humor men if have some sort of health related question peter it here right some sort of like how are they doing this and what it what it what it what is is legitimate right and they'll look at it and they'll analyze it yeah you i'll set up sent humor and stuff and he goes over the data because this is fascinating this it theoretically should work you know and then this will explain why and what the pathways are and how interesting this is yeah it's it's an amazing resource that wasn't available before to any person forget i mean it's too difficult you'd have one line of inquiry like you have one lane or whether it's archaeology or language one lane we like super well read in yeah you don't have access to all this these other professors that are working on quantum physics right you don't have access to the James web telescope people you don't have access to all this data it's like it's too hard to get right now it's fucking everywhere everywhere everywhere everywhere all the time that's right it's a question away on your phone yeah it's a question away you pick up your phone and use like impressive button you say hey google want to tell me what the James web tells you but you yeah he chat cheap eating once you talk to me like Santa Claus explained to me why these drones are fake the best it's not to know if the drones are China's or ours or water people they're coming out of the water no tell I mean just as civilization under the water I mean that's where I would hide if I was like trying to hide from a civilization is the ocean it's clear they can't get in there they can't breathe under there's a perfect place to hide you know what I've been saying for a while last few weeks at least I think maybe what the aliens are is custodians I think maybe they're just here they're like some sort of a autonomous creation that's designed to accelerate our evolution stop us from blowing ourselves up and make sure that we build the quantum computer with AI right that this is like it's all a part of this like endless cycle of integration in the great universe this and like we're at this like I don't want to get out of my cocoon we're in that stage we're in this like bizarre strange you know Australia Pithicus wandering around in the grass fields we're in this weird stage where we're we're gonna launch into some completely new way of interfacing with the universe itself yeah and it's gonna happen whether you like it or not yeah and this is just what's happening right now and that's why everything's so chaotic okay McKenna used to talk about this dude I used to talk about how the end of civilization it's not gonna be it's not gonna be a whimper it's gonna be people screaming yeah that's it flailing and trying to hold on hold on hold on the Norman Rockwell painting here's your big my own fucking bread it's trying to do a lot to the rave how many fucking genders yeah what are you saying yeah yeah yeah these fucking drones with their drones god damn it it's the meltdown and you know if you what you're saying like so if you look at like a crickin I think it was Craig wrote the hero to paper theorizing about directed panspermio which is where you play so so okay directed panspermio I get some kind of nano-bought which is I guess you could say that's what DNA is nano-bought precursor essentially like where I think it's weird and maybe I don't understand what he's doing completely it's weird to me that Musk wants to send humans to Mars because it seems like it would make make way more sense pre-sending humans to send drones robots to construct whatever it is you need to survive on Mars to go in the caves build the fucking that's the plan Duncan oh really so yeah the first the first the first voyage to Mars is gonna be unmanned okay great yeah I think they have to do that they have to they have to have a certain amount of supplies because I think they can only come back in two years but I don't even mean supplies I mean if we jump for 20 years I'm missing that bus the Mars bus two-year bus oh Duncan you relate you slept in and that's hilarious you missed the block watch the rocket go up no nobody woke me you can talk suckers I'm actually like Duncan is such a fucking douchebag let's leave him here let's leave him on Mars there's plenty of potatoes yeah that is so fucking make him fertilize his potatoes with his own shit like so Damon yeah like my Damon did in the Martian movie dude so you if so obviously like the way you're gonna want to colonize a bit of a world is you create not just this nanobot but you make it to the nanobot can only survive an environment that you would live in meaning and then encoded in the nanobot is the in destination what you're talking about the quantum computers some kind of AI that then will naturally uncover faster than light travel wormholes whatever the fuck it is and then when the wormholes open up you can instantaneously travel to a bit of all planets right so can I tell you turns Howard's idea yeah it's a great idea yeah he thinks that we have it all wrong when it comes to the formation of planets and the creation of life he thinks what happens is the Sun is constantly ejecting things right you see these coronal mass ejections crazy millions of times like longer than you know the distance between whatever and whatever I'm not at all just scary crazy bigger than earth right that he thinks these particles coalesce in space outside of the gravity of the Sun and they they orbit the Sun and very close at first but then as time goes on they move further and further away and they get to a place where they're in this position like earth is and then they people they flower just like when you plan a seed when the water comes and then it has to be sophisticated enough to adapt because the planet is eventually going to move out of the habitable zone he thinks it Mars at one point in time probably had civilization in life and then as Mars got further and further and further out from the protection of the Sun it eventually got too cold and it eventually got hit by something it lost its atmosphere and now it's just desert that's so cool well now they know there's water on Mars yeah they know it used to be just the craziest of conspiracy all there's no water on Mars yeah there's no evidence of water how could a society live there but you know this is the nuttiest of nutty but some remote viewer went to Mars a million years ago and said there were pyramids there yeah there was a civilization there yeah and you know there's tribes no actually they think they came from the planet's series right like the dogan tribe yeah I believe that all people came from from another planet yeah if you were in Mars and you're a thousand years advanced from us and they never figure out AI so they just go in a different direction they're like super super advanced though where they could travel through the space between the planets and you get to a point where you're like hey guys we kind of about decade yeah we got about one decade where life can exist on this fucking planet we got to get off of this now earth is ready there's some monkeys there there's a bunch of shit there like you know we could we could just go there yeah we'll just go there well and then we just monked around with they're like these guys are developing really slowly like one of you and then Homer say yeah there you go man listen the whatever it is definitely not just described no whatever it is it's not bad I wasn't believing it as I was saying that I was like that's crazy but dude you know I think maybe you look at just the concept of epigenetics and what we're doing right now you look at the statistical probability of DNA evolving based on the age of the planet you look at these things and not just that you look at the mythologies of the world it all points towards some kind of advanced intelligence bioengineering a planet for some reason or another I mean even like if you ever had the parable of the solar you know that Jesus Jesus said can you do you mind pulling it up Jamie I don't have it memorized yet the parable of the solar when you think it's a high solar S O W E R like a so like so ings no like planning so so we're off seeds planner the pair of the new dark but when you think about this generally this is the idea of like there's people are gonna like understand Jesus is God but if you look at it as an extraterrestrial intelligence planning seeds on planets versus it becomes this like crazy the soer is the yeah the pair of the so those seeing they do not see though hearing they do not hear or understand and then where is it uh oh yeah gotten it was any told a farmer went out to sow a seed as he was scattering the seeds some fell along the path and the birds ate it up some fell on rocky places where it did not have much soil it spring up quickly because the soil is shallow but when the sun came up the plants were scorched and they wither because they had no root other seed fell among thorns which grew up and choked the plants still others he fell on good soil where it produced a crop 160 or 30 times what was sound whoever has ears let them hear listen to this the disciples came to him and asked why do you speak to the people in parables he replied because the knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of heaven has been given to you but not to them whoever whoever has will be given more and they will have an abundance whoever does not have even what they have will be taken from them this is why I speak to them in parables I'd be like bro what the fuck did you just say can you break that down if I had that guy in the podcast if I had God in the podcast I was like okay do you have friends okay when you talk to friends like you should when you say like complicated things you should make them make sense so I know you're smart you made the whole universe yeah I'm not being disrespectful sir but what did you say well let me answer you can't be careful you see imagine a flower growing from stone sometimes the stone is angry at the flower but sometimes the stone glows with light this is why is it because we teach kids that way kind of we kind of teach kids almost in parables well if each kid's like a simplistic form of everything well I think it's an acknowledgement of a kind of spectrum of intelligence right it's like right the idea is like let me give you a little data fractal here that's why it's so rude when someone talks down to you or when someone's like I don't know if you know but let me explain to you please what's wrong with the way you're thinking I can't wait to hear it's the grossest way to talk to people ever it is though it's it's an absolutely a sign of low intelligence if you're so idiotic that you think and you'd be honest yeah but yeah but you feel but you're you're deciding to be mean about a point of discussion that's right that's what it is you're deciding to be mean instead of saying I have a lot of knowledge about this if we could if I could tell you what I know like this is why I believe what you're saying is not true yeah because I actually have a PhD in this and this is how we know this and this is how we know that right and then you go oh that's essentially what Eric Weinstein did to Terrence Howard right so when Terrence Albers on the podcast there's a lot of things that are saying that were true and really fascinating very interesting he's a very brilliant guy yeah Eric Weinstein is a legitimate PhD in mathematics right super fucking crazy scary smart and he was any said to him he said look I'm not giving you peer review he goes I'm not a peer you're not my peer he goes I'm an expert I give you an expert review I'm saying you have a lot of a really interesting ideas just stop teaching people stop stop it's offensive to the people that actually do this for a living that's all it is it doesn't you are like us he and this is what he said of him he said he's one of us he just went down a different path that's right he's a brilliant guy who has a strong desire to understand the universe yeah strong desire to understand things but he's not you have to go down the path of peers you have to go down the path of you got to be with all these other legitimate people to bounce these ideas about and the only way you're really going to get in cut if you you have to find some online community of legitimate people that accept you you have to be invited into something or you have to fucking attend a university like all the other I did that's that's how you find out especially when he comes to shit like mathematics boy you know when you're talking about like things like physics yeah boy you need do you need that's these are cold hard fact-based disciplines like you need to be around the people that are the cream of the crop of that that's it yeah that's right man and and that I watched some of that and I loved it because you will that's what compassion looks like you got to see also the Terrence is a good guy yeah exactly get upset it didn't get angry yeah it wasn't designed to really it wasn't at all and it was also an acknowledgement that a lot of his ideas are really fucking good that peopleing ideas are really fucking good do you know the other thing that he has that he invented you've seen that lynch pin thing that he invented I saw something like that modular drone technology yeah like be used for construction and yeah and moving giant girders it's a hard thing well they all link together it's like a geometric pattern but the nerdiest of nerdy things was Weinstein calling him out on the degree of the angle of one of the like fucking calculations that he made I don't remember exactly what it was you had to cheat that right right and he's like yeah I did I did that to make it work he's like that's they were like fucking with you because he understood why there would be something problematic about linking all these specific geometric patterns and then they had to make some slight adjustment to make them link up perfectly I love that super nerd talk inside baseball comedians do it too like when we're like breaking down a joke and like like them to a my new pause or something it's the same thing but yeah I mean this this was this is what I love when you read about the history of science you read about like famous physicists getting in real like intense fights with each other and you see that the process of discovering the truth does involve a kind of mutual curiosity but not being afraid to say this is fucking wrong but allowing the other person to fire back because you both know that via this conflict potentially you discover something new and that that was the attitude I mean like this whole thing where suddenly normal people aren't supposed to engage in science is really fucked up when you look at like the history of science which used to be maniacs like Newton who they analyzed his hair mercury in his fucking hair because everything had poison it back then well nobody was experimenting with mercury is interesting he's like building scale replicas of the temple of Solomon you know like you look at that and you see that now Newton today you know somebody like Don Lim would be like I really so you get a basic fucking Newton with Mercury in his hair and his little doll house like the temple of Solomon oh yeah he's a real scientist that's not what they look like it's like these people were out of their fucking minds of sigmund Freud just injecting fucking liquid cocaine into his veins you look at like the history of those mom freaking out about his mom shoving the guards up his ass I don't think he really did that but I wouldn't be surprised but you know you look at the history of what brilliant people who have shifted the culture actually behave like Tesla yeah fucking Tesla did like I don't know like you love his pigeon in love with the pigeon didn't want to like what the thought about castrating himself because his sex drive was getting in the way of his research so he's like I'll just chop my dick he did dude I think there was a description of him destroying his sexuality yeah dude so so you you sort of like realize that for whatever reason the priest class of default reality of which Don Lemon is a high priest have suddenly created this ridiculous version of scientists of philosophers of intellectuals that are domesticated people normal fucking people is actually really awful in the sense that all of the like philosophers and scientists out there today who are like you know in their filthy fucking apartments who've been staring into a candle for like five hours they're not thinking like I'm a scientist they might be you don't know like this this this new basically like it appears that the power structures in the world want to create this homogeneous version of humanity within which there's always declawed people who completely align on a few ridiculous facts absolutely and you can make those people very clawed if you bond them together to attack anybody who doesn't stay in line that's right yeah that's right and that is what again like a coup or you get rid of the president at least you know it's not the president tyranny where you don't have soldiers in the streets but a kind of societal pressure an unending pressure trying to unlock thoughts TikTok the reels the algorithm like dude if you ever looked at pendulum sync up but I don't watch TikTok I don't have TikTok I know it sucks because I try to send you some TikTok shit you can't look at it I won't click on it but I don't the the the the probably already infected my phone just could send me those links I'm sorry I'm probably in the user agreement I still send me agree to infect other people's phones every time you send me a link I keep opening you all of like I try not giving in well it's it is so incredibly hypnotic like it is so advanced in what it does but not interested it's really creepy though because like it's it's syncing as it's homogenizing people and that's what I don't like is like it's creating this synced up and it's creepy because like the TikTok dance is actually if you think about it it's really a symbol of what it's doing for a lot of other things like maybe you're not doing a choreographed dance with your family in front of the Christmas tree to some dumb song but why is it that everything you say I've read I've seen written exactly in the same way on Reddit why is it that every opinion you have matches not just like the idea doesn't match but the way you're verbalizing their idea that is it is like a sentence that I've heard over and over and over again in different places that is so spooky to me yeah so to me like that and also that it's called TikTok which in my fucking paranoid universe I keep thinking is that the TikTok of a metronome they're talking about getting people to dance do a certain cultural BPM Jamie I'm gonna send you something I'm not sure if it's true so I want you to find out if it's true and it was someone was saying that there's a whole series of I saved it on Twitter it's a link on Twitter that's what it is there's a whole series of people who were claiming to be doctors saying the exact same thing I saw that I know the problem with those things is like people bullshit and when people both here it is all something to you know when people bullshit it's really hard to tell you know because yeah if you change this and you know create this in Photoshop and then people start spreading it then all something that narrative gets out and most people don't ever hear oh no no somebody made that in Photoshop right so by the time it gets around it's like I don't know I don't know if it's true or not right these are one of those so it's like if that's true and if all these doctors wear tweeting out the exact same verbiage exactly I wonder if that's a mandate I wonder if they're sent something like a mass email that says copy and paste this perhaps Discord server or I wonder if they're fake doctors or I wonder you know if it's like some bot program designed to encourage people to go get vaccinated or whatever it was I don't know if it was real so I don't want to like I want to Dr. Jamie to look at it real quick thank you Jamie Jamie superscaps goal to the point of being a liberal why is that why is that why is that he's triggered he's triggered that narrative gets around people I know I know Jamie's not a liberal folks yeah Jamie's very down the middle hey Jamie's not a liver you're a centrist is that correct sure I think so right this is weird I'm just looking at the account I don't I'm trying to figure out a way to to research it I'm right Twitter's or Google search the image see if the thing has been community noted I do see one different here's what difference I'm noticing just looking at it that the different font well the third thing that they're saying is a little different because it's certain to be a joke Sogma is a joke it's something that's like my nip like someone that's oh really yeah look my next area another one hilarious hilarious that's very funny already in troll space but okay so it does mean oh so it could be that a bunch of people just decided to retweet it for funsies I it's some of them are why don't you go to their accounts look up and use it or it could have been one of those things where someone got caught do you remember when there was this like misinformation video that got out there was all these local news anchors giving the same yeah that's crazy in verbatim yeah in tune in time yeah it's really weird yeah play that Jamie I do know where that how that happens yeah they get given just get this thing script yeah it's like local news stuff it's like I mean usually happens I know player media right but it's about misinformation oh yeah right it's it's weird right it's weird right because they're basically protecting their job so what is it they've been caught stealing money you know they've got a big fucking pot of gold then you know and the people are at the door like I already got a golden there well you're hearing is misinformation it's all misinformation we are the number one source of news and we're dedicated to give you that true objective they're already we're signing the same script right is it um what company is it that makes them their scene player so they make them let's just play it though because it's so crazy that these people or the people that are in charge of giving you the news and they're reading off this thing pretending that this is the these are their thoughts this is what's bizarre about that where it's untenable because people know that those are not their thoughts they know they're reading off of scripts right everybody knows it so it doesn't work but you're just making noise with your mouth and people are still on twitter well they get you know what I mean they're still there's still like reading what's actually going on versus what you're saying also you know you know they the ideas you get these people to dress up like humans and then just get them to like you know in tone whatever the fucking thing is you want them to read yeah and we think they're one of us and so we believe them Jamie did I send you the thing where the girl is uh excuse me the woman is giving a um a press conference on uh the uap's and the drones and she's saying we don't know what they are they're not ours and they're not an adversaries that's I think I tweeted I send it to that's the one where she's wearing a UFO necklace you'll see she's wearing a UFO she's a cook and she a cook who is who is a slitty I don't know she's in front of a podium so I trust her that's what I go by it's a pony get all the way the fuck up there nobody in the tackle you know it's me telling the truth yeah you're at the podium totally yeah yeah you're at the sacred scroll there's a flag behind you I'm gonna buy uh Aria Torah you ever see the Torah I was like in a or the Talmud you can just buy you're gonna buy the actual scroll hey get someone to write it for you that's a terrible responsibility fam because you have to like treat it really carefully I have to put in a vault they have dudes they uh no he's gonna keep in his living room jerk off on it did he say that no no you won't I promise he still believes he's not gonna jerk off on the Torah I promise you he's gonna put it oh Talmud the Torah you want your dude how about this one could Jamie can you find you remember that lady they hired for the ministry event for it wasn't called that but it was like yeah ministry of disinformation okay can you find the ministry of different information ladies singing super califragilistic yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah Cindy or well I think she's like such a loon and this idea that this person is gonna be in charge of what's legitimate and not there's too many things and just what people are realizing there's too many things that they told us were not legitimate just three years ago that are 100 percent fact now and everybody knows that and this is this uh latest what is the house committee thing on with with COVID and the who I'm lab leak and this lady this is the craziest ever thing Nina Jenkovich yeah can you imagine they think we're idiots we do links on Ukraine or when TikTok concerns they could with can't contain their laundry in the info and we really should take note and not support their lives without wallet voice or vote oh information kind of catchy I mean she's beautiful in this way anime niex did this is real this feels like anime niex to me you guys might know I think it's really her no no I mean but that they would give information out in songs like that songform and it would be informational but if you but this was like something that she released when they were talking about her being the ministry of the head of the I'm just saying it's information hey but I think it's honestly just her trying to go viral with a video about this thing that she's doing that's what it is and that's the it's a good way to go viral I mean we just talked about it I mean people share it even if it's preposterous it's a good way to get attention to this thing that you're about to do and why fine if if the United States isn't literally trillions of dollars in debt and partially because people like that are getting hired to sing fucking Mary Poppins she saw about misinformation then it's an atrocity should get Nancy Pelosi money dude you should get I mean like Nancy Pelosi does your very full of diamonds just crystal and diamonds in the bathtub just water and just hang in there until that fucking genetic engineering comes you could be young again rules what was it she said Joe Biden should be on Mount Rushmore yeah good call dude always he's definitely not gonna send you in jail that guy is uh oh this is what I want to talk to you about pardons I'm not opposed to the idea of being pardoned yeah because I think that there's like governors can find out that someone legitimately got railroaded and they they can pardon someone yeah I like that I like that I like that the president compartments of people like I wish they pardoned Ed Snowden yeah I you know there's a bunch of Julian Assange they should have pardoned Julian Assange I wish there was you know a way to stop someone from pardoned 8,000 fucking people and some of them were like murderers some of them are the kids the kids for cash judge kids for cash one of them or one of the people we talked about this the other day he's one of the people he had two years left in a sentence but still like it's the principal how many lives were destroyed by that kids for casting we how many how many de-humanizing decisions were made where you decided to lock young people up in detention centers where they would get raped and beaten up and tortured and separated from their family and sent down a horrible road of distrust of law enforcement and of authority and everything else everything else you're basically setting them up for a life of being a fucking loser unless they have the strongest of wills and they could figure out a way to stay positive and get through it and then use that to fuel whatever they do out that's so rare man those people are so rare well here's the problem man I mean the problem is well number one I think okay like you pull someone over you breathalize they're driving drunk right so you're like you can't drive now because you're drunk so also you wouldn't say to them I'm gonna give you the ability to pardon as many people as you want for any crime that you want right so if somebody has dementia right why can they do all the burdens it's that's so crazy that's a great point that I never even thought of yeah like so why would you still give them that power well the other thing that's really fucking crazy about it is I don't know what we the president makes a year but it's not enough money we barely pay the president anything so I think it's like four hundred thousand dollars a year you can't say that's barely enough a daily I know I mean for the actual job I mean literally every day you're shitting blood because no matter what you do you say the wrong thing five thousand people accidentally die it's the most stressful job on earth I'm saying the actual thing theoretically in my mind so I would say you know in the way that we pay our football players a shit ton of money baseball players a shit ton of money dude theoretically keeping our country from getting nukes should make a lot of money why not if how about this how about we pay them more but they can't do speeches no speeches afterwards no paid speeches when you leave you can write books you write books but none of those paid bank speeches you do those five hundred thousand dollar speeches that's so to me it's like on your way out you sell pardons on your way out you you via some god knows what mechanism that's probably been in place for a long time people are able to give you this or that and you pardon that person yeah that's where it's fucked up it's like dude a mom right come on man that's trading that's how it works that's how it works you give you little this you give me a little that we do it right in front of the world and do you gonna let out murderers and then especially if you got cued so especially you got cued you got humiliating they didn't give you your trust is in he letting out Joe exotic it's insane let him out why not let him out you're gonna do kids for cash you're not gonna do Joe fucking exotic yeah and how is Joe exotic DMing me how's this happening I think he because he knows because you will say things like this you have a phone Joe dude I feel a lot of phone Joe can you have a Twitter account Joe I feel like right now because of your like you aiding trumping any elected I and I don't think you're the kind of person to do this but I do feel like you could probably call in like at least one favor get jokes on it out dude why not for all of us ross rust all work first okay sure yeah me I'm obviously I think I think I think Trump committed to doing that to releasing really yeah well I mean that's fine if that's true Jimmy I believe it is I believe he was it was a one of those bitcoin fucking things that he did you know and the dance or Dave said that the libertarian thing he said yes that's right libertarian is libertarian and bitcoin the same fucking category in my brain what I barely tuned in it's all the same it's like an ft libertarian bitcoin yeah yeah yeah whatever yeah I'm a libertarian like sure it's on in paper it's great idea it's not it's not a real party I'm a sovereign citizen I'm a sovereign citizen too really yeah it's great but I'm not of this planet where you from the place I'm from everywhere I'm from everywhere man I'm Johnny Cash dude that's a lot of place everywhere man I'm a great song what a great fucking son Johnny Cash was the fucking man oh my fucking man that's an incarnation I would pick like if we get to like if there's a VHS library of incarnations there's a long line of ejony cash I'm picking Johnny Cash oh my god 10 probably as you imagine being Johnny Cash when you played at Folsom prison Folsom prison blues it's the most incredible he played at the prison it's incredible Paul Rodriguez did a comedy special at a prison like way back in the day I forget when it was but I remember I believe it was an HBO special and he did it live from a prison which is fucking buck wow badass buck wow that mean I if you're gonna do that you would have to work you know who could do that Joey Diaz 100 easily 100% he would murder the prison yeah you know metaphorically I mean if there was a simulator and this is again like is this Paul Rodriguez behind bars live in Saint Quentin 1991 damn respect to Paul Rodriguez I don't even know if it worked through the laughing they lose the laughing looks like they're having a good time that's crazy no they don't have to I'm joking I'm sure they don't rush him who's the house of the guards gonna stop by the time they beat him to death I mean 50 dudes just rush him seriously you're thinking about that before you on stage like you they like Paul Rodriguez I mean but yeah do they all out of you know it's Saint Quentin he was popular at the time like me is still popular but he was like very very popular at the time there's a guy probably in the audience who like wore his daughters in trails as an necklace you know what I mean like he is neighbors right fuck this dog it's badass that's a badass that's a badass move I mean dude when you think about all of the shit that we're talking about and really when you sort of look at like just among our group of friends the insane events the last few months Tony Hinchcliffe was misquoted by Obama I mean there's a speaker at the Trump rally who said Puerto Rico's a pile of garbage those are human beings dude I mean no nobody's age harder than that dude well he's withered bro but those are like vampire ears there's like you got bit by a leech like you got a parasite yeah you're reading the Necronomiconis he's he's yeah right right right you have the archicovident in your bedroom yeah you're cooking you're cooking your agent like you look you age 50 fucking years you look you're a really good looking 70 year old there's something weird I mean just think about like what that's like to be pressure the star the you know you're can I'm saying as far as power goes I think power must be so addictive and so you're the fucking president not just a president you're like this kind of rock star president for a second yeah one of the greatest presidents of all time of all time and so you lose that power and now what you know what I mean now what and then you try desperately to like grab control of the thing and you can't it didn't work so essentially whatever like prana or energy you've been extracting from having that kind of power it's gone gone now you have the nice house but like really like what's left you're at the fucking control board for like America and now nothing you wither you deflate you like no purpose no purpose I think we're gonna be able to read minds in five years and all this is gonna be a moot point well no first it's gonna be all go out the window I think quantum computing is gonna crush encryption yeah we're gonna have a real problem with currency worldwide we're gonna have to figure out how to redistribute resources without conventional capitalism there's gonna be some weird new shifting that's gonna come along with the birth of this AI that's way more intelligent than us and everything's gonna get super fucking weird and we're not ready for it and we think that we oh we have to be ready for it's not gonna happen like that because I'm not ready for it no one's ready for it no it couldn't have just like a super volcano just like an asteroid impact it can happen and you're not ready for it that's right and a lot of us might not make it that's right dude okay this is as far as like AG I guess it like when Altman came out and said this year I don't the the somewhat a CEO from the company I think to make well I don't know one of the other AI's said two years from now I think but the idea is if if Biden came out was like guys got some news we've detected a mothership it's coming to the planet in a year we don't understand anything about who they are other than they must have extraordinary technology based on what we've seen of their ship I'm good the whole planet the next few years we just be getting ready NASA anthropologists philosopher scientists defense people what do we do if they want to focus up what what what do we do how do you interact with aliens but having these tech people say we are about to have a brand new species essentially a technological species and AGI is coming to the planet that will surpass us as far as being able to solve problems it will know everything it's gonna be in about a year maybe two years you would think the reaction to that will be okay we've got to get ready for this what does that mean what's gonna happen and we can't get ready maybe that's what this scramble is all about that we just have to fucking die screaming me Christmas oh maybe it can't be solved just like Australia pithika's kitten figure out how to make a plane it's we're not prepared for it and we're not supposed to last we're supposed to carry on to the next thing and the next thing will still be us. That's what's going to be weird. The next thing is going to still be us. We just want us to stay us like this. We want, you know, fucking blue songs and we're entering Quisky. Sure. We want to smoke cigarettes. We want to like get in fist fights. We want us to stay us. Well, it's, you know, it's not going to happen. I'm sure if you could travel back in time and there was an intelligent semi-intelligent version of humanity. One of our ancestors who still had a workable tail. And you're like, hey, I want to show you what you're going to grow into. And probably there'd be a lot of things that are excited about. Whoa. Cars. Incredible. Jesus Christ. You can shit in your own house. Yeah. Wow. But then they would see that we didn't have tails. And they're like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. I'm not doing that if I lose my tail. So this is for sure the sort of cultural drama that we're seeing is, and you know, the trans controversy. There's aspects to it where like, yeah, why are you duchen't be in sports. But the reality is where we're going is going to make that controversy seem like nothing. Not only that, it seems like if you wanted to have an evolutionary path towards a genderless society, wouldn't you have that society if you wanted to tame the wild primate? Wouldn't you have that society be completely addicted to plastic? These plastic for everything, which is an endocrine disruptor. So you have these plastic in these chemicals that get into the body, lower testosterone, shrink dicks, shrink taints. Dr. Shannis wants or- They shrink taints. Yeah. Yeah. Shannis want if you ever talked to her. I didn't know that taint could shrink. You should talk. No, it's in utero. So this is what happens when you introduce mammals to that. Her book is called Countdown. That's right. I used to remember it. It's great book. She's really fun too. She's a really fascinating person. But what they found is with mammals when you introduce phthalates, which are these plastics, like microplastics and the chemicals that come off of them into pregnant women or pregnant mice. The babies have smaller taints. And the taint is one of the best ways to distinguish a male or female in mammals. And males, the taint is 50 to 100% longer. Is it really called the taint? They don't call the taint. They have a word for it. She told me, but she calls the taint because she's fun. She has a thing on her website called the Jiz Quiz. It's very funny. She's very funny. And she's a really distinguished professor. But what she's saying essentially is that these plastics are lowering hormone levels. They are lowering birth rate levels. They're increasing in the amount of miscarriages that women so that all these things she believes are completely connected. And that this hormone disruptor that is on these plastics is causing people to become sicker and a little bit deformed because your hormones aren't expressing themselves correctly because they're being poisoned. If you were society, like if you were going to get to where the aliens are, they look genderless, don't they? Yeah, sure. Don't you think that's probably us in the future? Aren't you glad they're genderless? Sure. Can you imagine the gray that big swing and dicks? Giant hogs. It would be horrible. Those gray pictures would be very different. Very different. Santa over your bed, jacking off in your face. Horrible. Yeah. While you're paralyzed, you're like, you're like, you're like, oh, this is a shit. I think that we're clinging to this idea of male and female. Look, I think currently there are male and females for sure. And this is why I'm completely opposed to biological males who have mental illness. And that's what gender dysphoria is, even if you're being kind. It's a mental illness. Whatever it is, whatever it is, you're not well in who you are. You wish you were a different gender. I fully support you. That's not one of them, but you can't compete with biological females. We can't pretend that you're a biological female because when we want you to feel good, you have massive physical advantages. They've been clearly documented. Anybody who says does any differently is full shit, talked to Riley Gaines. Right. Talk to her. She's the expert in this shit. She had to go through that shit with swimming. It feels crazy to me. It's crazy. You have to say that. It's so crazy. It's so crazy that you have to say that to liberals who always wanted to protect women. The whole thing is bonkers, but it just goes to show you it's not real. This idea of left and right is not real. Right. These are just masks that people put on. These are just a conglomeration of opinions that people adopt. Most people have not thought most of the things through. They don't have the time. They have to work all fucking day. They have a family. Maybe they have a hobby to try to get out and play hoops with their friends. Maybe they get together with their buddies and they want to play video games one night a week. Jesus Christ, they don't have fucking time to pay attention on this crazy shit. That's what's really going on. Right. Most people are just deciding that I'm a progressive. I will repeat progressive talking points. I will violently defend. A woman's right to choose. They get into these patterns. And then the same thing happens on the right. The same thing. Exactly. Same thing. That's why the right is against the war in Ukraine and the left is supporting it. It's like this is like Vietnam and reverse. The whole thing is fucking bananas. Right. You know, the right is insisting on free speech. They were the motherfuckers that were censoring everybody. They wanted to lock Howard Stern up in jail. He had to fight the crazy. They sued him. They just fucking parent company had to play untold amounts of money. How much money did Howard Stern's company get fined? It was hundreds of thousands of dollars. If not, millions. Yeah. Insane amounts of money. The fucking government was trying to shut down a radio guy for a talking shit. It's crazy. So, and now that's the left. It's just patterns, man. It's just patterns where people can justify certain behaviors because it aligns with their ideology. That's right. And also where it gets really fucked up is you are dancing to a song that basically there's like, here's two songs. There's two songs you can dance to. The right song or the song of the left. The the metronome is beating out to, I guess, somewhat different rhythms. People dance to those. They get in fights over. You got to do our dance. Yeah. Meanwhile, there's a million other songs out there. You could be dancing to. And there are songs that are much older than America, much older than maybe the planet itself, which is that's why I really think it's creepy the way that Christianity or any religion where there's theism, it's in the list of things that should be decried by an intelligent person. We shoot down this notion of God. We shoot down this or that. But all of these religions, at the very least, they give you a new song to dance to that isn't fucking war drums. They don't like that. They don't like that. Because suddenly you're supposed to be perturbed. Like, you know, that stupid bust. Also the arrogance of intellectualism. You know, you get really smart and these idea of these fairy tales seem preposterous to you. That's right. And you don't want to accept that maybe what it is is a moral scaffolding that keeps society glued together. And it's probably based on some truth. There's some of it that seems to be a history of the world. Oh, and also the most people that I have encountered who have a lot of people have encountered who are rejecting this religion or that it's I get it. It's religious trauma. I just ran into somebody at Best Buy recognized me had a long conversation. It's religious trauma. They were raised in some kind of like form of spiritual abuse. And in that, it's snake handlers, bingo. And they, but listen, if you want to handle snakes great, the problem is if you tell a kid to disregard their rational mind. In other words, the introduction to the conversation of questions regarding this or that or not Matt with like, oh, yeah, it's a good question. I don't know. But her you're going to hell. You're going to hell. You're demon possessed. So then you experience that. And of course, you must reject the thing. It's like when you have a hangover and you smile to Kila, you can't connect. So I get it. But the main thing is what's what I love about religion or Christianity is it's like just try it on for size. What happens if you pray? I know you don't believe in it. Sounds insane. What the fuck are they talking about? Sounds absolutely nuts. I know it sounds absolutely nuts. Now what happens if you pray just for a few days? What happens if you pray? And then once you start doing the experiment, it starts off with like, this is just I'm going to do it. It's probably bullshit. Opium of the masses. But then you realize you're getting pulled in, not in a bad way. But right away, there seems to be some feeling of connection, some sense of something a little different than what you're used to experiencing. And sometimes that can get really scary for people. And they're like, fuck this. No, it's getting me. And it's like to me that that should be the experiment of any anyone who's skeptical. And if you're skeptical about Christianity or any you should be. You should 100% be skeptical of it's like what Mark Twain said. Religion is what happened when the first command meant the first fool. You should be skeptical. But if you read the gospels and you realize like the part of the story there is an invitation to connect on your own, you don't need the priest class. You don't have to listen to the fucking rules. You don't have to it's just between you and the eternal. And see what happens. Right. To me, that's the number one thing is just investigate, explore and don't let anyone subvert your rational mind. Use that as a form of connecting with the thing. Even if you connect via rejection, it's still worth like a wholehearted exploration at the very least to experience a cultural trance. I don't think that's what it is. But maybe what that cultural trance is is this is like it's a pattern that you can you can follow that can connect you to the divine. And there's a bunch of these different patterns. This pattern might be Buddhism. This pattern might be Islam. This pattern might be even more monism. Even Scientology. Definitely. I think all of them can be distorted. All of them can have those guys that have private jets and Rolls Royces and those fucking crazy arena guys. All of it can go in that direction. But all of it is kind of a moral scaffolding that seems to be designed to help us in this journey of getting away from the primate instincts. That's right. Getting away from and also connecting to each other and transcending state propaganda. Like this is the this is like my favorite version of the Bible. They're trying to trick Jesus. They don't know their attitude. Imagine being so cocky thinking trick Jesus. I would try. I got it. Maybe. What'd be cool if you could. I want to bring out three card money. Who are managing Jesus walking down New York City and watching police three card money and getting soccer. You're like, hey, I thought you were the fucking I thought you were the guy. Hey man, that don't don't do that. He's don't understand. It's not the same card. Oh my god. Jesus Christ, you don't have any more shackles. You're out of shackles. Is that what they use shackles? I guess. Well, they have back that I don't have denarius. What kind of dollars did they have? What unit of money was around when Jesus question? Super good question. I wish I knew it. Be a clever thing to say. Checkles sounds good though. Shackles is a fun name for points. Shackles. Shackles. Was it shackles? It comes up with the Phoenician. Let's fucking go. Let's fucking go. It's shackles, son. There you go. There's oh yeah. So imagine Jesus blew all of shackles on three card money. Jesus. Jesus. We just stick to being the fuck I'm. What are you doing? Yeah. Why are you here again? He gets hustled in a basketball game like Jesus. You're gonna question him. Not good at basketball. You can't run in those fucking sandals. Are you doing this? You can turn water in the wine. Let's just fucking lose money at basketball. He plays horse with people. He keeps missing. Wow. That would really be weird. Jesus would have to be really good at badminton. Every plays badminton. He's got a win. Pins going to win. Well, I'm not going to believe your Jesus if you can't wrestle. If you're bad at pen. If you get pinned, if you get pinned really quick in a wrestling match, like what the fuck dude? Dude, yeah, he's got to be good at every somebody renequered jokes. Jesus. You're like. You're like. You're doing it. You're like. I don't know. He's not touching out. He doesn't know what the fuck to do. He doesn't know shit. He's a wipe out. Why is he in this competition? There's a Jesus goes to the open golf tournament. And there was like, Jesus fucking sucks it golf. He can't even fucking hit the ball. Somebody show him how to hit the ball. He's no way. Why did you let Jesus compete in the UFC? Jesus is playing pickleball. Just falling down. Not good at pickleball. I know. And that people would be so disappointed in Jesus. Everything that they walked just bold gutter ball every time. You fucking dummy. What are you doing? Farts in the car. Just that. You're like, dude. Roll the window down. Everybody smelled back then. I think farts probably like cleared the air a little. Oh, something interesting to smell. Some new thing instead of these shitty asses that I smell everywhere. I just read that they used to think smelling farts in a jar would cure diseases. What it doesn't? How do you say a fart in a jar? Cancel my subscription. How do you mail that? This is some young lady that we we featured on the podcast at one point time was making a ton of money for your first. Yeah, son farts. Dude, that's incredible. I hope she didn't even fart in those jars. I hope those dummies. I wasn't even that long ago. It's just 2014. No, smelling farts in a jar does not cure disease. It does. Look, and you don't know. You don't know. Read that in 2014. My guy. Where a proctor told me that smelling farts was the way to go. These claims are based on a university of exit or press release that was not about smelling farts. Imagine they've heard of this new medication they're given cows to make them fart less. Oh, during the plague. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, I almost what you said. That's not that's not far off from what this says. It's just something better. It's a great plague of London in the 1600s with a scary time. The public is just not a healthy including sniffing a jar of their own farts. But then doctors were apparently convinced that the plague was spread via deadly air vapor and that a foul smelling substance could dilute the pollution. That's some locals apparently took the storing their farts and jars just in case the situation suddenly demanded a quick whiff. Honey, open the fart cabinet. Open the old vintage farts. I'm gonna get them farts from when I was 23 and I had a good gut biome. Dude, like that's so hilarious. That is so fucking crazy. I want to know how long it lasted because for one I understand that you can't really fart in a jar and keep it there. Here's by the time you seal it up, it's probably sealed up with so much oxygen. There's only one way to find out and get Ari. Can you get a heart of fart in a jar? Let's smell it in there and lie to you. It's so gross. Ari just shits publicly. He's out of his mind. How do you get the fart in the jar? I guess you put the jar up to your asshole when you about. You think it capped, but then you got to get the cap on her. Real quickly. Go Dinge. Jamie, can you get a little bit of air in there? I'm looking at it. You know what I mean? It's like moon chai. It's not 100% alcohol. You don't want to use a tube if you're a pro. Yeah, you use it too. A tube going in at a jar. You would have like a diaper, a big like a gas diaper with like a completely sealed to your ass. They're a COVID mask. And then you would just fart into that two. It's gonna go into that jar and then you'd ever, you'd do it all day long. Right. You're gonna be a robot there that would seal that jar off. How do you know what to fill? How do you know when you're jars? What if you gave me a half-ass I want a real fart or just a the jar only has like a yeah, a little fart. I want a 330 AM Taco Bell fart. Dude, that's what I want. What you're in the car and you buy Taco Bell and you immediately hate yourself. There's a study on it. They use it depends on the. You have far to drop in my knees. Oh my god. It's over days, obviously. Who did this? Oh my god. Some awesome scientist. How a shy and then. Jacks. Yeah. Why is it called anal. Wait, that can't be your anal chemistry. No, it's like a no, that's my study. My field of study. You don't can't see. Just go with that. Oh my god. Jesus Christ. Literally. I mean, you farting in jars. The sad thing about that article though, because it comes out and so that means there's people who think fart in a jar can cure cancer. And that means that somebody was laying in bed dying. And someone who loved them came up and said, I know this is going to seem weird, dad, but I need you to smell this. And like there was people dying again. This brings us back to the placebo effect. Could work because I think almost everything works. It just doesn't work when your streets are filled with sewer. You know, I think that was what everybody was dying of back then. They had horrible terribly unsanitary conditions everywhere. Everything was covered in shit. Everything was shitty, water, shitting in a bed. No running water. And you have a bunch of people living together. You have horrible diseases. According to the, their study, one of those jars, if found could maybe have the fart from the 17th century. Now that's a horror movie right there. Like you find like a 17th century fart. You sniff that fart and then you may return until like one of those 28 days later zombies are that spreads. This virus is how to chance to adapt and evolve and plan its strategy while trapped inside this jar and get back at the humans because it doesn't have to die. So it lives in this guy's butt gas and then it evolves over hundreds of years figure out through the multiverse how to communicate with other other bacteria everywhere in the lives of strategy. Yep. To more itself over 1000s of generations of new viruses to become some crazy rage virus. By the way, man. Maybe here's the other thing. Maybe that is the fountain of youth. Maybe the thing they're trying to hide from us the most obvious thing is if you smell an aged fart, you're going to do reverse age. Yeah. Maybe snake oil works. The science on harvest. How do you harvest the best bit of harvest? Thank you. Oh, science. Oh, there you go. Not, not, don't try to catch the fart in there. Yeah, we got to be accurate. Can you can you acuer with your farts Jamie, can you YouTube smelling? How do you close the gap? You got a slide. A little there. You might get a little water in your farts. Yeah. That's fine. No, you can't farts in the water together. They're separate. Oh, so when you open it'll be pure farts, but a little bit of water at the bottom. How do I know that the water isn't diluting and slowly washing the farts over 200 years? It's not how Jamie, can you scroll up a little bit? Yeah. Farts lights in my degree in farts. Sorry. Can you pull that up again? I just, I find it interesting that someone wrote an entire essay on how to do this. When you go back to the beginning, I just want to read the how do you introduce the story here? How do you bring this up to a fucking person where you want to grant? Yeah. I recently caught my four-year-old nephew attending the fart into a jar and I hope it's saving it for later to surprise Grant. This is not the first time I've encountered a little boy with a dream of bottling his own farts. Here's a coat, but younger cousin, let's call him Jay at a whole shelf of dated mace and charts in their part. It was very proud of his collection. That kid is killing cats. That's a fucking serial killer. He's got a fucking shelf of dated jars of his farts. What a fucking psychopath. Jeffrey Dahmer. He has nothing better to do than just fart in jars. I want to show you my jar collection. Those are my farts. That's New Year's Eve. He's torturing animals. That's a fart when September 11th. That's a fear fart. Oh my god. Oh my god. Wow. Duncan, we got to wrap this up, unfortunately. What a joy. What a joy. Always. Thanks for having me on. I can't really just do another eight hours in a row. Easily. Easily. I didn't even have to be once. I know. I wasn't me either. I don't know what happened. Usually, you have to piss like four times for that. I know. We were locked in. I appreciate you very much, brother. I love you. You're one of my favorite people. You really are. You are, too, man. You're a real treasure. Thank you. These are some of my favorite podcasts of all time. This is a weird combination of the two of us. I love it. We think up in the weirdest way, man. It's the best, man. It is. That's it, man. I love you. I love you too. Hi, Christian. Hi, Christian. Hi, Christian. Bye.