Andrew, how are you? What's happening, man? Doing great. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you. I'm really excited to talk to you about this. Just sort of for an introduction, tell people what you do. Some of neuroscientists, I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology, Stanford School of Medicine. So I run a laboratory. I teach a little bit. I teach neuroanatimatim medical students. But mainly my lab does research. So I've got students in post-docs, and we're trying to figure out the answers to two problems. The first problem is how to regenerate the damaged nervous system, in particular, the connections between the eye and the brain to restore vision to the blind. So that's a big mission of ours. And to prevent vision loss in people that are losing their vision. And the other thing that we're doing is we're focusing a lot on stress and other states of mind. So I'm obsessed with the idea that all our states of mind come from the brain and the body. And we're trying to figure out what happens in the brain and body when we're stressed and how to control it. What happens in the brain and body when we are creative and how to control it. And essentially for all states of mind. But rather than try and tackle the really high level stuff, like flow and states of awe, we're really focused on these states of stress and things like focus and the ability to think clearly and do certain things athletically or cognitively. Because first of all, there's a lot of suffering. There are a lot of people out there. They're suffering from an inability to control their states of mind. And also, there's great potential for people who aren't suffering to be able to create and perform and do better things once we can understand how those states come about. That's an interesting way of putting it. Suffering because they can't control their states of mind. That is the case. But that's not like a politically correct way of describing it. I guess I never thought about that. That'd be accurate. Well, I think it's fair to say that all our states of mind end body. And I say mind and body because of the nervous system, which is the brain, the spinal cord and all that stuff. They connect star body and our body connects star brain. So we can't really separate those. But states of mind, which include the stuff in our skull and the body, those essentially dictate our whole life experience. So whether or not we're feeling calm when we want to be calm, whether or not we're feeling stressed, when we'd rather be calm, whether or not we are feeling focused, when we need to do work, whether or not we're feeling creative, when we want to be creative. All of that stems from the nervous system. The other organs of the body are involved. But the nervous system, the brain and those connections, it's really what it's about. So if you see somebody who's in a state of depression, or you see somebody who's in a state of flow and creativity, you can be pretty sure that that's reflecting the activity of neurons in the brain. The idea that the body and the brain are inseparable, most people who are physically active accept that and appreciate that and they know that this is probably true. But there's a lot of people that kind of want to deny that and concentrate only on the brain. And particularly, like there's a psychiatrist that will prescribe medication before they'll prescribe exercise. And it's a controversial subject. That's what I meant by saying that you are unable to control aspects of your brain or aspects of the way you're viewing things, the way you feel about things. But yeah, so I think if we take a step back and we just kind of think about what the brain and nervous system does. And again, nervous system includes all of it. We can say the brain is special, right? The brain, there is something fundamentally important about the brain part because somebody who, let's say, has a limb amputated. It doesn't fundamentally change who they are. It can change what they can do. But there will be aspects of their personality and temperament that might shift. But who they are hasn't changed. Whereas if someone has a brain lesion or the brain is degenerating, that person is fundamentally different. So there is something special about the real estate in our skulls. But that said, the job of the brain is really to combine our experience of what's going on in our body with what's going on in our mind and to react and behave to things in an adaptive way. So if I may, there's just sort of like, if we take a step back and just think, there are basically five things that the nervous system is responsible for doing. First is sensation. Sensation is non-negotiable. It's happening all the time. Sound waves are coming in. Your feet are in contact with your shoes or the floor. That's all happening. And you can't control it because we have sensors. Things in our eye, our tongue, our nose, our skin, our ears. That take physical events in the universe. Photons of light, sound waves, touch your physical pressure on the skin. And it transforms that into one language. And the language is the language of electricity of neurons. Now perception is the next thing that the brain does. And perception is all about which sensations we are conscious of. So if I say, you know, the contact of your hands with the table, now you're conscious of it, that's just your perceptual window. It's like a spotlight. It just goes straight to your hands. So there's sensation, perception. And then there are these things we call emotions, which are brain body states. They tend to make us either want to get up and move or stay still. They tend to make us think, this is a good place for me to be at mentally and physically or I want to shift this. And then there are thoughts, which we could discuss in detail if you want, which kind of arise spontaneously. They're kind of running in the background all the time. Like pop up windows on a badly filtered internet connection. But we can also deliberately have a thought. Like I can say, that pad of paper to my right is yellow. I can decide that. In the same way, I can do the fifth thing, which is an action. So you've got sensations, perceptions, feelings, slash emotions, thoughts and actions. And all five of those include the brain and the body. But how much brain and how much body is shifted by a kind of underlying, let's just think of it as a tide, like the level of the tide. And that's the autonomic nervous system. So if I'm suddenly stressed for whatever reason, my perceptual window is going to shift. My eyes are literally going to change their focus. My world will become more like portrait mode. I'll see you and everything else will become blurry when I'm calm. Actually, I have panoramic vision. I can see everything around me. So I better. So my state, my internal state of alertness or sleepiness impacts all this and in sleep, which is kind of the opposite extreme of stress. I'm not in relation to anything outside me. I'm not perceiving anything. I'm sensing things. It's non-negotiable. I'm not having real thoughts, but the thoughts are kind of disoriented in space and time. And behaviors done. You're lying down. You're sometimes paralyzed in sleep. So when I say states, it's really about this dynamic shift between what we're perceiving and how we're perceiving it. And we could go really in depth in this or not. But states of mind are fundamentally, I think, to me anyway are the most important aspect of trying to understand how the brain works. Because ultimately, if you want to understand mental illness and mental health, if you want to understand high performance, which is something my lab is really interested in, if you want to understand any of that, you have to understand how these states of mind and body relate because the autonomic nervous system, which is strongly impacting these states, is in the body. It is the basis of it is connections between the brain and body. So you're analyzing people in stress states and are you doing cognitive function tests on these people in stress states versus people in calm, placid states? Like how are you doing similar tests? Yeah. So there are two states that, like we can take that whole tangle of mess that I just, you know, throughout on the table and simplified and say, look, there are two states that I think if we could really crack, we could really understand the underlying neural mechanisms. And we could understand how people could get themselves into these two states. We would greatly improve human health and human performance, cognitively and physically. Okay. And those two states are the state of sleep. So not just the importance of sleep. I know you had Matt on here. So you have great sleep researcher. Not just that sleep is important, but how to get better at sleeping, how to access sleep. So a lot of people struggle with that. And the other state is clear calm focused. Those two states for my lab right now are the target states. But, you know, there's so many states, but if we can figure out how those work and how to put, allow people to put themselves into those states, I think it's my belief that we'll do humankind a great service. Okay. So when you say sleep, the state of sleep, like what techniques are you talking about to achieve the state of sleep or do a better job of sleeping? Yeah. So when people come into my laboratory, we essentially start pressure testing them from the moment they walk in the door. So we have a laboratory. We do some animal work. We work on mice and we study states like fear and courage and we're interested in what leads to winning in certain forms of competition between animals and these kinds of things. Aggression, those kind of very primal states. We also have a human lab. So people come into the laboratory. We have an equivalent lab, essentially, to our mouse lab. People put on VR goggles. We wire them into a lot of gear that allows us to measure things like heart rate, breathing. We're measuring pupil size, eye tracking. And in some people, because they are neurosurgery patients, we have access to the brain. We drop electrodes down into the brain, record from the human amygdala. So you have a hole in their head? They have a hole in their skull. The neurosurgeons actually, which I am not, tell us that it's no big deal, right? That basically they look at the skull as kind of a poorly evolved device. They always tell me, you're much better off of the titanium plate there anyway. It's much stronger. So they don't have a problem putting a hole in the skull. These are patients that have other issues, right? So they're saying you're better off with a titanium plate than the skull bone? Well, if you're concerned about concussion or anything, if you really want to protect the brain, you could build a better device to protect the brain. But isn't the real brain damage comes from the brain slamming against the inside wall of the skull. Yeah. And it's not going to be better with titanium. Yeah. I mean, this is neurosurgeons in their, you know, their foam inside the, yeah. There are synthetic materials that, you know, they use to protect against sloshing around. Do they, how much, how far do they go with this? Are they ever like remove the top of someone's head and replace it with titanium? Yeah, large portions, large windows. I've seen windows in the skull that are, you know, the size of an iPhone. What? Sure. You don't flip it open. Oh no. No, but now keep in mind that these are lit a manhole cover for your brain. Basically. Really? Is that available online? Can Jamie look that up? He's looking better. They, a guy who used to work in my lab who's now who's now at neural link, a neurosurgeon. Oh, one of those guys, when I was a fucking bring on the AI hyper world, they, I'm scared. Among other things, I mean, I think that, well, I always say, you know, all of human evolution is based on human neural plasticity, the ability to learn and acquire new functions in the nervous system or where our biology kind of cliffs off and can't support us in what we want to do. We build technology. Right. Yeah. Innovation steps in and says, I've got an idea to accelerate this process. And then you get kept in super genius who thinks there's no big deal, cut giant holes in the top of your head and stick these wires in there. I mean, I think there's that version of it. And I think what I haven't spoken to them directly, but except this one individual there, but you know, first of all, they're not, I don't think they're thinking about large windows in the skull unless there's a clinical need. They're talking about behind the ear. They're talking about a quarter behind the ear. Yeah. The crowd in through the bone there. Another thing is that I think it's very likely that the first 10 years of that work will be clinical in nature. Movement disorders, Parkinson's. Yeah. And of course, because I said that, they'll probably beat that by five years. Well, the quote that made me uncomfortable was when Elon told me you're not going to have to talk to communicate anymore. Hmm. I was like, oh, Jesus Christ. Where are we going with this? Well, this is interesting because, so I have a good friend who's a neurosurgeon at UCSF. We've known each other since we were little kids since we were nine. His name is Eddie Chang. It's kind of the world expert. He's a neurosurgeon, but he's also the world expert in speech and language. And what he's been doing is decoding essentially figuring out what neural signals come out of the brain that allows to speak in a certain way. So let's say I wanted to build a device that would allow you to speak eight languages tomorrow that you don't know today. The reflexive idea is that people like Eddie and people like me and maybe the neural link folks are going to go in and build chips that are going to stimulate the hippocampus and you're going to learn faster and do all that. But there's a whole other version of this and it gets right back to this issue of brain and body that we're talking about before. Now speech is a brain thing. You think about what you want to say, maybe for a joke or here and it's in your head, but it's transformed, meaning those nerve signals go in the form of electricity to the pharynx and larynx and you say things like, hello, my name is, you know, Mikey's Andrew, right? That transformation is happening at the muscle. So in theory, if I know that in English, right, and I know the nerve signals that come out of that area of cortex, that speech area that say, hello, my name is Andrew. Well, I can take those, look at how it controls the pharynx and larynx and insert maybe a little box. Maybe I don't even have to put it under the skin, maybe it's a device that I hold. So that when I say hello, my name is Andrew, but I dial it to Mandarin or French, I'll just say, and I can't do this because I don't speak Mandarin or French, hello, my name is Andrew. I'll think that, say it in English in my head, but my pharynx and larynx will say it in Mandarin or French. But isn't the problem with the way language is structured in different languages? Like, just, it wouldn't, you've, I'm sure you've read translations from like Russian to English. Sure. It's really weird. Very different. Or English to Russian is even weird or sometimes. Right. So this is really Eddie's work, but because we're such good friends, we talk about this a lot. One of the fundamental discoveries that he's made, and I should just mention all these neurosurgery patients, they have epilepsy or something else. There's a reason for opening up the skull and going in there. They're not, we're not just curious. There was a time a couple decades ago when you could do this kind of stuff, and there's some very interesting experiments that came out of that just because you could decide to study rage in humans and go in there and start probing around. But, lobotomies. Yeah, there's obviously really interesting and famous and kind of sad history around that, but also some interesting data came out of it. So, you know, a patient will come in, they'll do this, they'll record these areas and what he's found. It's so interesting because if I, let's just say with that same statement, hello, my name is Andrew. There's a neuron in my cortex that responds when I say that and when I want to say that. But if I just change it slightly and I say, hello, my name is Andrew, I make it a question. There's a neuron right next door that encodes that. Turns out there's a map of inflection. So regardless of language, there's a map of, it's not quite meaning, but there's a map of intonation and inflection in the brain. So in theory, because that map is so regular across cultures, he's looked now in Chinese speaking people, in English speaking people, and people who have a second language, he's even has some interesting data about people who have up speak, they're really annoying. Oh, I hate that shit. That's a lot near where you live. Yeah, that's a San Francisco tech thing. Is it? Yeah, it's like what they're doing is letting you know that they're one of the tribe. Okay, and we're all in this together and I think like you do. And you can trust me because I'm on original. Well, it might reflect a subtle brain damage. You think? I think the data show that it's a distortion of the regular map. I think it's the same thing as a southern accent. I think you're just fitting in with your environment because I know people that have adopted that shit once they've gotten into the tech world. I'm like, hey, fuck face, you didn't used to talk like that. Where the people that go to England and start speaking with the British accent. Oh, Madonna. Oh, did she do that? Yes, she did. I don't follow up culture carefully. Yeah, she did. Yeah, I'm moving to Texas. I'm going to start saying y'all two weeks in. I'm giving myself two weeks. I'm going to try out y'all. Well, some of this stuff is learned. Are you moving? I've heard rumors of that, but I guess. Sorry for California. Congratulations, Texas. These maps have some regularities across people because when we're born into the world, we are not a completely clean slate. There's a map that expects the world, including language, to be a certain way. We can't expect that we're going to be born in China or born in France or born in California or Northern California for that matter. The map is what we call semi-maliable. It's not a rigid concrete hardwired map. What makes you think that this up-speak is like damage? I asked Eddie about this. Eddie Chang, my friend, this neurosurgeon who is a premier world, not kind of. He is the world expert on speech and language and the neural transformations and how it controls the pharynx, all that stuff. I said, what's with the up-speak thing? He said, yeah, we see that sometimes and I'm concerned about that. When a neurosurgeon tells you they're concerned, you go, okay, what are you concerned about? I guess there's something wrong with the map. There's kind of key things. It could be because of upbringing and people. The brain is plastic as adults too and not in the same way it's plastic and childhood. If you are forced to learn another language, your brain will fundamentally shift. Neuroplasticity is a real thing. I think it's interesting you raise this cultural component because actually it was Eddie's advisor, a guy named Mike Mersnik, was really the one who discovered adult neuroplasticity. In the 70s and 80s and Mike actually signed to the great grandparents, David Huber and Tornsin, we as a one the Nobel Prize for showing there are critical periods, these periods of development after which the brain cannot change. It had important implications for amblyopia and eye stuff. Mersnik came along and said, you know what, I don't buy that. He started doing experiments with his students and postdocs where they would create an essential need or contingency. If the animal doesn't eat unless it learns something, then the brain can change. If you break down learning events into a smaller, more focused events, the brain can change as an adult, essentially any age. So the strongest drive for adult neuroplasticity is focus. It's the ability to say, this is really important. It's making a so-to-straw view of the world. It's almost like being in a state of stress. The best way to do that for a young person in adolescence or maybe even older is the social pressures. If they're strong, they will shape and rewire the brain. I mean, I look at what's happening in the world right now and I think we are in a state of immense neuroplasticity. Everybody is having to rewire their understanding what's going on. Just to sort of put a kind of a bow of some sort on the speech and language thing. I don't think brain machine interface is going to be all about sticking chips in that end. But still, let's get back to the up-speak thing. Sure. Why does he think it's damage? What is it about up-speak? Well, he just thinks that the map which shows up kind of normally, I mean, most of this is probably the first time in human history people have used this up-speak. It's also the first time in human history people have typed with their thumbs. I was listening to two guys at the airport back when you can go to the airport. And these two guys at the airport were talking in up-speak. It was like as clear as day to me, like they were letting each other know that they're in the tribe. And I remember Jamie had a tech problem once and he was on the phone with this lady who was doing up-speak when she was talking to him and we both looked at just like, ew, yuck. It does kind of create a kind of visceral, like nauseous speech. I can't trust those people. I can't trust someone who talks like that because I know you're unoriginal. Not what most of us are clearly at least mostly influenced by the people around us. But it's not just that. It's like you've changed how you talk to fit in with this, there's a tech world. There's tech language. That's tech-speak. It's English, but it's tech-speak English. It's letting you know. And there does seem to be a body response too. There's a spinal extension. I don't trust them. I don't trust them. I think they're sneaky. I'll try and get the data from Eddie. I've been halfway joking here if you're like an up-speak person. Hey, man, I've always loved your show, but then you said you don't trust people who talk like meat joking, but also stop doing that. Stop fucking doing that. I know what you're doing. I think Eddie would say that there's some distortion in the way they're using this map. But how did it start? I think it started with one really smart person who's probably a little autistic who would talk like that because they were trying to keep it together. And then everyone else is like, I want to be as smart as John. And then they started talking like that. And then it became a thing, sort of like accents. Like I grew up in Boston, right? They talk in a weird way. And I picked it up. And then one time I heard myself on television. I heard myself talk like that when I was 19. I was like, oh my God, I feel like a fucking idiot. What is wrong with me? Like, because I had only lived there at that time for like six years, but I adopted it a whole hog. And I was like, what's wrong with me? Like why am I, I wanted to fit in. That's what it was. I moved there when I was 13 and I tried to fit in. And so I had adopted the speech pattern. I didn't realize it until I heard it. Like you know, you listen to a tape of yourself. You actually find out what you really sound like. You know, like, ew. Do you watch your performances? These things. I have to watch stand up. I have to watch some of those podcasts. I try not to unless it's important, unless it's like something that I need to watch over again. I'm going to be listening to this one over again because you're probably going to say some things that are you already have that I need to reflect on and research. And you know, this is a very interesting subject to me. It's very important to me. And there's many different parts of this that I wanted to talk to you about, particularly how people respond to damaged brains and what can be done to repair damaged brains and stress. And what we were talking about earlier, states of stress and how they reflect on your ability to think and assess and resolve problems because it seems to me that me personally, if I'm tired, if I'm like, particularly working out, right? Like if I'm working out with like a, like a Moy Thai trainer and he has like a particular combination and he wants me to do if I'm exhausted. It's like my monkey brain can't put that combination together. I'm like, what do I do again? Like right, low kick, body, knee to the body, elbow, clench, like what is it again? Like it's simple. It's very simple, right? But if I'm tired, it's not simple anymore. So what's going on? Like why, why does being tired have an effect on the way you perceive things and what memory and combinations of things that you have to put together? And that's nothing. That's just being tired. That's not your life depending upon it, which is a huge factor. For fighters, there are many, many fighters who do really well in the gym when there's no pressure. They're comfortable. You look at them and like, wow, that guy is incredibly skillful. He must be incredible. Like when he fights, he must be amazing. Then you see him fight and they just lock up. Like for whatever reason, they can't, they can't rise the occasion. They are dwarfed by the moment. And whatever it is, whether it's the way they're perceiving these threats, the way their mind is just wired or the way they have learned to handle situations. Maybe they have a series of bad memories that gets relayed every time they're in a situation and they start concentrating more on failure than on staying calm and trusting the process, which is a big factor. Your training is supposed to come out almost in a zen-like state. And when you're fighting, the whole idea is to maintain calm and maintain this sort of of center as much as possible. And when someone's pressuring you and attacking you and talking shit to you in particular, what they're trying to do is weaken that center. What they're trying to do is break that up so you can't have a happy place. There's no happy place for you. And then you see people fall apart. You see them fold and it's fascinating because it's not a physical thing. Like the physical body is still capable of performing. But there's something going on with stress where the brain can't send the orders to the body correctly. And you're so overwhelmed with anxiety or fear of failure or just the overwhelming reality of the consequences of making a mistake that you crumble. Yeah. Well, this is why we're obsessed with clear common focus or sleep as a good jumping off point for, you know, because we want, eventually want to tackle all the states, but that's a good jumping off point. We're jumping all over the place, but let's get, we started with sleep. So let's get back to sleep. So sleep and stress make a good sort of counter examples. So but if we're just going to focus on sleep, first of all, sleep is the only time that you're in complete relation to only one thing and that's yourself. It's also a time in which there's a core operation of the brain in wakefulness, especially apparent in stress, but it's happening all the time where your brain is trying to do two things in wakefulness. And I realize we're talking about sleep, but most of what your brain is trying to do is pass things off to reflexive behavior. So I don't have to think about picking up water. I don't have to think about walking down the hall. I just do it. I just breathe. I just move. I eat. I'm not conscious of it. There's another mental operation, which is very demanding, but extremely important. And this is encompassing a lot of different aspects of neural circuitry and function, but the brain wants to figure out duration, path and outcome. How long something going to last? What's the path to do it and how is it going to work out? Those are the two things that the brain is mainly managing during waking states. And of course, it's keeping your heart rate going and your breathing going, you're digesting going, but that's all running in the background. When you go to sleep, your perception of space and time, not outer space, unless that's what you're thinking about, but space and time becomes untethered. It becomes very fluid. So when you lie down to go to sleep at night and you're drowsy, you stop doing these duration path outcome analyses. And if you have trouble sleeping, it's because you're still doing what's the duration. What's the path? What's the outcome? Your brain's looping in that. So when you go into sleep, it's the one time in which the brain can untether space and time. Like if this were a dream, your dog could float in here and sit down on the table and then morph into somebody that you know from long ago. And we'd be okay with that because it was a dream. So that period of six to eight or 10 hours, whatever you need, is essential for resetting neural circuits in the brain. There's some chemical events too, but neural circuits so that during wakefulness, you can do duration path outcome, like learning a new martial art move. So it's the untethered aspect of it is crucial. It's absolutely crucial. And how do we know this? We know this. So when people come into my lab, we study these two states. We put them into VR goggles and we deliver very real, not cartoons and animation, but very real 360 video things like claustrophobia, if you're claustrophobic, diving with great white sharks, if you don't like sharks, spiders crawling up, you we find your pain point. We bring you into a state of stress and we find in everybody, and this is not necessarily a new phenomenon that your pupils dilate. When your pupils dilate, the optics of your world changes. And you are looking at the visual world, which is space, physical space. And you start slicing time differently. If you've ever been stressed, it feels like things are taking forever. That's because your body is sending your brain more signals per unit time. It's saying like my body is active, my body is active, my body is active, my body is active. Think about when you're drowsy, your body is sending fewer signals to the brain per unit time. And what ends up happening is the brain uses physical space and use these signals from the body. We know this from neural recordings. To start creating a space time relationship. The space time relationship really says, let's just take the jujitsu example, even though I've never done jujitsu. You're trying to figure out where do I place my hand? Where's my grip? How do I move my leverage? What am I going to do when you're trying to sequence thing? It's duration, path and outcome in sleep. The forebrain essentially shuts off. There's some other things that happen to, of course. And the brain starts to drift and idle into these states that wear duration, path and outcome analyses become impossible. We also put people into deeply relaxed states. So we're studying three different ways to do that. One is hypnosis, which is not like, you know, charm hypnosis, stage hypnosis, but medical hypnosis. My colleague David Spiegel and the department of psychiatry is kind of world expert in hypnosis for pain management, et cetera, trauma. You can put people into hypnotic states, which are very sleep like they're a little different than sleep, but they're like a shallow stage of sleep. We also use particular patterns of breathing or respiration to bring people into states that are sort of like sleep. It's like I have very shallow level of sleep, but they're completely a mobile. Or in some cases, we've studied things like more traditional forms of meditation. All that's the less the focus these days. What we find is that the brain can go into states where duration, path and outcome, what cognitive processing, physical activity is impossible. And the brain starts to show wave like activity that's very similar to sleep. And what I didn't tell you is that we also have people do a cognitive task. So while they're in a very stressful environment, like with heights or they're being bombarded with snake experience or we have a bunch of different experiences, they're required to do a cognitive task, which is a duration path outcome task. And then we put them into the. bombarded with snake experience or we have a bunch of different experiences. They're required to do a cognitive task, which is a duration path outcome task. And then we put them into these states of pseudo sleep and then we evaluate their ability to perform in these tasks again. And what we found is interesting, what we found is that their first of all, these sleep-like states can be very restorative. I imagine that you mentioned the float tank earlier, like maybe float tanks and we could talk about why the float tank would put you into a pseudo sleep-like state. Certain substances put us into sleep-like states. Naps and just letting the mind drift can put us into sleep-like states. And those sleep-like states do two things that are very powerful. One is they reset our ability to do these very taxing, demanding duration path outcome kind of brain functions as well. They allow people to access sleep more easily. So we want people to be able to get into deep sleep because nothing is as restorative as deep sleep, because in deep sleep and in the states that I'm talking about these deeply relaxed states, duration path outcome analysis are impossible. And I think being able to toggle back and forth between these states is really where high performance emerges. So for the very stressed human being who's suffering from generalized anxiety, we study those types of patients. But in addition for people who are doing well in life but are high performers, so we do some work with elite military, with some athletes, we've had David Goggins out to the lab. We can't use him. He can't use him. So he's an extreme outlier, right? He's too far on the outside. So what's remarkable about him is he has figured out how to tap into direct, he can force himself into duration path outcome. Now I don't know his state while he's running if he's relaxed, if he's aggro the whole time. I don't know. But he is a bit of a mutant in the sense that but he's created and he's where he's created. He's turned himself into that. He's figured it out. He's figured it out. He was not born that way. We know that. Well that's the most special thing about him really is that and also that he's willing to share that he was at one point in time a large fat lazy guy. You know and then he became this savage that you see. He forced his mind into that particular state. Well and the states that will allow people to go there often are fear states, anxiety states, things that are extremely high pressure because the adult brain especially doesn't want to change. We're basically born. We get wired up by our experience. We get wired up by what we're exposed to. Brainplasticity is very passive for the first 25 years of life. You know, you're a child. The things you hear and see and do are shaping you. My kids come home saying things they've never even heard before. It's amazing. And as an adult you have to crack into that neural circuitry and reshape it. And why is that? What is it about adults? Because I have my own theory and this is just a martial arts based theory. Young kids learn so fast. They learn so fast. But I always feel like it's because they don't have jobs. They don't have a family to take care of. They don't have a girlfriend who's on their back. They don't have bills and the IRS breathing down their neck. They don't have anything. So they can just think about it and they're mind like if they have a hard drive, right? And they have a one terabyte hard drive. They got like a hundred gigs full. They have all this space. You could fill that space up a technique and movement and it becomes their whole life because it's thrilling and it's exciting to learn and their body heals quicker so they can force themselves in the situations. With adults, it's extremely difficult to find the bandwidth to find the amount of time to really completely focus on something because you have so many distractions. Does that make sense? Absolutely. What you just described is it is a beautiful description of the top contour and below that what's happening is in childhood. The whole brain is literally more plastic because there's more space for the neurons to move around and make connections. The whole environment, the chemicals that are swirling around in there are set for plasticity because we were basically designed to come into the world and be customized to our experience. I mean if the human animal is exceptionally good at any one thing, it's that. So if you're an adult, say if you're a 35 year old man with a family or a 35 year old woman with a family and a job and you want to learn a new skill, what is the best way to force your brain to accept these new patterns and learn this quickly? By attacking two separate parts of a process. Neural plasticity is not an event. It's a process and it has two parts. The first one is if you want to learn and change your brain as an adult, there has to be a high level of focus and engagement. There's absolutely no way around this because so focus and intensity and that kind of the the Goggins phenotype, right? I think Goggins is now a noun, a verb and a pronoun, right? It's like it's amazing. So if you're going to Goggins this process, we need to do is you need to regardless of how agitated you feel. You have to lean in and focus extremely hard. Now the reason for that is that there's a neurochemical, nor epinephrine, also called a adrenaline, same thing. That's released in the brain and body. Most people back off at that point because they feel this agitation. But we have to remember that that noradrenaline was designed to get us into movement. That's the purpose of noradrenaline to take us out of stillness and into movement. And then the other thing we have to do is we have to take that elevated level of alertness and we have to focus it. And there's a second neuromodulator called acetylcholine, which is secreted from this little structure in the base of the forebrain when we visually focus on something. Or in the case of maybe if you're doing auditory learning when you focus with your auditory attention. Can I pause you for a second? Yeah. So acetylcholine, you could take an a supplement and nor epinephrine, you can actually get from flute ice tanks. Like you can get it from cryo chambers, you can get it from cryotherapy. So using those strategies of taking like acetylcholine is actually an alpha brain. You want to supplement my company cells. When you take that along with flute tanks and doing or excuse me cryo chambers and do some intense exercise or whatever you're trying to get good at with intense focus. Could those things accelerate that process? Almost certainly increases the plasticity, the rate of plasticity. So you would recommend if someone was trying to get better at something like a cryo chamber would actually accelerate the process of learning. Yeah. So yes. So the reason for that, but you don't necessarily need a cryo chamber. What you need are, so we have these requirements. We need urgency and focus to trigger plasticity. Right. That's one part of the process. I haven't mentioned the second part yet. Neuroplasticity is triggered when urgency and focus combine. Acetylcholine is released for the aficionados out there. It's called the nucleospice Alice, but that doesn't matter. There's a little compartment of neurons in the base of your forebrain that doesn't like to release acetylcholine on a regular basis. It's it's greedy. It's greedy. And it doesn't want to use that with your child. It'll drain your brain with acetylcholine. But as an adult, 30, 40, up to you. Why is that? Because the mother nature designed us to learn what we need to learn and then do that, reproduce and die. I mean, not to be, you know, dark about it. But I always say evolution is now about us. It's about the offspring. Yes. 100%. You know, it's not even about them. It's about their offspring. Exactly. Never ends. We are being manipulated from the inside. Yes. I mean, that's what it, you know, kind of drew me a neurobiology is that all these complex things you see in the world. It's all internal. So, you know, if you get urgency, it can come from, let's use David as a, he's a shining example of this, right? You can sit there and just ramp up your level of urgency through purely psychological means. You could take an ice bath. You could do high intensity breathing. Anything that brings your level of alertness up. Can I ask you this? If you were going to try to improve your ability to get better at something, when would you use that ice bath or the cryotherapy? Would you use it before? Would you use it afterwards? Definitely before before. Before the, the learn, what we're talking about is a two-part process. The first part is the learning trigger. The learning trigger is gated by two things, adrenaline, which is also an open effort and same thing and acetylcholine. And so you need that level of alertness up and you need acetylcholine released at the location in the brain that corresponds to what you're trying to learn. So things like supplements and certain nutrition regimens can assist the process for sure. There's no question about that. Things like alpha GPC, caffeine will bring up the adrenaline and kind of anything to raise that alertness. Doesn't nicotine as well? Nicotine has some sort of a, um, neutral, but benefit to it. Not, not encouraging people to smoke, but, you know, you could take it in various forms, particularly gum. I know people take it in gum just for the, uh, new tropic benefit of it. Yeah, I'm not encouraging people to take anything, but there's a very, very famous, uh, Nobel Prize winning neuroscientist who, uh, I went to his office to visit in New York and he chewed seven pieces of nichorectoring that half hour meeting. And I was like, what is going on here? And he said, well, first of all, it increases plasticity. And second of all, he has the belief, and this is not a clinical study, but he thinks that it can also hold off certain forms of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. Didn't Bertrand Russell wasn't he like a famous smoker, like it wouldn't even know? I don't know. I think, I think he wouldn't even go on a plane unless there was a smoking section because he couldn't imagine not having his pipe for a certain amount of time. Well, creatives, you know, when I think when smoking became less in vogue, I think creatives really suffered because it's very clear that so nichorect is nicotine and the acetylcholine binds to the nicotinic receptor. So when you take nicotine in cigarette form or a nichorect form, you're actually increasing the release of acetyl with the action of acetylcholine Yeah, I don't smoke cigarettes, but I have. And the only time I have is before shows, because I have friends that are comedians that would smoke and I'm like, give me one of them things. Let me see what's going on. And I smoke those like, whoa, dude, you get high off these things. This is crazy, particularly if you don't smoke cigarettes. You get this really weird high. Well, your receptors have never seen that level of nicotine before and then they like that. Yeah. And so for those moments, you know, your your acetylcholine is like a spotlight. It brings your vision literally into this more kind of portrait mode where you can see more like a narrow window of what's going on. There are behavioral ways to access this too before a fight, you know, if somebody's really ramped up their world is not, they're not seeing everything. They're probably, I've never done the walk of course, but probably walking out to the octagon. They're not seeing all the color of the hat of the woman in the corner. You know, they're not relaxed. They're hyped up. But that's a trigger for plasticity because the brain needs some way to cue this plasticity prostitute, let itself know because it's a self learning organ, let itself know that something's really different. That's adrenaline. Something's changed. Then there's focus. What's changed. So in the jujitsu example you gave earlier, it's the ability to focus on what the sequence is, what happens when. And okay, I did that correctly or I didn't do that correctly, but that's duration path and outcome again. And having a seat of Colleen and nor adrenaline up, that sets the plasticity trigger. However, that doesn't guarantee that those synapses are going to change it does not mean that you're necessarily going to learn. Oh, no. What guarantees that that process will be converted into literally the change in the connections between neurons, sometimes new neurons, but mostly the change in the strength of the connection so that eventually you don't have to do duration path outcome. You can just be reflexive about it is states of deep sleep and any state where you're not doing duration path outcome. So we know from two recent studies, some of this was done by my lab, but by other labs as well in humans, which I think is important to distinguish between mouse and human when where we can. A lot of the changes in these brain structures occurs after learning during deep sleep in particular slow wave sleep. But it also occurs during periods of naps and shallow sleep or even just periods where people deliberately decompress, where they're not focusing on any one thing in particular. So if we were going to kind of operationalize this process, it would be focus intensely have an intense period of urgency and then access the deepest rest you can where you're not thinking about anything where space and time becomes very fluid. So stress in that case, post exercise or learning session, would actually hinder your ability to grow and get better. Absolutely. And elite performers like elite military elite athletes, I'm sure you're familiar with this, they understand that the ability to toggle back and forth between these high alert, high attentional states and deep rest is not just the key to performing what you can already do. It's also the ability to get better over time. You know, I think Goggins again is such a remarkable example because it seems like it's all gas pedal. But I'm guessing, I've never asked him about this, but I'm guessing that he has his ways of recovering so that he can remain in that heavy gas pedal all, you know, significant amount of the day. I don't know about that. Maybe he's just all gas pedal. I think he's all gas pedal. It'd be. I mean, he eats well. I mean, you know, he does sleep, but he prides himself on his ability to just go, let's go motherfucker and just force himself to do it. It's so impressive because, you know, I think most everybody struggles to try and get themselves in action. I mean, we know that actions are the key to neural plasticity. I mean, yeah, you can do some mental training and that can be powerful. You can do meditation. You can learn to access sleep and all that stuff. But ultimately to get better at anything, you got to your reps in whatever that is nor a surgery or run. Interesting. You say that because that's what he does with his mind. He's getting his reps in and he describes it. He calls it armoring your mind. You have to arm your mind. And, you know, like he told the story once about being on a plane. Some football player said, you know, how do you you know, how do you keep that dog alive inside of you? And he goes, it is like a dog. He goes, my fucking dog. If I feed my dog, he goes, and I feed him again, that motherfucker is always hungry. He goes, he's always hungry. He's never not hungry. He's like, you got to be that dog. You got to always be there. So he's always there. And this doesn't mean he's not a pleasant guy. I love the guy. I love hanging out with him. He's great. He's great to have dinner with. He's fun. He's a good guy to be around. He's not like an asshole or anything. He's fun. But when it's go time, he's fucking razz. David. David. Yeah. Yeah. All the time. 24 seven ready to go. Wake him up for in the morning. Time to run. Let's go motherfucker. You know, stay hard. I mean, that's that's sweet. Does like all day long. He is every bit as intense as that public persona. When he came out to the lab, it was kind of interesting because we just built this great white shark experience. And I gone down to Mexico. We had dove with these sharks and my friend Michael Moller. He's got this whole thing where we could leave the cages and we did all this. And it was it was fun and crazy and probably a little stupid, frankly. But we bring it back. We build this VR stimulus. And he and a couple of team guys came in. And you know, so I'm explaining what we're doing. And we show the shark thing on the screen. And he goes, Oh, like sharks. And I'm thinking, okay. So we'll give him something else. And then we go through the whole thing. And I'm explaining how we wire people in and we record from the brain. And I said, all right. So who would like to try the sharks? David, I'll go like just he just wanted to be first. And I realized I was like, okay, he wasn't showboating. That's just the way he is. It's just if there's something that creates that sense of agitation, that's a signal for him to go forward. Do you know what he does in the summers? I don't. He goes to Montana to fight forest fires. Does he feel like, yeah, he doesn't even make any money. Amazing. He just goes there. He's rich. And he gets fucking dropped off in Montana in the woods, camps out there and fights forest fires with a bunch of other savages. And he does it to keep his brain hard. That's fantastic. That's he's the real deal. He is the real deal. You got millions of dollars in the bank. And you're like, I'm going to go fight forest fires all summer. Yeah. Just to stay hard. Yeah. Maybe I would have done that when I was a teenager to impress girls, but I don't I don't face 40. He's doing it for him. Well, that's the thing is I think that's that that authenticity is a real thing. I mean, there is a kind of a third kind of secret. There is a secret sauce in this whole mix. And this is kind of what brought me to some my lab, you know, we do work with typical people, but we also and do some work with people from David's former community and domestic and foreign special operations who are interested in this process for obvious reasons. Mm hmm. How can you leverage the nervous system to build better longer lasting warriors? So really interesting question. And you could do that with brain machine interface. You could do that with, um, you can imagine doing that with drugs or with, you know, supplementation or nutrition, all of that. But since the nervous system sits at the foundation of any of those, we started to think about this problem. And there's actually another element to it, which is the reward pathways involving dopamine. So you asked about kids like why they can learn all day long. So their brain is very different, but it still needs some degree of focus and they still need to get their sleep. They still have to obey those two rules of this process. But they engage in something else, which is really powerful, which is play. A lot of their learning is through playful exchange, especially with the little kids like in kindergarten and nursery school. And then as they get older, the social dynamics can be kind of harsh, but they can also be really pleasurable and fun. So the molecule dopamine is a really misunderstood molecule. We all make it from a location in the back of our brain. And people think of it as like reward, like, oh, I've got a bunch of money here. I, you know, did a great performance. Dopamine is responsible for that feeling of feeling great. But in addition, dopamine is what's released any time an animal or human thinks it's on the right path. And that's very subjective. So this is not, and I want to be really clear that this is not positive thinking, or, you know, the secret or telling yourself that you're performing well, even when you're not. Right. Look, if you were a rioter and you break into a courthouse, but you feel like you're on the right path, you're going to get a release of dopamine heavy. Even if you're, yeah, even if you're committing a crime, and you really probably shouldn't be doing that. Yeah, mother nature built these systems adrenaline, acetylcholine dopamine to be very generic in terms of what can activate on purpose. You know, cocaine will cause a tremendous release of dopamine. So we'll met them, fed me. The problem is it sets a focus on just getting more of that thing. So dopamine is a vote through play. It's a vote through humor. Right. If you've ever just been working like mad or you see this in, you know, team guys know this really well, that, you know, because they tell me that you can be in the worst situation and somebody will crack a joke and all of a sudden it's like you have energy. Now that couldn't have been glycogen. That wasn't because you're a ketogenic. It wasn't because you're whatever. That's neural energy. And that neural energy is dopamine. Is that what happens when you hear a great song and you get pumped up? Is that the same thing? Absolutely. And the reason dopamine is so powerful in this process of neural plasticity is that dopamine has the ability to buffer nor adrenaline. So that stress that you feel when you're in effort, it's very hard for most people to keep that going. But when you get a, when I say a shot, I mean, internal release of dopamine through humor or through the sense that you're on the right path. Let's take the fight example where it's stressful and you're getting beaten down all of a sudden you land one or you do something properly and the other guy starts to timber a little bit or shuffle a little bit. You gain a chemical advantage and it comes in two forms. One is it triggers marking of the synapses that likely will change later. We rarely forget the events associated with dopamine for that reason because they signal, oh, whatever's happening now, that was good. And in addition to that, they start pushing back on the level of acetylcholine, excuse me, nor adrenaline in the brain stem. And this is crucial because there was a study that came out two years ago, not from my group that asked, why do we quit? If you set 800 or even 500 pounds on the bar out there, I can't lift it. So I'm not talking about that kind of quitting. I'm talking about a long run. Why do I quit? If I'm not injured, like what actually causes quitting? When do we decide that something is futile? And it turns out that for every bit of effort, any bit of effort, lifting a glass of water or running up a hill or in a fight, there are little bits of nor adrenaline, adrenaline that are released in the brain and body. And there's a counter, there's a cell type, which are called glia, which literally means glue and Latin. These cells are paying attention to how much nor epinephrine is coming. And if it hits a certain threshold, the brain stops voluntary control over the muscular. It says, that's it, I quit. And there are these beautiful experiments where they manipulate the visual environment so that this isn't, they're certain that this isn't lack of muscle fuel, this or liver fuel. This is lack of neural fuel. Dopamine pushes back that level of nor adrenaline and it gives you more gas. It lets you go further. And you see this through teamwork when you feel like you're supported, when you're your cohesion, humor, play. If you're in serious effort and it's just things are going terribly, maybe I've never done comedy, but you're trying to write a joke and it's just frustrating. And then suddenly you just kind of laugh at how ridiculous the process is. There's a kind of loosening or a lightning and you have more energy. That energy is reductions in epinephrine. And so I don't know how David Goggins has done it, but everyone does this a little bit differently, but it could be, and I'm speculating here, of course, never done the neurology. But that David has somehow figured out that the leaning in process for him is the dopamine trigger. Like there is a kind of of sicko thing about the way he talks about it. Like it's like a, it's a little bit masochistic. And for him, maybe it was that way. And it's rooted in his origin story. For other people, they find this in purpose like that you're doing this for your kids or you're doing this for somebody else. You know what? I think that the human animal has a capacity to push, has an capacity to focus, has a capacity to learn at all ages, but these gates on plasticity are set by certain requirements. And when I look out there and I see all this stuff about psychology and all the self-help and wellness stuff, I'm a neuroscientist. I look at the lens of everything through neurochemicals and neuroscience, but it all kind of boils down to a couple basic chemicals and systems are what we call circuits in the brain. What's the difference between noradrenaline and norepinephrine? Yeah, great question. So same thing. So adrenaline and norepinephrine, excuse me, adrenaline and epinephrine, same thing, same thing, norepinephrine and noradrenaline, those two things are the same thing. It was a naming war. So scientists are like, they have egos, some more than others. And there was a naming battle. And so if you go to Australia, they call it one thing. In England, they called it another. Basically, it was two labs discovered the same thing and it was a pissing competition. Oh, well, how confusing for everybody else exactly. And you can find that over and over and over again in science because no one ever comes in with a gavel within like nomenclature committee and says, we're just going to call it this noradrenaline so much easier to say. It is. It is. It's thick with that. Norepinephrine. Like, I've fucked that up a hundred times. Well, and it gets worse because like, you think about the autonomic nervous system and they're like sympathetic parasympathetic sympathetic. Sympathetic sounds like sympathy, but it's actually the stress date. Do you think that you would benefit from data from real world situations in a much more comprehensive way than you would from these virtual situations you're putting people in? Because I, you know, we have a VR thing out here. We have an Oculus and it's pretty cool. And there's one of them where you walk on a plank and you really do feel like this plank is over, like it's on the 60th floor of a building and it goes out of window. And you really do feel like you're kind of, but you know you're not. Right. There's a difference. Right. You get a little bit of it, but you don't get the real thing. Right. Like, like being in the jungle and the leaves part and there's a real tiger in front of you. The feeling that you would get would probably be, you probably wouldn't be able to recreate it with virtual reality. There's some part of your brain that knows this is bullshit. Yeah. So we have three, three laboratories to explore this. One is the virtual reality. And virtual reality can give you what the scientists call presence, the sense that you're really in that environment. And that's mainly visually an auditory driven. My colleague Jeremy Bailinson, who's on the, I'm in the medical campus, he's on the other campus, he's studied this a lot. Like, what are the requirements for getting people to feel presence? So people who come to our lab, they don't think they're underwater with a shark unless they're afraid of great white sharks. And for that moment where one of these guys is coming in and it opens its jaws, for that person, it's every bit as scary as the real experience. No way. If you look at their audience, well, we don't know because we don't put them in the water, but I think I just can't imagine. Well, here's the, here's the check close. I agree. I mean, here's the challenge. We need it to we need to stress people and we needed to do it really well for a lab. And if you look historically, the experiments that came before ours were really lame. It was like picture of someone with a knife in their arm for some people that's gross for some people that's scary, but that's not really fear, right? Or they'd startle people, but I can jump out of, you know, probably not to you, but I could jump out in front of a typical person with a teddy bear and they'll get startled. It doesn't matter. It's a teddy bear. So that's different. That's not fear. So VR allows us to access states the more sensory stuff that we can include the better. There are some now, they include smell. We have that we're working with augmented reality. So, which is a little bit like the Star Wars thing of projecting a chess board, that kind of thing. We find people's pain points meaning we find the places in which we can trigger their autonomic function. We also run studies outside the lab. So I have a large scale study running right now with David Spiegel, my colleague in psychiatry, where people are equipped with whoop bands. It's a remonnering sleep. We're going to expand this to include some other devices that actually allow us to look at heart rate variability and body cavitation and some other things in some interesting ways, but also body positions. We're tracking them 24 hours a day. And those people are reporting back to us, levels of stress, life events, that kind of thing. So this is outside the laboratory, but we can do this in real world, essentially. And those people were using interventions which are mainly respiration based, so which are looking at specific patterns of breathing that trigger particular states in the brain stem that allow people to either sleep better or buffer their stress in response to life events better. So this isn't really breath work as much as it is. Teaching them specific patterns of breathing that capture these neurons that switch their brain states. It really is fascinating that these periods of rest are crucial to learning and developing. They're absolutely crucial. They are, they're every bit as part of the process as the actual trigger event. And I was the athletes, the people, the high performers that I've encountered are all really good at accessing those states also. Is it, is there a desirable ratio? Right. So you want to focus as long as you can focus well, and then probably a little bit longer because there's also plasticity of the circuits that control focus. So as you, so going back to your Jiu Jitsu example, as you get to the point where you're starting to not be able to do this duration path outcome stuff, which involves motor movements and mental thinking you're saying, you're getting tired, you're literally going into a sort of sleep-like state where space and time duration path outcome becomes hard. What you can do at that point is to start buffering the nor adrenaline or up in effort. Now I don't know which one to say, but I'll just keep going with whichever is reflexive. And you can start to buffer that through things like humor, through things like setting the urgency higher. That is not a time to relax and taper out. That's a time to ratchet up the intensity. If you want to grab a stronger trigger. But that period can't last infinitely. And the question is how long? Well, we know that you can do more short bouts of that each day than you could ever do one long, long bout. We know that. So you can maybe do two or three bouts of that a day or a few are doing it several times a week. You basically want to dose it about twice as much as deep stress as you do the deep focus. Excuse me, deep sleep as you do the deep focus. So if you're, I don't know how long these training regimes go, but part of that training is reflexive for you. I wouldn't count that in the learning process because it's dialed into your nervous system. But at the point where it becomes challenging, a clock sort of starts. And when that period ends, I think at least double that amount of time of deep rest if you want to maximize learning. There's been a lot of work done on visualization and learning through visualization. And they found that you can get a similar benefit to actual physical training, obviously not with the endurance and the strength and all those other things. But in terms of skill learning, you get a similar benefit from an equal time of visualization. What do you attribute that to? Like how is it visualization? How can you learn things through visualizing? Yeah. So that's visualizing is setting the brain through these duration path outcome circuitry loops. It's running the script essentially. And it's important to move the musculature. It's important to say the words if you're, say, you know, learning a motor skill or learning a movement, a language, excuse me. But at some level, the brain doesn't really know what's going on in the body. It's the command center, except what signals it receives back from the body. The language, excuse me, but at some level, the brain doesn't really know what's going on in the body. It's the command center, except what signals it receives back from the body. And so if the visualization is intense, the brain isn't completely convinced, but it's pretty convinced that you're actually experiencing that thing and rehearsing it. It's a little bit of your own internally driven virtual reality is what you're doing. Right. And so you're creating, and so I think mental training is powerful, but there's no replacement for repetition. So what about, obviously physical training has its limitations in your body's ability to keep doing the movements. You're going to get tired, and you're going to break down. Would it be more beneficial to get more rest, or would it be more beneficial to get rest, but also spend a significant amount of time visualizing? We haven't looked at visualization specifically. The one thing that is very close to visualization, which is very powerful based on neuroimaging studies, so legitimate science, I should say, is hypnosis. Hypnosis is a really unique state, and this is of mind and body. But you've been hypnotized many times. Yeah. And I'm very interested in hypnosis because of the work with Spiegel and the incredible success that he's had with pain management, smoking cessation, these kinds of things. Hypnosis is a state of deep relaxation, not unlike sleep, but also deep focus. So it's very unlike any other state of mind. You're either usually asleep or you're focused or somewhere in between, kind of drifting back and forth in between. But hypnosis is a deliberate narrowing of context. So the person or the audio script is bringing you into a state of mind that centered around particular types of events, but you're in deep rest. And the idea is that you're taking that plasticity process of focus, urgency, and then rest, and you're combining them into a single session. And so hypnosis and deep hypnotic states are the place where neuroplasticity can be accelerated. So when you say hypnosis, what kind of sessions are you talking about and how often? Like, say if you're an athlete, like let's say maybe you're a basketball player and you want to get better at basketball, you train as much as you possibly can, but there's limitations that you sleep as much as you possibly can. How often would you recommend someone doing some sort of a hypnosis session to try to improve their skills? Probably one, well, it depends on how intense their training is. For some of the people I'm doing work with in athletics and in the military community, you might, they have extremely demanding lives, right? And certainly for the military folks, it's you know, high risk, high consequence, even when they're non deployment. So under those conditions, maybe every day, 30. It knows this every day, 30 to 45 minutes. As a replacement for some other standard form of nap or meditation, I mean, not necessarily lumped on top of that. So the standard eight hour sleep and then on top of that, some sort of meditation for like 30 minutes, like, yeah, there's a process of doing this. We have a script that we use in our lab. I'd be happy to send it to you that takes you into these deep, sort of relaxation states, they're sort of meditative. Some people can self-hypnotes by induce, you know, some people call them intentions, but I don't like that because it sounds a little bit too much like a uncomfortable set of yoga classes have taken when they start with though. I don't know really what that's about and they make you use complete declarative sentences. It feels weird to me. That's just my own bias. Oh, they mean they make you set your intentions behind this and this. Or say it out loud or oh, no, I would not know that would send me out of the room. Even though it's like this, if they combine the up speak, then I'd probably then I'd then I'd follow a complaint. But yeah, they even sometimes it's really bad. Sometimes they even make you work a pronoun into it. So you'd have to say, Joe, you know, anytime someone's, you know, fake pronoun like one of the new ones. That's, that's it. I don't know. You might, I don't even know how to go there. You stunned. You stunned me. Probably we're all going to be required to at some point. Maybe not. Maybe not. Hypnosis is powerful. And I think stage hypnosis has done a great disservice. No disrespect to the stage hypnosis out there to detract from the power of hypnosis as a medical tool and a high performance tool. Right. Yeah. My own personal experience is that I didn't understand what hypnosis was. My first experiences with hypnosis were there was a guy named Frank Santos. It's a famous in the Boston area who's a very famous comedy hypnotist. And he was an actual hypnotist who would hypnotize people and get them to quit smoking things along those lines. But then would do this comedy hypnotism show where he would get people on stage and man, like we would want me and a bunch of other comedians would go and watch it every week because it was crazy. He would put them under. They would definitely be under and they would think they were having sex. They would think they'd be in a boat. They think they'd be in the water. They it was weird. It was really weird to watch. And I always just thought it was like really weak minded people. My thought was and obviously 21 at the time, I didn't know anything. But my thought at the time was, okay, there's certain people that are just they have nine volt brains and you could trick them to do anything. And that explains cults and a lot of other shit and televangelists and all sorts of nonsense. It should be like really obviously fake to people, but they fall into it anyway. And so that's what I thought. I thought it was just really dumb people that he was tricking. Well, some people are more easily hypnotized than others. And it's it's actually pretty predictable. There's actually a test that we could do right now that. Really? Yeah. So can you do it to me? Yeah, I can use the one that that Spiegel taught me, which so you look up at the ceiling and you're going to look and now try and now close your eyelids. You're not very hypnotizable. How's that? Look up one more time and then close. Yeah. So probably not as hypnotizable. So for people they're very hypnotizable. Is that a word? Yes, it is hypnotizable. At least if it's not, then I'm stamping it and nowadays I just I'll put a Wikipedia entry. It'll be there. But no, I don't know. I've heard Spiegel use a simple to hit no, susceptible to hypnosis. I asked Spiegel how you measure this kind of back of the envelope, you know, curbside consult as they call it. And people who are more hypnotizable, their eyelids will flutter in an attempt to go down. The reason is that a lot of hypnosis is anchored on the ability to go into these deep really relaxed states. And some people's autonomic nervous system gets locked in a state of more, excuse me, of more attention and kind of higher levels of alertness or levels of sleepiness. So think about like a seesaw. So you can either be really stressed. So when you're really stressed like you're analyzing time, you're analyzing space differently, duration path outcome. What's going to happen? When's it going to happen? Real emergency. The other state would be sleep, right? That's the other extreme duration path and outcome are essentially non-existent space and time are fluid, whatever. The hinge in the middle of that seesaw for some people is very tight. They get locked over here or locked over there. They can't get the energy or they can't de-stress. Hypnosis involves taking somebody from a state of alertness like you and I are now and bringing them into a almost sleep-like state. Now for some people, their autonomic nervous system isn't that willing to do that. It's almost like the hinge on that seesaw is locked. It doesn't want to budge. And this fluttering of the eyelids is reflective of a peripheral nerve, believe it or not, it's that originates in the brain stem. That's a central part of the autonomic nervous system. The other thing that they'll do, you ever see on the stage hypnosis where they'll have people look up at the ceiling and then they'll sometimes shine a light in their eyes or they'll like have them look in a light. They're looking at how we call it labile but how rigid or labile, how willing to move the pupils are because autonomic arousal impacts the pupils of the eyes. So it's an external read of what's going on in the brain. A lot of people don't know this but your eyes are not connected to your brain. Your eyes are brain. They're the eyes. They are central nervous system and they're brain. Your neural retinas that you use for seeing things around you are part of the central nervous system. They are the way that you know when to be alert and to be asleep and they are two pieces of brain that during development got squeezed out of the skull and placed outside the skull. They're the only two pieces of your brain that are outside your skull assuming that you don't have some sort of damage. That is fucking crazy. Your eyes are a part of your brain. And that's why when people tell me, you know the eyes are the window to the soul. I'm like, oh look, I don't know about souls but they are definitely your brain. So when I look at you and now it's weird because I'm looking at, you know, we're not looking at other pupils. Right. But when they hit my test, I should say looks at the pupils. They're saying, you know, the pupil size is a direct readout of that, of how loose that hinge is. So when they shine light in someone's eyes and they take it away and they go, hmm, that is so weird that you can look in someone's eyes and there's something about like you can kind of tell what kind of a person they are in some ways or at least tell how they're thinking. Like if someone's uncomfortable being around you're like, you could see it in their eyes. If you tried to write that down like, what are you seeing? You tried to explain it to someone. Good luck. Good luck writing that down. I don't know what that is. Like, but I know when someone's full of shit, like if someone's lying to me or bullshitting me, I'm not always aware, but I'm aware a lot. Well, and it's not just their individual eyes but it's also the way that they focus their eyes. So, you know the myth of the Cyclops, right? One eye in the middle head. That myth has origins in the fact that the Cyclops was one dimensional anger and it turns out that when we are experienced and increasing autonomic arousal. So let's say we decide we're going to fight, we decide we're going to learn or maybe we're going to write something important. Something's important. Our eyes, the pupils change shape but because our eyes don't really move in our skull, they actually do what's called fovea in a little bit. There's an eye musculature reflex that gets triggered in and so you can see that sometimes in people that are getting ready to fight, their eyes are actually brought inward. That triggers another neural circuit to increase levels of autonomic arousal and starts deploying resources internally. Fuel resources, fuel for bouts of intense stuff, whatever that intense thing is going to be. When we're relaxed, like we view a horizon or we're just walking or we're in what's called optic flow when things are flowing past us, we go into panoramic vision. So in panoramic vision, you go out of that soda straw view of the world and you start being able to see the corners of the room. The ceiling, the floor. That's a relaxed state. Sometimes we're even subconsciously perceiving how stressed or relaxed somebody is, not by necessarily their pupils, although that might play into it. It certainly has a role. Whether or not based on your prior kind of intuitive knowledge about that person, whether or not they're like cyclops or whether or not they're in panoramic vision. This is important because it changes the way we perceive time. If we are in cyclops of vision, soda straw view, that high intensity, we tend to do two things. One is we tend to be more in tune with what's going on inside us. We start, the brain does this other thing which is called interoception. It's like paying attention to what's going on inside us versus outside us. And when we're stressed, time outside us seems to go really slowly. It's like you're in the security line at the airport and you need to get your flight. It's a very different perception of the person in front of you and what they're doing than when you're relaxed and you've got time. That's because outside events start to feel slower. This is why after a car crash, people will say, oh, everything was in slow motion. Or I've never actually looked at fighters, but I visited the UFC training center, Duncan French. I went out there and talked to him about this. He's not out to Duncan. Yeah, he's done some his graduate thesis is like this beautiful work related to this, although not directly. As important implications for this, which is when you're in these high adrenaline states, you parse time differently. And when I hear about fighters, you know, say like being able to time the fight or they, it's almost like they can see things coming in slow motion. That's because their internal level of arousal is really, really high, but it feels like relaxation. So there's like sleepy, not feeling so good. Everything feels like it's going on really fast. I can't deal with life. Then you ramp up your level of intensity. And everything outside, you feel like it's going a little slower or maybe you're matched to that. Like I'm a pretty high intensity guy when I'm in New York, and I feel great, at least before the COVID thing. People walking down the street, I finally feel like the tempo is kind of matched between internal and external. But though, is that why like those high functioning people enjoy Manhattan? Yeah, there's a wide neurotic people like, yeah. Yeah. You take a neurotic person, you put them in Manhattan, they're like, yeah, they love it. Yeah, a lot of my friends that are neurotic. They love it there. Yeah. So I'm a neurotic lineage. I'm constantly trying to get to the other part of the sea cell. But I get it. You know, I get out of the subway in New York and I'm like, the walking speed, the speed of everything. It just I finally feel like internal to external match. Does this thing that connects the fluttering of the eyelids to being able to be hypnotized more easily? Does that coincide with a personality variable? Not that I'm aware of. I'd have to ask David, I don't want to throw something out there that's wrong. I'd have to ask him there. There's a whole set of personality traits and coping traits that relate to hypnotizability. There's a small subset of people that just cannot be hypnotized. You can't really force hypnotism on people. But is it they cannot or they are not willing to let themselves be? Because I've been hypnotized. My friend Vinnie Schorman, he works with fighters. He's hypnotized. He calls it mental coaching. And I was like, I want to know what you're doing. He's been on my podcast before. I'm like, do it to me. What's up? It was very weird. Did you find it beneficial? I think I did. I mean, we did it once. But I was kind of stunned by it. I'm like, oh, this is a weird state where you're kind of there, but not there. It's not like you don't know what's going on. You do know what's going on. But you're in this weird sort of quasi-relax, sleepy thing. It's a very unusual state. This match of high focus, deep relaxation is not a brain state that we can access very easily without a hypnotist. I mean, there are other ways to do it. But that state would be super beneficial for people wanting to learn something because it would relax them much more deeply than it would just ordinarily everyday life while you're conscious. That's right. Taking the two pieces of the plasticity puzzle and putting them in the same event. So I don't think it should be the only way to learn new things because they're things you can't do in hypnosis, like, like, Rolji did so. I mean, for instance. But as a tool for accessing faster learning, it's quite powerful. Just like sleep, I mean, I think the work of Matt Walker and Bill Dement at Stanford and others had just shown like if you want to pull someone apart, you want to just make them insane and unable to do these duration path outcome mental operations, you sleep to prop them. There's a thing that people do, this sort of reductionist dismissive way of viewing meditation and viewing states of mind that it's really weird to make. It's smart people do it occasionally. And there's a guy that thinks very smart and he was talking about it on Twitter like mocking meditation. Well, and I was like, man, this is a guy who's probably never really meant to it. Well, meditation, you know, I guess growing up in Northern California in the whole mindfulness thing. That's the problem. So it's the stuff. It's the stuff around it often. You know, and I think this is why like it's exciting that respiration slash breathwork is now making a, you know, a big showing in the world because I think it has tremendous value. I think that it's the stuff around it that causes problems and can get it pushed into like the naming. I mean, like, I mean, I have nothing against yoga. I mean, there's a lot of powerful tools in yoga, but it's the aschandas and then all the stuff around it makes it sound a little bit like religion and a lot of people in medical communities and other religious communities back off from that. Well, there's a problem with yoga that I actually had a conversation with my yoga instructor about because I do a beakeroom class and they say things in the class like you're massaging your descending calling. I'm like, no, you're not. You're definitely not doing that. You've probably stopped saying that because that's not really possible. You're not massaging your fucking colon while you're stretching. Right. That's nonsense. Are you are you increasing your flexibility? Yes. Are you strengthening your balance and your stability? 100%. But there's so much nonsense that goes with it that they, you know, if you talk to a doctor, they're like, right, you're not doing that. Because I have talked to doctors, I'm like, okay, before I criticize this, is it even possible that this is going on? No. Right. And the medical community can be a little bit too one sided as well. Sure. You know, I think Stanford's a very progressive place. The fact that Spiegel and I have this study looking at respiration and its impact, I think, is a sign that the times are changing. We're not doing this in any kind of mystical way. The fact that people in military special operations and athletics are starting to think about the mind and the tools to access the mind is a sign that there's been a tide change. I had James Nasser on the podcast. Oh, yeah. We talked about his new book, Breath. And just the ability to control various aspects of your nervous system and even your immune system through breath work, it's very confusing. Because everybody breathes. So we're all, you and I are both breathing right now. We're not doing breathing exercises, but we're breathing. So what is it about breathing exercises that accentuate these, these aspects of autonomic system and sympathetic system? What's going on? First of all, I think James's book is great. Amazing. You know, it sounds like I'm just shamelessly plugging Stanford constantly, but, you know, like most of the studies he was referring to were done by my colleagues, Paul Erlich, Sandra Con, stuff in my lab. Mark Krasner, these are, these are people, these are serious scientists and serious physicians who are saying, look, respiration has an important role in balancing oxygen and carbon dioxide in the body and in the brain. And that has an important impact on states of mind and body. I think that's just no medical professional, presuming that they're any good could argue that. So take, for instance, Mark Krasner's lab and a neighboring lab at Stanford discovered that animals and people periodically throughout sleep and throughout the day will do what's called a physiological sigh. These have been known about since the 30s, but it turns out there's a set of neurons in your brain stem and my brain stem that every once in a while on the level of carbon dioxide in your bloodstream gets too high. You do a double inhale and an extended exhale. So it's sort of like two inhales through the nose and extended exhale. Your dog does this right before it goes down for me. Yeah. Yeah. To offload carbon dioxide. That double inhale, I don't think James talked about this if he did forgive me. The double inhale maximally inflates the little sacks in the lungs. The ovioli of lungs. And that pulls carbon dioxide out of the bloodstream at a higher level so that you offload it more in the exhale. Now these physiological sighs are the fastest way that I'm aware of from work in our lab and with Spiegel to take that seesaw from too high level of stress to a little bit calmer. Double inhale exhale. So this is in breath work. This is a set of neurons that every kid and every adult has, they use periodically, but we can also consciously control through the diaphragm. So that's one way to bring things more calm. I think, you know, James talked about this in his book, but those breath work of the sort where, you know, kind of two-motype breathing of doing, you know, 30 inhales and really offloading larbic carbon dioxide, that causes the release of noradrenaline norapinephrine. And noradrenaline norapinephrine are mother nature's way of buffering us against infection and disease. Everyone thinks stress kills your immune system. It's the opposite stress activates your immune system. And that makes sense. If we suddenly had to forage or go out and find water, we needed two or three days and we didn't know what we were going to, you can't afford to get sick. This is why if you work, work, work, work, work and then you finally rest, you're more likely to get sick as you go into that more parasympathetic, relaxed it because your immune system also gets shut off. Does that why people in prison are getting COVID-19 and not really getting sick? There's so many of them that are asymptomatic. Could be, I didn't realize they were asymptomatic or if you're very stressed for a very long time, eventually the immune system can't deploy these killer cells that it needs to deploy. So there's a certain amount of stress that's actually beneficial to you in your immune system. But I get very, I start doing eye rolls and I get a little frustrated when people are like adrenal burnout. Look, your adrenals were designed to take you through two lifetimes if you need to. The idea that your adrenals are just going to shrivel up into, you know, somebody told me that their doctor told them that coffee is giving them adrenal burnout. Is that nonsense? I want to see a Mattechner anatomy. Tell me adrenal burnout. Show me an adrenal that won't secrete adrenaline anymore. So why are they saying that? Like where did that come from? Sounds good. Sounds better. What are the parasympathetic sympathetic? Yeah. Yeah. This doctor was telling my friend that drinking coffee is burning out as adrenals. Yeah. I mean, it may be putting them into a state of heightened activation and they can't take it down a notch in the evening. They don't know how to relax. They don't know how to turn on the parasympathetic nervous system without doing things like eating or something, which is one way to do it. And I think as a society, we're struggling to manage this seesaw. I mean, we know that being in a chronic state of stress is bad physically. You don't want to do that, but you also don't want to do it for your mind. I mean, anytime you're stressed, you're also able to be recruited better by other people's stress. We know that. We're recruited by other people's stress. Yeah. So my lab has also looked at like how stress spreads between people, how the autonomic nervous systems communicate. And we know that the best way to get what's called emotional contagion is to get people into a heightened state of alertness. I'm guessing and I have no knowledge of comedy whatsoever, but I'm guessing that the comedian that's less funny that comes out before the main person, I'm guessing they're trying to get them like ramped up. You can create a more emotional contagion. You have to take them from the floor all the way up to the ceiling, kind of get them up a level. Is that right or in my way off base with that? Well, it's interesting that you put it that way. It's actually a problem that comedians that have sensitive egos will bring less funny comedians with them on the road so they look better. And it's like amongst elite comics, it's actually very frowned upon because you're setting yourself up to look like a hero. You rescue the audience from some terrible comedian that you had open for you. You could judge the ego or the health of the ego of the headliner by what kind of comedians they consistently take with them on the road. I mean, you know, everybody has bad sets occasionally, but a lot of times these weak-minded guys will bring these terrible comedians on the road with them. Interesting. Yeah, but the reason is because they don't want to be outshined. That's what it is. Makes sense. Yeah. Well, that's anchored in a neurobiological phenomenon. You're giving me this is all I think about called dopamine reward prediction error. So it's very simple really. It basically says that the degree to which something feels really good or you've experienced it is great could be great meal or comedy set from the perspective of the audience, of course, is going to depend on how much dopamine you got before. So if I tell you, we're going to go to a restaurant tonight. This is amazing. I got the most amazing stays, amazing stays. And we get there. Higher probability that steak isn't going to taste great to you. Really? Absolutely. Reward prediction error means that. But what if it's really great? It has to exceed the dopamine that you had and reduced to that. Can't bullshit people. That's what you're saying. You basically gave bullshit people. Right. Well, there's something that does happen. There's a contagion that does happen when people are funny where it's contagious and everyone around you starts laughing more because there's more people around you laughing. Like if I'm in a room and there's a funny comedian on stage and there's a bunch of people to my left and right that are laughing really hard, I'm more likely to laugh. There's something weird that goes on. And one of the things that I've always said about stand up is I think it's kind of a massive noses. It's not just funny because if it was funny, there's these comics that are doing these zoom comedy shows and I encourage them to all stop doing it immediately because it's fucking terrible. Even great comics look fucking terrible because you're lacking that critical element of an audience. Stand up comedy is one of the rare art forms you really can't do on your own. You have to do it in front of people. And I think what's happening is when it's not just when the person's on stage is really good, it's not just that they're funny, not just their timing is excellent. It's not just that they have these really insightful ways of looking at things and making laugh. It's also that you're around a bunch of other people that are experiencing it together. And when that person's good, you are allowing them to think for you. There's some weird, like if I'm watching a guy on stage and he's really good or a girl on stage, she's really good. When someone's killing, I'm allowing that person to think for me. I'm like sitting there just like, go ahead and take me for a ride. Let's go. And then they're making you laugh. But it's you're also aware that you're in it with these other people. So you have this enhanced state because all these other people are around you and you're all experiencing it together. I don't know much about comedy at all. So forgive me. But comedy to me is very interesting because it's a, and I don't know how the comedy scripts are written, but I find them incredibly fascinating because it seems like almost all jokes are a break from the space time rule that the brain expects. Close contact card magicians do this very well too. It's like you're expecting something to happen and I think he's going there. So it's sort of duration, path, outcome, like this. And then all of a sudden you get hit with something that's surprising. Yes. This is probably not funny. Maybe it is to you or not, but there's a Steve Martin thing from way back when he, he basically does comedy for dogs or something. He brings out dogs and, and it's a perfect example of just breaking all the rules. The dogs are telling him what to do. And at first it's not funny. And then he keeps going with it. And what you realize is he's, I don't want to use the word hypnotize and correctly here, but he's bringing you into a reality where the dogs are setting the rules. And it's hilarious because the brain, when it sees surprise, it could be a card that, you know, you pick and then I tear it up and then you've suddenly produced it from my shoe or something like that kind of extreme magician type stuff where really funny joke. It's like the brain wants to go one place and when something unexpected happens, dopamine is released. We know this. It's like surge of dopamine and all of a sudden it's like I'm in a state where then you can take me further up the staircase. The one thing we know about dopamine was why it's so powerful is not just that it can buffer these feelings of effort, but that it can take you into new ways of thinking about a problem. I mean, this is why a lot of, and this isn't work that I'm involved in, but this is why a lot of the excitement about the therapeutic use of MDMA and things that increase dopamine are windows into modes of processing information that are very different. Now on the dark side of that, if you think about cocaine or methamphetamine, you've got dopamine coming in artificially and it tends to create a problem. It tends to make people super focused on everything outside them and in pursuit of more stuff. That's what happens with really high dopamine. But dopamine appropriately does allows us to explore new realities of how, you know, what led to that joke, a new variation. Anyway, I'm sorry like parsing comedy. I don't know anything about it, but when I watch comedy, I'm always looking for that element of surprise and sometimes I think you're laying out crumbs for me and then you'll hit me with something I had no idea and that's twice as fun. That's the pop. That's dopamine. When someone does cocaine, do they wear out their dopamine receptors? So in a short, yes, the dopamine receptors are very prone to saturation. Remember the, they're like parking spots and you can fill those up very quickly. And there's actually changes that happen at the genetic level in cells when there's too much dopamine in the system for too long, like with dopamine addiction or cocaine addiction. The cells actually start modifying the way they work so that they become better and better at gobbling up dopamine. The whole system becomes a dopamine pursuit system. And you know, in thinking about the brain for these kind of, you know, very top contour conceptual levels, we can think of addiction as just a narrowing of the things that bring you pleasure. And so what you want is to obviously not use cocaine. You want is to access the dopamine system through whatever process appeals to you provided that it doesn't deplete that dopamine system. You can maximize this to the point where things don't work anymore. And there is like kind of a little weird techie cult thing happening in the barrier. They call dopamine fasting, which has no basis in physiology where these kids are like literally they're not looking at each other in the eye because like oh, it's too much dopamine. And then I swear it's a real thing. I get asked about this a lot. And if anything, it would have the opposite effect that they're seeking. No wonder why there's bums just shitting in the street up there. Everyone's losing their mind. I have to be a little defensive of the Northern California. Oh my god. And if anything, it would have the opposite effect that they're seeking. No wonder why there's bums just shitting in the street up there. Everyone's losing their mind. Yeah, I have to be a little defensive in Northern California. It has a lot of problems. But when I go down to Venice, which I love, and I love LA also, I'm not one of these Southern California hating Northern California. There's a pretty serious homeless problem here, too. It's growing. Yeah. But San Francisco homelessness is it's on another level. I mean, I don't go to the city anymore. You're the king. I don't go to the city. San Francisco's either as the king's the homeless people. Not a title we were. Gavin Newsome, you did it. You've motherfucker. You started it. It's a, you know, I live in the East Bay side on the Oakland side. We have that problem there. But Oakland's always had a lot of problems. Well, it's one of the side effects of a really tolerant, progressive community for whatever reason. Your tolerant to drug addicts making tent compounds. And it's very unfortunate because it ruins everything else. And so I get the idea behind it, I get it. But in practice, it is not effective. It's not good for them. It's not good for you. Certainly not good for property values. It's not good for safety. It's just not, it's not good for sanity. It's not good for sanitation. It's not good for anything. I mean, fucking downtown LA, they're fun and typhoid. Like they're bringing back middle aged or what is it? Not middle aged. What's the word I'm looking for? I've do this middle ages. Medieval. I always thought that up. I fucked that up. Yeah. Medieval. Medieval diseases. They're bringing back diseases that haven't been around for fucking thousands of years. Where I don't know why that can't be solved. I just don't understand that problem. The home was problem to me. It's so odd that they just let them camp out. Like I went to Venice the other day for dinner. And we're driving by this house. And there's a beautiful house to my left. That's probably worth like $5 million. And in front of it, there's 13 tents. I'm like, this is crazy. The last time I was down here was in March, right before COVID hit. And for around the time, who knows when it hit. But there's a block on Venice Boulevard leading down to that Air One market that was made one block. And I drove in the other night. And it extends seven blocks. Yeah. And they don't do shit about it. And I don't know what they're going to do. Every time you go into an underpass, you're entering a homeless encampment now. They've even the one over here on Wannetka. They put a porta potty there and a hand washing station. Like, we give up here, shit in this bucket. It's crazy. Like, wow. This is, it's just, I mean, I don't know. Maybe there's bigger fish to fry. Maybe there's more important things right now with COVID. I can't think of anything more important than making sure that citizens have health care and shelter. And the route to do that is not my expertise. I don't have any great ideas about that. But the homeless problem to me is very bothersome. Their neighborhoods in Berkeley, you go down towards the four street, fifth street, used to be a kind of an artist district. Get down here, there's skateboard park. They call it the Aaron Brockovich Park, because they had all this like sewage and toxic waste seeping up and kids were getting infections and stuff. So down here there, now everyone wants to go there, right? But bus after bus after tent after tent, it's an entire city now of people living in the avenues back there. Yeah. And I don't know what they're going to do about it. And there doesn't seem to be any solution. I mean, there's nothing on the table. No one's doing anything. They're just letting it grow. It's so weird. So I mean, I don't want to be the person, engineers, the solution. I've got shit to do. Aren't you fuckers? They're mayors and congressmen? No, that's your district. Don't go do something. Yeah. I'm not a very political person, but I'm very disappointed at, well, a lot of things. But I see a lot of great things happening in the world. But I also see a almost total failure, even in the part of the scientific community to communicate accurately what's going on right now. There's so much confusion. And I don't want to get into the COVID thing because it's not my expertise. But the fact of the matter is that science has also, there are a lot of people who don't believe in science. But science has also failed at some level to get out there and explain to people what they need to know. Who are the people that don't believe in science? Well, there are the anti-vaxxer, flat earth people. Yeah. It's good to try and mix. And that's the most part. And I think the ease with which a celebrity can just decide that vaccinations work, or certain way or don't work a certain way. And it spreads so quickly. And people love that idea that I try and look at it through the lens of neuroscience, say, what is it about the mind where people can't seem to connect to logical ideas when it's inconvenient for them? But they can string together all these random dots into a theory that this was all caused by 5G or something that makes no sense at all. So it tells me that, yes, people are challenged. But in addition to that, I do think that the scientific community has a responsibility. Let's not go after Fauci specifically. But why isn't there a team of scientists out there saying as a team we've figured out this, that, and the other thing? The team was just bringing this up earlier before the show that someone was being criticized because they said we should have more experts to draw upon other than Fauci. And this person who was interviewing, explain what they were saying? Yeah, I was on CNN this morning. It's just kept asking what's your problem with Fauci. And he said, well, there's other, once you talk to somebody I stand for, he named someone specifically, I don't remember what the name. But just talk to other people. And she's like, well, we have other epidemiologists coming on the program or whatever. But he's just like, why not try this person, this person, this person. She just kept grilling them on Fauci. Why do you keep asking about Fauci? What's the problem Fauci? Right, right. It's very strange. Right, right. The issue is divergent opinions are important, particularly when it comes to medicine and science. There's different perspectives. And also equally educated experts who vary on what they think the approach should be. And I think regarding this thing, this is the COVID thing is completely unique, right? Because it is a novel coronavirus. So we really don't know. We don't know. And you go back and listen to what the World Health Organization was saying in January versus what Fauci was saying in March, versus what they're saying today in July, it's very different. So clearly there's no one expert as a fucking finger right on the pulse and like, I got this. This is what we need to do. Listen to Fauci. Listen to Joan over there, whoever the fuck it is. That's not the case. We need a panel of experts. When the Space Shuttle exploded, we had a panel of experts. Now Richard Feynman was the one who was kind of the front runner and he's the most eloquent and he knew how to speak to the general public. And so he was the one that got all the attention for figuring out. It was a, you know, a washer ring that he did up or got cold. What was it? Yeah, fine. We figured that out. Wow. In addition to doing so many other amazing things. Jason chicks playing the bongos. What he did then would have gotten him fired today very quickly. Yes. Well, my dad's a physicist. According to my dad, it was, it was bongodrumming naked on the roof of Caltech. Wow. Yeah. So he took it to a whole nother level. Also a guy who was very into float tanks. Oh, yeah. Good for him. He really was into the float tank thing. But I think like anybody who tries them gets a norm. I've never tried. No, we need to get you in one. But my prediction, my hypothesis is that it's dramatically changing that sensation piece of the equation so that your perception can now move and kind of float. No pun intended that you're, it makes it hard to do this duration path outcome kind of rigid thinking in there. Because you, my understanding is that the, the salinity of the water and the temperature of the water makes it so that you kind of don't notice the boundary between yourself and the water becomes one environment. Yes. So Feynman actually talked about this as a way to access space time relationships of the mind that he anchored to physics principles. And so he was a big proponent of the float tank. I think also because he was a little afraid to try psychedelics. I want to talk to you about the float tank, but I don't want to steer away right away from science and the responsibility of science. Because I don't think the responsibility is in science. I think the problem is, and this is a new problem, the new found ability to communicate online and reach massive amounts of people without any expertise whatsoever. That's what this podcast is. I mean, I've said a bunch of stupid shit on here that's not accurate. And you can get away with it. You know, and at least I'm ethical in it that if I do make mistakes, I will correct them. And I'll try to be as honest as I can about what I know or what I don't know. But when someone's slightly schizophrenic or delusional and they're more prone to believing in conspiracies because conspiracies, they activate some weird spot in your brain. And maybe we could talk about that. I don't know what that spot is. But there's some weird reward mechanism that comes from discovering things that are hidden that people don't want you to find out that everybody else doesn't know about. And you could be the fucking Paul Revere of 5G. And you could be the guy running around, you know, 5G is coming. 5G is coming. You know, there's something about that that really dumb people really gravitate towards. And some really smart people with some mental ticks, some things that are off. And it's a real problem because it's a giant distraction. I don't think the responsibility lies in science because science is supposed to be about data, analyzing these things, coming up with cold, hard facts that you could that are provable. Right. Things you could show. This is repeatable. This is this is what the situation is and this is how we know. A spokesperson for science would be wonderful, but there are people like that. There's Neil deGrasse Tyson does a fantastic job about the cosmos. Yeah. I mean, I love his work, but you know, there's this, there was this culture in the 80s and 90s around, you know, and I grew up sort of in this because my dad's a physicist, you know, his physics, we spent some time around a lot of physicists. The cosmos and astrology that gained immense popularity. Yeah. It's very exciting and very interesting and mostly irrelevant to what we're dealing with right now in 2020. Right now it's about biology, virology, epidemiology, and there has not been a voice for that besides Fauci. And I think he's doing the best he can with what he's got. I do. I have to believe that. But I think a panel of experts who could appeal to different types of people through different types of mediums would assist in at least letting people know what the process is. You know, we've sort of said, there are people out there who don't think COVID exists. You've got people that are just waiting for a vaccine are going to leave their house until there's a vaccine. You've got people that are afraid of vaccines. There needs to be some structure of communication about what scientists are doing because there's incredible work happening in laboratories at Stanford all over the world trying to figure out the solution to this problem. And at the same time, people are very stressed. You know, for the person that doesn't have a W2 or regular 1099 income, this period of time is immensely stressful. And the more stressful something, the more stressed a human or any animal gets, the easier it is to recruit them into some sort of delusional thinking. Yes. You know, it's, you know, psychosis is defined as a scribing meaning to something for which there's none. You know, if I suddenly tell you that the brick in that corner is sending me messages about what I should say next, that's breaking with our space time understanding what's allowed here. People are doing that in subtle kind of incremental ways. Some of them might be diabolical and evil. But what we know is that the more stressed people are, the better people are able to recruit them into ideas where they can connect dots that otherwise might not be connected and has everything to do with the way that the brain computes information. So I'm not saying a panel of experts would necessarily buffer us or inoculate us against those kind of forces. But I do think that there was a time in this country, at least when I was a grandma 44 years old, where at least there was some faith that the figures that you saw on a screen where that we're talking to you were putting in a best faith effort. I mean, there might have been a lot of shady stuff going on behind the scenes, but I think that is completely fallen away. And so now it's all, as you said, very aptly, it's all about following individuals who can be most convincing in the moment. It's about capturing people in these highly dopaminergic, anxious states where you can start leading them down a thought path. And pretty soon there's no notion of science, pretty soon you're talking about flatter earth and it's scary. And other countries aren't doing this. China's not doing this in China. They are they are working chipping away in Europe. They are working and chipping away in a way that is in keeping with the reality that is broadly presented to them here. Reality is getting very distorted. There's also a problem with and it's not because of phogee, but phogee represents to a lot of people a point of ideological loyalty. Right. You believe phogee because you think Trump's more on, you know, or I believe phogee because I think he's a scientist. He's got the best set of tools to look at the problem. Right. But you know what I'm saying? So anything that opposes his perspective gets diminished, even if it's a legitimate scientist that has an altered perspective, you know, or someone who instead wishes that we focus the public on how to strengthen the immune system and the techniques for strengthening the immune system, which we are aware of. These are real things and you don't hear a peep out of this, which is to me, very frustrating. Yeah, me too. It's I'm very disappointed. I guess that's what I was saying poorly before and you said much more clearly now, which is, you know, I'm disappointed that he's the only person out there and the only voice, not because I don't believe what he's saying is valid, but because I think there are other things that are important. First of all, the stress problem has not been addressed. You know, they, you know, I work in my laboratory, but one of the reasons I'm, you know, getting out there and trying to talk to people about stress and these systems and trying to provide tools is because people are stressed. And for that person, whether or not they're wearing a mask and washing their hand 20 times a day and staying at home or going out, stress, there are tools for that. And we have an obligation to teach people those things. And I we have their tools for enhancing the immune system and we need to teach people those things. Yeah, I wish that was a big part of the government, whether it's local government or national government, the focus of not just telling people to stay inside and be scared and wash your hands and wear a mask. Do all those things, but also exercise, drink more water, take vitamins. You know, teach people meditation techniques, let the give people some tools that can help them get the proper sleep that they need. Because I think these are all immense factors. I agree. I mean, the foundation of our well-being is through the very basic, kind of almost boring stuff. It's hydrate sleep, gratitude, social connection, nutrition, exercise. You start hearing about this thing and you kind of go, well, it's not exciting. It's not the magic pill. But I think of that all that is kind of the tide that comes in that's required to bring the boat out to see. You know, I think people think about the thing that's going to trampoline them up to the highest position. You know, that's going to suddenly turn them into a high performer. You know, and I have, I'm doing some work with a former team guy. His name is Pat Dossett and Blake Mckosky, who started Tom Shoez. So just full disclosure, because I have a position on their company board. I want to do full disclosure. It's not work in my lab. And they've got this, you know, this company, this program that's really about building foundational tools for people. Like for the every person, that it's great. And I also feel like our government should be sending these messages out there because we're really lacking that. And I think the instability of the situation that we see today has a lot, the psychological response to all this has a lot to do with the fact that we didn't hit COVID prepared. We didn't hit the situation prepared. The world was, you know, that the United States is badly obese. There's a real serious medical problem. I'm not even touching the psychology. Just medical problem, badly obese and stressed. I'm going to send you, I'm going to send this to you, Jamie. So you could put this up on the screen because a bridge at Fettuce sent me this today. It's fucking appropriate and hilarious. And it's about what we're going through right now in terms of obesity and stress and all these poor people. Hold on a second. Give me a second here. I'm going to find it. God damn. I got a lot of text messages. Whoa. I can only imagine. Oh, I can't even imagine. I'm like, what the fuck is this? Um, sorry. No more second. God damn. I have 150 new text messages here. I'm sending this to you right now, Jamie. A lot of dead air here, kids. Yeah, we can Jamie. Bam. Bam. Okay. Well, I will say my physician friends tell me that one of the major threats to, you know, one of the major risk factors is obesity. Yeah, this is, um, would you look in at a lady that weighs about 400 pounds in a scooter, uh, yelling at a fit woman, put a mask on. You're putting my health at risk. And she's got to make Donald's bag in her hand. That's a lot of what's going on. I was hoping that what this was going to do was, it was going to be a wake up call for people. And we're, I was going to see, oh, obese people really take their health seriously and go, well, while I'm alive, like what are the primary factors that lead to really bad results with COVID? Well, according to, uh, the doctors have treated patients in Manhattan, the number one factor was obesity. That was number one. And so there's older people that, uh, you know, did way better than young people that were obese. So it's not just an age related thing. It's an obesity related thing, but people as long as they're okay, they could stay inside and wear a mask. They're fucking healthy. They'll just eat ice cream and watch TV and hope someone comes up with a solution. The daddy government comes along and fixes the problem. But it should be a wake up call. Should you health related wake up call for people? It should. I mean, I think that we saw in the 80s and 90s, you know, fast food and cheap calories became so prominent. Yeah. And we see the effects of that now. Right. Yeah. That's, that's, that's here now. The problem is now I think the other problem that's happened over the last 10 years and we're starting to see this emerge in much in the same way that we see no obesity emerge is the phone. And I love the phone. You know, born and raised in Silicon Valley. I use the phone. I love the phone, but it is a complicated device because we are bringing a ton of our attention to it. Social media is very complicated. It has wonderful aspects, but there are ways in which it's converting and engaging neural plasticity in the young brain, the way it's you know, engaging our attention. Think about how much attention people will place on that little phone, but they can't read two pages of a book. Right. That worries me. And not because I'm, you know, University professor and I need everybody, you know, doing equations or learning about neuroscience, not at all. I just worry about the neural plasticity of learning to be defocused and scatterbrained. There is a time to put the brain into states of space time fluidity to come up with new comedy routines or scientific ideas. You know, you can take a walk. You can run. You can put the float tanks. There are a bunch of different ways to do this. But the phone is starting to gobble up all that dopamine and all that space time duration path outcome stuff. And we are wasting our cognition and we're wasting the most precious gift we were given by Mother Nature and evolution as a brain that can teach itself things and that can predict things and that can look at the past, can learn from elders and gain wisdom. I mean, all that stuff is what we were put here to do. And, um, you know, my dad said, you know, he thinks, I asked him if he thinks there are other galaxies, you know, because he's more versed in the, in physics and the cosmos than I am. And he said, I don't know. But if there was, they, they probably extinguished themselves with social media because it's like mental chewing gum people just kind of throwing away their cognition. And the dopamine thing, it's not that they're getting so much dopamine from using the phone. It doesn't feel like a big win. It's that they're spending it out like spending, you know, $5 bills all day long pretty soon. You're broke and exhausted. And so I worry about our use of these devices and what it's doing to our neurology. But I also know they're extremely important. Alan the little of innovates who was on the podcast recently had a book called Natural. And it's one of the things that he, uh, he talked about in the book was that what we're doing is essentially the, the, the, it's weird. And he talked about this on Twitter. And that's how I engage with them. We were, we're taking most of our information and we're making it processed information by getting things off of Twitter, by getting things off of social media. You're getting this very weird interaction with people. It's boiled down to this very strange 280 character version. That's not equivalent to an actual conversation with a human being or reading a book or watching a documentary or any of those things. It's this weird thing that's most of the information that you're receiving. And if you look at human beings that are on process food diets, you see the body behaves very poorly. And it just reacts very poorly and it's, it's terrible. It's just not good for it's unhealthy. Well, equally unhealthy is processed information. And that this was, this was his argument and his book. It's a great argument. It's a great argument. Yeah. So I think we are in an adolescent stage of this technological intervention. And this, this will lead to whatever neural link is going to be and whatever this successor to neural link is going to be. I think things are going to get way weirder. I think, but there's potential for a beneficial aspect to it. And I think one of the potentially beneficial aspects are that it seems like all of technology is moving us through, at least in this virtual sense of using phones and computers, where the boundaries between people and information are becoming smaller and smaller. The problem is the boundaries between physical people are becoming greater. There's more separation, particularly with COVID, right? There's more physical separation between people, but the boundaries between being able to access the thoughts of people is smaller. Right. So it's your, your, the beneficial aspects of like what we talked about with, with your, even your immune system and your, your health and just overall mental well being community, love, friendship, all those things. You need to be right there. You need to be right there with it. You need to hug each other, all that stuff. That's, that's, that's crucial. Well, everything. And hardwired in death. Absolutely. And with COVID, that's, first of all, everyone's scary. Because everyone could give you the bug, you could kill you or kill your grandma. And then on top of that, you're engaging in this processed form of communication all day long. And most of it is toxic. I mean, if you're engaging with people on social media, then I mean, I've talked about this multiple times in the show. There's people I follow that don't even know I'm following them because I just have a bookmark because they're just so toxic. I go and just I want to know what they're doing. I'll just go to the, I'm like, look at this motherfucker. He's on Twitter 12 hours a day. These yelling at people are you in constantly. And I just imagine that their mind is a fucking chaos, just a, a, a rack, just potholes and burning buildings. Their head is just filled with shit. But it's effective. You know, in a terrible way, it's effective. It's like in the engineers, you know, talk about signal versus noise. And the brain is essentially an engineered machine. It looks for where signal is high and above the noise. And so there really is a payoff nowadays, a short term, deleterious payoff, but payoff nonetheless for being able to recruit people's attention, recruit their autonomic nervous system, get those into them into those modes of having to click and follow and scroll. Now, I, I agree that I think social media, like for instance, I teach some science on social media. I've managed to make great, great connections through social media. But we have to be very judicious in our use of it. And that's hard for most people. And what I think is going to happen is that we're going to talk about signal noise. I think what's going to happen is we're going to start selecting for people that are very good at controlling their attention are very good at separating themselves from technology as well as using technology. And so for people that are just rapidly consuming technology and information and thinking, this is the way to live a good life or to get ahead. They're actually just falling into the noise. And the people that are, I think it's one of the reasons why a select set of individuals have been so effective at controlling the landscape, the political landscape, the lots of landscapes. Let's just say that. And I think that we need to think about whether or not we're in the noise or whether or not we're, you know, paying attention to one of these big peaks of signal and what's that we're getting recruited. We're getting, you know, kind of groomed by these things. And it is scary. And at the same time, I agree. I think that eventually we will break through this. I do because that's what the human animal is really good at. Yeah. I think we're in the technological dark ages. That's what I think. I think we're very well. And then we're just some weird thing where there's a lot of people going, this is not good kids. This is not good. But most people like fuck you. And just in the, just waiting into the fray because it feels kind of good. Yeah. Well, especially when you don't have real meaning or purpose in your life, because you're unemployed and you're stuck at home because of COVID and you're scared. Well, that's, that's a way that people occupy their mind and engage. You're seeing a big uptick. Big uptick. And well, at least the people that I'm paying attention to, the toxicity of their inner, their exchanges. Well, this is kind of scary. And I, I sort of hesitant to just kind of flip to another research. But there was this guy in the 60s, this guy, Robert Heath, who didn't need patients who had epilepsy. He just got permission to record from the human brain. And so we put electrodes into their brains and he let them stimulate any area of the brain that they wanted. This was like this, he just did it. And they'd stimulate one area and they'd feel kind of drunk. Or they stimulate another area. They feel sexual arousal. They stimulate another and they start laughing. The number one area that people like to stimulate created a sense of mild frustration and anger, which is totally perplexing on the face of it. You say like, why would people like that more than sexual arousal or feeling drunk or happy or giddy or whatever? It turns out that this dopamine system we were talking about earlier is tethered to that. And it very likely explains not just the human animal, but all animals ability to lean into challenge in order to acquire more resources, to fight and overcome that. You know, if you had a bunch of, the whole species, everyone just backed away from any frustration and challenge, that would be very problematic. And so right now I see us in the state of extreme anger, and frustration, or mild anger, and frustration. And some people are going to drill through this and they're going to make things work. You know, they're going to goggons it to make it the verb. You know, but and a lot of people are just going to feed that frustration and anger, but in a loop. It's just a closed loop where they're just clicking in scroll and and clicking in strolling. And they're not building anything out of that. So this circuit is really important. It's actually part of the circuit that underlies the state that we would call courage. And my lab's worked on it and this relates to some of the stuff done with military groups. But it, those states of courage were designed to accomplish specific goals, you know, find food, find mates. And then in the world of military, you know, conquer this or learn that and you know, learn a new skill. Right now, the phone in many ways is hijacking some of that circuitry at a low level. And it's it's never the subtle stuff is the stuff that scares me. It's, you know, obviously I'm very disturbed when I see riding and looting. But when I see a technology that is kind of gnawing away at our neurology, little by little, and then we kind of go, oh my goodness, we can't cope with life and what's being thrown at us. I think that's when I think we really need to look at what that, that neural circuitry was built for and start building new technologies to take us out of this mess. Yeah, that's what I'm hoping the future of these, whether it's neural link or some other sort of immersive technology that allows people to communicate in a very different way. You know, when Elon is saying you're going to be able to talk without using words, what I'm, what I'm, what I'm really hoping, this sounds really crazy. But I think what could help is if we could read thoughts and clear intentions, really understand intentions versus interpretation of intentions. Like someone could say something sarcastically and you could read it the wrong way and you can get upset at them. If you read it in text, it's even more easy to misinterpret with someone saying or to purposely, uh, deceptively frame what they're trying to say. Absolutely. But if you can just read someone's mind, we're going to, we're going to have a much better understanding of each other and the rewards versus, the, the positive versus negatives of holding onto these really toxic patterns that people are swimming in right now with social media. I agree. And I do think that neuroplasticity in addition to brain machine interface, you know, so it probably will involve machines that we put on our faces or whatever. But neuroplasticity is the way out of this, right? I mean, that's what the brain can do. It can learn new contingencies, new ways of relating. That's why I'm so adamant about understanding this process and really feeling so much importance on, you know, especially with kids because it's also passive. Like their brains are just passively shaped by experience. So that could be a little scary to people. It's also beautiful because it means that you set one proper intention or one rule that they should learn and adopt. And that can have a long lasting effect. Yeah. The ability to de-stress themselves self suit the ability to. on proper intention or one rule that they should learn and adopt, and that can have a long lasting effect. The ability to de-stress themselves, self-su, the ability to work through a hard tangle of a problem interpersonally or academically, whatever problem, that can be done. It's just that we, I do think, especially in this country, we've learned to back away from that internal sense of agitation. And going back to what we were talking about earlier, that agitation is the first requirement for getting plasticity. There's no way around that. And we have this kind of obsession with flow states, which I think are great, and on all this stuff. And we think it's, that's the portal to it. But I think I'm certain actually that it's not the portal. The portal to changing the brain is these higher-agency, high-attentional states followed by rest and just keep going, toggling back and forth and back and forth. That is what's really important, right? That you cannot strive for a life of total relaxation, because you're not going to get chit-done. There's nothing there. It's not the active state of the human mind. It doesn't thrive under those conditions. But we're also concerned about stress, and we're so concerned about the pressures of whether you're in some sort of a competitive environment or a job that you're involved in that requires an immense amount of your focus and your attention. We're all striving for that state where you're like a monk in a lotus position, not doing anything. Yeah, that seems terrible to me, because it's divorced from everything we know about competition winning in the brain. There's a cool set of experiments that I think you might especially appreciate given your background in martial arts, which is called the tube test, where they take two rats or two mice and they put them in a tube, typically it's male mice, but also female mice, and they start fighting for position in that tube. One mouse pushes the other mouse out or rat inevitably. That one is the winner, the one that got pushed out of the loser. We know that statistically, if you put those mice back into another tube test, even with another mouse, the winner has a higher probability of winning and the loser has a higher probability of losing. Even if you push the winner from behind, so you take a loser and you push it from behind with a stick and it wins, even if it doesn't win on its own effort, it becomes a winner. Now, this is totally weird and for about two decades, this really perplexed neuroscientists, and this was taught in psychology classes, but not neuroscience classes. So in the last five years, neuroscientists come in, we have a lot of new tools now that let us monitor the brain and look at the brain in real time as rodents or people are doing these kinds of things. And so they figured out that there's a specific area of the frontal cortex that becomes more active in the winner and less active in the loser. So much so that if you shut down that brain area, the winner suddenly becomes a loser. You increase activity in the loser, it becomes the winner. So you ask yourself, what in the world is this brain activity or brain area doing? It turns out, it's taking the feeling of stress and arousal, which both of them are experiencing. It's a battle, and it converts it to more steps of forward movement per unit time. It's just forward movement. And so one animal is feeling stressed and is pausing more or is backing up. The other animal is feeling the same level of stress and is moving forward just physically. And it's wild because you can even take an arena, make it really cold, which mice don't like, put a warm heat lamp in the corner. And the animal that won at the tube test gets the sweet spot every single time. And so what this says is that, you know, those are mice were humans. My lab's been looking at this. We had a paper a few years ago identifying the area in the brain that actually leads to forward movement and rewards it with a dopamine reward. So as a paper we publish in nature, the area of the brain is interesting only because it maps exactly to that brain area that Robert Heath found people like to stimulate frustration and anger. So frustration and anger were designed to get us to move forward adaptively. Now I don't know how this plays out in the octagon where you're seeing somebody get beat up and you know, but then they're all of a sudden they're winning and it's switching back and forth. But you know, my dream experiment would be to record from the brains of those guys while in real time. We don't have the tech to do this right now. But someday we will. And I bet you that every forward step or perception that you have an advantage over the other guy or gal leads to a dopamine increase lowers that norepinephrine and allows them to keep moving forward. They get energy. They it's, you know, it's not gassing at the level of, you know, I can't breathe or gassing at the level of conditioning. It's something's happening nearly. So as a society right now, we are stressed and this is not the time to back off going to the lotus position. And people come at me eight. So I'm times I do think we need tools to buffer stress. I want to be clear about that. I don't want people stressed all the time or seeking stress. But goodness, we were given and then we were endowed with this amazing neurology that allows us to do this. We did it in famine. We did this with foreign invaders. We did this with animals and storms. And we did this. And here we are. We've got severe challenges. But forward movement balanced by rest is the solution that's worked for us for tens of thousands of years. And it's what's going to work now. And it, it all comes back to just a few select brain areas because this is a primitive situation we're in. It's not a sophisticated situation. Yeah, that's a, that's a uncomfortable reality for a lot of people that the struggle is good. Right. That there's, there's benefits to it. Particularly if you're looking for growth and also if you're looking for stimulation and a sense of meaning, I think people for whatever reason are hardwired to try to figure things out to try to get better at things and to have a purpose. And a lot of times the purpose that they feel other than family and loved ones and friends and things along those lines, there's a purpose of success in their chosen field, success in whatever endeavor, even if it's a hobby, you know, like whatever the thing is that they obsess upon, that's what gives people this sense of meaning of, and I think that's why there's buildings, that's why there's cities. That's why we figured out the wheel. There's something about people that need a problem to solve. And then once they've solved that problem, they need a new problem. Right. And that's what the nervous system was fundamentally designed to do that and make sure our offspring make it to the next. So when you see like riots and looting and you see people pushing against the building and let us in, do you, do you look at it from that perspective? Like, well, there's sort of a battle going on here. And there's a problem. Like they're trying to win. Just like the mouse in that tube, when you see those protesters in Portland or trying to get into the courthouse, like what are they doing? They're trying to get in there because it's locked. And they have this idea in their head that that's going to be the conquest. But you saw like with a chaz, remember that the zone in Seattle, six blocks, they let them have it. And then what happened? They've fucked it up. It fell apart. It fell apart because there was, there was no end goal then. Once they have it, like, what are you going to do? You get to sustain it? No, people started leaving. Murders took place. They started beating people up. They were filming things. They were behaving like the police. It was crazy. They put boundaries up. They essentially turned it into a far worse version of the United States. But in their mind, they thought if we just take this over. If this is this right now is not ours. But if we take it, there's a policing, police precinct there. If we storm the precinct and occupy it, then we're going to win. Yeah, we're in. But then once they're in, they're like, now what? Well, there's no resistance. Once there was no resistance, they didn't, they didn't have a fight. There was no battle. It was very primitive. And actually, I hadn't thought about it. It's a perfect example of real life example of the tube test. These, you know, two opposing forces pushing back and forth. And we know that the more, you know, we call autonomic arousal, the more stressed you get, the more your mental and visual landscape becomes that sort of straw view where all you can think about is the adversary. Yes. You know, now in a fight in octagon or a boxing ring or to jitsu match, that's great because that's everyone's agreed to that. But it, that's not designed to be played out in society over these micro wins. It's not even clear that they're wins because what's really changed. I think that working through legislation, working through top down legislation, identifying specific things to go after. I mean, that was the beauty of the civil rights movement, you know, in the 1960s, you know, Brown versus the Board of Education, like what a beautiful thing to create openness in schools, you know, where anyone could attend going after a specific legislation. That's far and away a different way of looking at a problem and solving a problem. And, you know, I don't have a lot to say about the situation in terms of the process. I saw a lot of looting where I live in Oakland. I'm the first house in on a commercial district. Drove a car through the window, looted the place three times, pharmacy three times. I mean, it was right up next to me. So, you know, I think that that seems to me to be just opportunists. Yeah. Take advantage of the chaos. It was clear it was not the protesters. There's many things going on simultaneously and to like to kind of conflate them all together. It seems disingenuous. Well, this is a problem. In science, we have a phrase. You're either a lumper or a splitter. The lumpers like to kind of lump everything together and push forward at a grand theory. Now, today I'm using some generalizations and I want to get too far down in the weeds. But I'll stand behind anything I've said because it has, you know, detailed background to support it. But the splitters as annoying as they can be when they come to meetings, no, but this, but that you need a certain number of splitters. This is why I think like a panel of people is good. You get a lumper, a lumper and a splitter. And then pretty soon, the splitter is annoying everybody because you just want to go for coffee or you want to just break. And the lumpers are done. But the splitter says, no, we're actually not thinking about this problem in a nuanced way. And this is where I think maybe it's not specific scientific information, but a scientific training and ability to think about a problem and be comfortable knowing you may not solve it today or ever, but you're going to lathe into this thing over and over and over. That's the kind of training that a scientific thinking will give somebody. You don't even have to want to be a scientist to do it. I don't know if anyone wants to be a scientist nowadays. I certainly hope so. But we need to have more nuance. We need balance between the lumpers and splitters. And as you point out before social media is all about lumping and high emotional states. And that's the worst combination. Yeah, I think, and that would you just said is perfect. I mean, that that's really what we're dealing with today is this inability to recognize nuance and to accept nuance and to be rigid and committed to your position. And your position is something you defend because your position essentially is you. Right. This is one of the problems that people have with ideas that they marry their mind to these ideas. And if these ideas prove to be even objectively, they know that this idea has holes in it. They will still defend that idea to thin claw because that idea represents their ego or represents them as an individual. And that that's unhealthy for everybody. But it's also it's part of being a human being absolutely instinct to do such a thing. Absolutely. There's a paper that came out recently in the journal neuron, excellent journal that was all about the dopamine system being attached to beliefs. So beliefs and thoughts we think of as kind of these vague, you know, like what are thoughts? You know, I have thoughts all the time, but I can also deliberately have a thought beliefs are almost like actions in the sense that they can recruit dopamine release. What this paper showed is that people just believing thinking more and more about what they already believe leads to these dopamine increases. It literally reinforces the belief they have from the inside. That presents a certain particular type of problem for trying to convince people how to change their opinion. It means I have to take your mind or the person's mind into a completely different state in order to change it. It's, you know, maybe it's hypnosis, maybe it's proper landing of media ideas. I don't know what that form would take. But changing people's minds provided that they are older than 25 has to be done by the person themselves. I can't change your mind unless you're a child. The child can you we can impact them. But once you're an adult, only you can direct your own plasticity. No one can do it for you. So we are becoming more and more polarized. And because of the nature of the AI bots that drive social media, the information that we're that you're getting and then I'm getting, well, hopefully that's more aligned than, you know, some of the ideas that I'm getting and other people are getting where we fundamentally disagree because social media and media in general is designed to bring us into these high amplitude aroused states. But we're getting different information. We're not reading the same newspaper. And so our beliefs are actually diverging and being reinforced by dopamine. So we are creating a bigger and bigger conceptual divide through the hijack of these neural mechanisms. I wonder if that's one of the really attractive things about these protests is this internal recognition somewhere even if it's subconsciously that we don't connect with people enough and that there's there's no greater connection than a group of 50,000 people that are supporting an individual cause and working towards a common we know this. If you, you know, you really want to build a team, you know, build a sense of community, you know, you can have them all watch a concert bring them into a peak state or you can all have them fight the same fight. I wonder if there's like a a yearning for that because of the separation of I mean, think about the coinciding factors, right? You have social media which separates us, you have COVID which separates us and then you have these protests which unites us. And it must be like incredibly satisfying for people that have been locked up and are constantly on social media to be in this mass movement. And you'll probably alter your own perceptions and beliefs to fit in better with this movement. So people that would never be violent, maybe violent, people that would never loot might loot. People that would never use graffiti or start smashing the windows of Starbucks might be so inclined because of the mob mentality to join right on in just to be accepted and be a part of this group and just to feel something just to be excited by this gigantic movement. And when it's so undeniable that the cause is worthy, like the George Floyd murder, when you see that and you go, well, fuck this man, this is wrong, this is injustice. And then everybody's on the street and they're chanting together. You're like, it's it's perfect. It's a perfect combination of things. It is the perfect combination and it is a combination. You know, until now I've been talking about, it's like just frustration or just winning, but you're talking about group cohesion. You're talking about fighting a fight. You're talking about being locked up before. So all these forces, you know, pulling on the same neurochemical forces, there aren't many neurochemical ingredients. There are a lot of ways to access them. And I look at the what's happening now and I sort of go on sort of like the inverse of burning man. I've never been to Burning man. I'm probably the one person of the area hasn't been to Burning man, but you know, going out to the desert, every no money, everyone's going to get along. There's going to be a lot of sex and like everyone's going to get along and everything's great. You know, no rules basically, right, except be kind. And now we're seeing the exact inverse of that. Yeah. And so there needs to be something that can satisfy this yearning for connection and that can make us feel like we're building. And you know, back in the last century's history, I mean, you know, the build after the war was a, you know, everyone community building. There were a lot of problems with the way that was played out. Of course, was not done equally among racial groups, etc. But a common goal, a common battle, a common fight is very good at recruiting these systems in the brain. And I don't know how that's going to come about. I keep hoping I have this 14 year old niece and I just keep hoping that like her generation is looking at all this and they're just like, we're going to work this out. Well, I think what's going to happen with places like Seattle and Portland, unfortunately, I sense a mass exodus of rational people from the area. I think they're probably going to go, okay, people have lost your marbles. We're going to get the fuck out of here and we're going to take our tax dollars with us and leave you with your Marxist mayor and congratulations. You fuck the whole city up and then there needs to be some sort of a recognition of the mistakes and then a correction. And that's probably what's going to happen. You're probably going to see more and more of this, more and more chaos. And then like, you know, what's going on today in Portland. And now you've got Homeland Security troops, which I mean, I don't even know what branch of the military they are part of no idea. So we're they're all wearing camo and they don't have badges on. They just, they just show up in many vans and pull people in the cars and everybody's like, what the fuck is this? Like, what is going on here? Well, they'll probably be a correction because of that as well. It's most likely that we're experiencing is just a lot of chaos and then lessons will be learned. And unfortunately for a lot of people, victims will be made, you know, they're going to make victims out of a lot of people and a lot of people are going to lose their businesses and their livelihoods and even their lives along the way. When we saw this in the 60s, you know, the civil rights movement was incredible movement, but we also had like the whole hippie movement. There was like a lot of the same parallels were happening in the last 20 years. I was watching this, you know, because I grew up in the Bay Area, people think of Silicon Valley is like very conservative. But I remember time growing up, you know, at least in my house, you know, like the way that my dad talked about hippies was like, you know, every doesn't lead anywhere. It's bad for everything, you know, the counterculture movement. Um, my mom was the opposite. So I think neither was correct. But, you know, they had crazy stuff going on like this. There was this guy, Lulu Geller that was, you know, he thought he could bend spoons with his mind, you know, spoon-bender. That was the joke. My house don't be a spoon-bender. You know, like whatever you do, don't be a spoon-bender, because it's like state attached to facts and things that are designed to move human progress forward. That's really important. At the same time, you had the whole counterculture thing going crazy. And I feel like in the last 20 years, we've seen some spoon-benders. We've seen the explosion of access all things, you know, and people being so hungry to have everything that everyone else has. And there's been a gradual decline, at least in some sectors, you know, an appreciation for hard work ethic. That's why I think David, um, you know, I have a deep appreciation this for the work with, you know, people in the military. But people who, you know, that whole American thing that I grew up with of you get up, you pick a vocation, you grind away at it, whether or not it's, you know, garbage, garbage man or scientist doesn't matter. You're just building your same circuits are underlying all that. And I think right now, people are feeling like they don't know which way is forward. Right. We talk about moving forward and pushing against stream, but I think a lot of you just don't know which way is forward. So whatever thrown in their face, they go that direction. Yeah, well, they think they have a sense of what's forward and they're moving in that direction. And a lot of them are very young too. And so their, their version of the world is not, again, to use the word, not particularly nuanced, which is, you know, they're, they're imitating their atmosphere. They, they are a part of this. What they think is a very valid and worthy movement and they're pushing forward. And it's very attractive again, it's, it's, uh, it's one of those things that I think ultimately we're going to get something out of this. And ultimately we'll probably be good. And I think racially to be fantastic. I think this, this big explosion of tension is going to be awesome when it all settles down because we're going to realize how ridiculous it is to look at people and base how you treat them or how you feel about them based on their appearance because of what part of the world their ancestors came from. It's just as stupid as looking at someone because of their hair color or their eye color. I mean, imagine a world where all blue eyed people were devils. We hate them all. It's crazy. It's fucking stupid. It did things that are completely outside of your control should have absolutely nothing to do with how a person values you as a human being. And I think most people, uh, haven't experienced this, but there's a, there's something out there. Maybe it's on the internet, but my colleague, Jeremy Bailinson built this VR experience called a walk of 1,000, uh, walk of 1,000 cuts or 10,000 cuts. So you put the VR on. You see yourself a reflection of you. And then you, they turn a dial or you turn a dial and then your skin, if your Caucasian becomes black African American. And then you walk down a city street. And it's very interesting. I've done this experience and people look at you out of the corner of their eye. And you're like, Oh, I've never experienced that before. The virtual people, the virtual people looking you out of the corner of eye. You go to the moop, you beat up. There isn't that option in there. And there's a different VR experience where you can beat people up. There is. There is. You should come up to the lab. There's come up to the lab. But you don't feel anything. I have a VR boxing game and it's weird because when they hit you, like you get a flash and it gives you, it gets you a little nervous. Like you really do feel like you're sparring. But when you hit them, there's no satisfaction. Well, you're used to the real thing. There's nothing like that real impact, right? There's, there's no replacement for for hitting things. Real spying getting hit. Are you even hitting a bag? I mean, it's, it would be nice. I mean, you don't really have to hit a person. But if you, if you hit the thing, like if, if they they can figure out a way to make a robot, you know, that was interacting with the VR program that understood where the footsteps of the VR, the, so it's in the correct position. So like as you hit it, that's where it should be. And you could actually push off of it and it would back up a little and then you could hit it. So you could come and combine. I bet it is coming. And I should be clear, like I'm not a total technophile. I think we're using the tech that we have now because it's the best we've got. And I hope that in five years with all these amazing engineers, I'm surrounded by an elsewhere that we won't be using that tech and we'll be doing something completely different. So I'm sorry to interrupt you. So the, the, when you are in this different race and you're walking down the street, you get this, this feeling. Is there a overt racism? Yeah. So you go to a job interview and you're standing there next to somebody else. So you're actually seated down. And then the interviewer comes in and says, hello, nice to meet you. And they put out their hand and shake the person's hand next to you white guy. And then you put out your hand and they don't shake it. They go nice to meet you. They do the nah. They make eye contact. And then you go into a different set of experiences. It takes you through about 10 minutes of these experiences. And what's interesting about it is none of them is so overwhelming that you're like, oh my god, this is more what it must be like. But what's interesting is I did that experience three years ago. Every time I walk past a black person on the street, I now, it triggers a frame of mind. I'm thinking about how I react. I'm thinking about it. Whereas before I wasn't, I've never considered myself a racist person. I don't now. But it fundamentally changed the way that I experience interactions with people on the street. And that was a 10 minute or so or 20 minute or so VR experience. And that's just the tip of the iceberg about what's possible. I think we really, what it tells me is that because of how stringently gated plasticities, plasticities, vaulted by these chemicals, we need to bring those chemicals into play. If we want people to change the way they feel, I don't think watching a protest on the street can do it. I think the George Floyd thing absolutely did it. That was a very dramatic, terrible example. It went, it was visceral to watch that. And I think that's why it had the effect. It did. It underscores essentially everything we've been saying about neurochemicals being the gates to changing the brain without that. It's not going to happen. Talking about this VR program highlights one of the reasons why I don't like cities, like Manhattan. I'd like them to visit, but I don't want to live there because you don't say hide everybody. Right. You can't. Yeah. You're just in the optic. Hi. How are you? Hey, what's up? Hi, lady. It's the human so far. It's like a, I was saying New York is like a human safari, but it's like that again, signal to noise. Like a person asked Abakat on their head naked and on fire before you're like, Oh, wow. Maybe it's just that it's very impersonal. There's a, there's this sort of weird thing that happens when you get around large numbers of people where they don't become, they're not as valuable because they're, you're overwhelmed by them. There's so many of them. Whereas if you're in a small town, you know, of 20,000 people and you walk down a street and there's a guy walking towards you, you look at each other, go, Hey, man, how you doing? I like that too. I always, what I liked about New York is I felt like it's, you had Italians and Irish and Black people, white people and Puerto Rican people and so there's a, you also experience them. Yeah. Right. You see that. And you know, the Bay Area, I love the Bay Area, but one of the problems I have with the Bay Area is it's become, you know, people are hidden away a lot more. There isn't that in a lot of our culture as well. It's a car culture. And every place has its, its challenges, but I think New York is such a beautiful experiment in putting a bunch of people with different genetic and ethnic backgrounds together, putting them together and saying, you know, you may not all get along, but at least you will hear those, those accents. You'll get cursed at in five different languages. And I think there's a real beauty to it. I wonder why I'm not such, that's going to change because of COVID because obviously people are terrified of being jammed into a subway now with strangers. And that was one of the cool things about New York is that you did all walks of life, poor and rich would interact with each other on the street. In LA, there's virtually none of that. And there's this weird sort of separation between people and where they live. And then also the car thing. Car cultures, you mean, it just, you're in your own little environment. You set up your own little world. And that's your car. And you're driving around. And these other people that you're interacting with, that's a little segment of their world that they're taking with them on the 405. And because of that, you don't have the same sort of melting pot aspect that you do get in New York. New York really uniquely. And I grew up in Boston. It doesn't have it. You know, Boston has like, there's public transport. There's the tea. You know, you can ride the train, shit like that. But it's not nearly as prevalent as the subway system in New York City or the walking in New York City. Everybody's walking. Yeah. And you have to be right up next to it. Yep. You know, I think martial arts has this a bit as well. I grew up skateboarding. That was my sport. And what I loved about it is first of all, it's like all ages. Sort of a weird sport in that way. You got a little kid hanging out with grown men and don't draw something. All these things. Yeah, there's a, um, and so you get this big mixing pot, but also ethnically so diverse. It wasn't always like that, but you've got, you know, if you're getting to me, it's Mexican plaque, you know, white kids, everything, right, hanging out together, whoever can get their tail down, dropping and go. Yeah. That's great. Science is making a an effort. And I think now, especially after the recent events in the world, to try and bring in more diversity. And, um, it's a desperate need because you want that diversity of opinion. You want that diversity of outlook, et cetera. We're fortunate to have a African American, um, colleague in our department was actually a small department. And there's an immense need for that. I think science is going to be more diverse in the years to come. That's it. It's a focused effort now that the National Institutes of Health is going to put money and energy into this, thankfully, but there can always be more done. But I think when thinking about kids and neuroplasticity, like whenever, I'm not skateboarding anymore, um, it wasn't very good at it anyway. But, um, I did enjoy it. And I loved the community around that. I think more of that, please, for the next generation, more things like that. I think martial arts is great. You go into, Jim, it's like, it doesn't matter really where you're from, especially if you're going to spar, if you're going to get in and, you know, start boxing rounds, you have to be able to take it, you know, and it's not about background. It's about what you can do. Yeah, that is really important. I mean, and it's, it's just more of those things where people can interact with all kinds of different people gives you a more balanced perspective. It gives you, it gives you a broader perspective, right? You get to see and bring you back to the way that brain functions, the more variables that you have in terms of when you see a person, you know, you, know so many different examples of human beings that you have more to draw upon. And I hope that one of the things that comes out of this George Floyd thing and then the Black Lives Matter protests is people have more open-minded approach towards just human beings in general. And I think these things like they happen in these big explosive, these big explosive events and then shifts. And I think we're absolutely experiencing like a global consciousness shift. And it's very chaotic and scary in some ways for a lot of people right now. But I think ultimately we're going to come out of this the better. And if you look at, like say, Stephen Pinker's work, where he covers, you know, the history of human beings and interactions, we are in the best time ever. And it's hard to say that because, you know, they're still poverty and they're still violence and they're still crime and they're still racism and sexism and rape and all sorts of awful shit. But it's way less and way better than it was just a hundred years ago or 200 years ago. And it seems to constantly be moving in that trend. And I'm hoping that that's going to be what comes out of this. This is going to be another event that as the dust settles and as the lessons are learned and as we kind of get our feet back on the ground. And we understand what went wrong and what happened particularly because of this this coronavirus situation that we're in, we're, you know, everything's in chaos, everything's thrown up in the air. 30 something percent of people can't pay their rent right now. It's crazy. It's not. It's terrible. Unemployment rates through the roof. It's crazy. It's terrible. It's terrible. And every time I, you know, I think being able to take someone else's frame of mind or reference, just as an exercise, it's so hard. I mean, we become kind of autistic in our way of just feeling like our experience is the one experience and just being able to try and and think about what it must be like over the last three months to not have any income, you know, to see your gym or your business open then shut again at least in California. Incredibly stressful. It's pulling on all the levers that create internal tension and outward physical explosion. And we, yeah, I am optimistic in terms of the long arc of this, but right now internal tension and outward physical explosion. Yeah. And we, yeah, I am optimistic in terms of the long arc of this. But right now we are in the pressure point. Yeah, it's rough. To bring it back to your work, one of the things that you talked about was eyesight. And regaining eyesight or dealing with people that have weakening eyesight, my eyesight's going to shit. And do you have a red condition? No. And I'm just old. 52. And just this, you know, macular degeneration. Like, I can, I mean, I can read my phone. I can read all these text messages that are coming in. 14 new ones since I put my phone down. But what I do know for sure is that my vision is not as good as it was 10 years ago and certainly not as good as it was 20 years ago. What can be done? Okay. So there's what can be done now and where we're headed. But I suspect you want to know what can be done now. Fix my eyes. Okay. So we do have a clinical trial in my lab right now through my affiliation with ophthalmology where people put on VR goggles very separate from the fear inducing thing. It's actually a very pleasant experience. And we use a particular pattern of stimulation that activates the cells in the eye that are most vulnerable and create vision loss. It stimulates those in a way that reinforces their connections with the brain. That's the logic. So every cell in your eye has a different function, but some of them, their job is to transmit visual information to the rest of the brain. They're called ganglion cells. We know what patterns of activity make them healthy and what reinforce regeneration back in 2016. My lab published a paper showing that that particular pattern of stimulation combined with a particular pattern of gene therapy. So this is one injection into the eye of a gene that triggers growth of these cells in mice that allowed regeneration of neurons that were damaged. And it actually reversed slightly, but it reversed blindness, completely blind mice. We're able to see again. Whoa. So that was in mice. We then took that built a human clinical trial using just the VR part. However, some people in this trial are receiving injections. It's about once every month, very painless injection into what we call the vitreous of the eye. They shoot it right in the eyeball. Yeah, just a little insulin syringe go right in. You look that way. Boom. Yeah. I skilled ophthalmologists can do this without any pain or anything. I know it sounds terrible, but it's very straightforward. Okay. To inject something called cntf, silinary natrophic factor. And the combination of the growth factor plus the visual stimulation, we believe is going to protect cells that would normally be lost from getting lost. So offset vision loss and potentially restore vision. Now the results of this trial aren't done, but we are recruiting people for this trial. Jamie, you're in, right? As a good person. And if the prisoners, okay, and it's a prisoner is a really bad people, but they can't see that good. The injection part provided it's done by a really skilled ophthalmologist is, is a, it's a, it's a cinch. You've been through way worse this morning on your way to work. Trust me. So it's, it's nothing. The other thing is that there was a paper published just recently a couple weeks ago, not from my lab, but from a group over at University College London, looking at the effects of red light on mitochondria in a different cell type, which are the photo receptors of the eye. So you've got the cells that connect the eye of the brain called the gang wind cells. And you've got the photo receptors, which take all this photon information, turn it into this incredible thing we call vision, which itself is a whole galaxy of information, but is amazing. And those cells degenerate over time, the photo receptors, they don't do very well in part because as we age, the mitochondrial function gets disrupted. This study was preliminary. It wasn't very many subjects. I think it was only 20 subjects. Maybe it was 12. But getting red light therapy, just viewing a very bright flashes of red light of a particular wavelength. So I don't want people going out there blasting their eyes. Improved vision on vision tests almost immediately. And that's a very noninvasive approach. And I'd be happy to have one of those red light therapy machines. But one of those issues. Yeah. It's probably a little different than this. If you're interested in doing this, let me know. And we can, you know, potentially put you into this. What would be the difference between that red light therapy and the other kind of red light therapy? Because I really like that june thing. I'm not exactly sure what it does. It's supposed to like regenerate college in and do a bunch of different things. It helps you, but it feels good. Yeah. It feels good. It feels good. It's good. It's in front of it. And the bright, you know, one of the things is remember, we're saying that the eyes are actually a piece of brain. The brain needs to know when to be awake and when to be asleep. One of the best ways to wake up your brain is to view bright light. And you know, there are all these people there fanatic about blue light out there. Viewing bright light in the morning from sunlight is the, is the best thing. Like in Southern California, go outside two to 10 minutes of game bright. Right. And then you want to avoid light from like 11 p.m. to 4 a.m. Actually, it's been shown to suppress melatonin. It can disrupt sleep. It has a lot of problems. You don't really want to be looking at any bright light in the middle of the night. A lot of people get obsessed with blue light being bad. You want bright lights during the day. And you don't want any bright light at night, really too much of it. And people come after me, though, like the blue blockers, you know, I call it, like the blue block on East does have been coming after me recently because I'm out there saying like, is like, what about the, it's like, look, the blue blockers will help filter some light. It'll make things less bright. It's hard to see with sunglasses in your house. So be my guest in where them. But really what you want to do is dim the lights in the evening. Deep or sleep melatonin suppression. It won't be a problem that'll, that's all good. Get bright light first thing in the morning when you wake up. And then the bright red light is probably having a dual effect. It's probably increasing mitochondria in the photoreceptors. If the study is right, and I do believe the study has, it looks really good to me. And the person who did it has been in the game a long time. So I trust him. And in addition, that's going to wake up your system and get the balance of these hormones like you want cortisol high in the morning and melatonin coming up about 16 hours later before sleep. It's going to put all that into the right rhythm. So I say go ahead and do the red light thing. But if you want to pursue the red light flashes or the VR and maybe even the CNTF injection, we should talk about that. CNTF injection means the bacteria, the square it right in your eyeball. That's the growth factor. Yeah. But I'm scared of that. Well, well, the good news is, the good news is that the VR, we do have a condition in the study where it's just VR. So it's a daily, essentially, neurons like to be active. And these cells that connect the eye of the brain are the most about all others, the most active neurons and cells in your entire body. Do you know of anybody who's done this? Well, they had the injections in the eyes. Well, yeah, many people now in the study have had the injections. We got what are the benefits of the, well, so I want to be careful. I can't talk about the results of a clinical trial, but I can say they're promising. And this is inhuman. Just wink. Wink if you think I should do it. Wink if you can fix my eyes. Well, I think if you, if you qualify for the study, I definitely think you should do it. Okay. But I can't reveal that the results of the study, because I actually don't know. In the name of good science, I'm blinded to the conditions. No pun. Right? Like I just don't know. But we have, we have subjects or patients that are as young as 17 as old as 80. And the, the beauty of this is that it's, if you decide not to get the injection, it's completely noninvasive. Okay. And how many injections do you have to have? I think it's like once a month for a period of about six months. So what I have to go to the Bay Area once a month? No. So there, so there is another version of this where there's a slow release polymer capsule that's, that's placed into the eye. Oh, that sounds, that sounds worse. Just inject me, get it over. Well, someday we will have drops that will get through the vitreous and down there. Cause we're like, like we work on glaucoma, my lab people for glaucoma take, a drops for eye pressure. Um, but getting things into, you know, remember it's brain. And so there's a reason why you have this tough square. You're not going to be able to think that way. Okay. The brain thing is really fucking my head up. The fact that your eyeballs are your exposed to the brain. That is so nuts. Two pieces of the brain. And so visual repair is soon going to go the way of two other strategies. And I think we're going to see this in humans in the next couple of years, meaning two years because I hate the 10 years thing we've been here in the 10 years thing forever. One is the work of someone that you've had on here before, Davidson Claire. Love that dude. It's great. He's terrific guy, both for sake of his work on combating aging and also just I really have to tip my hat to him because he was really first man in in terms of doing public facing science education through podcasts and things like that. And, you know, I'm starting to do that and others are starting to do it. And he deserves credit for that. It puts scientists in a vulnerable place and I think he's doing it with a lot of integrity. He's also got a fun personality. So great guy. Yeah. So get the point across. So David's not typically known for doing vision research, but he paired up with another guy, slab, a guy named Gigang, he at Harvard Children's Hospital. Someone I know very well. We worked together in a number of things. And they took advantage of what are called these yamanaka factors. Yamanaka won the Nobel Prize for finding these four factors that could essentially allow a cell to turn into anything. Any other cell type kind of create stemness in in these cells, make them pluripotent stem cells. The problem was that tends to induce cancers in these cells. So David's lab has combined an anti cancer gene. I think these these workers still not published, but he's talked about them. So I feel comfortable doing this. Suppress his cancer while turning these cells young again. And at least in mice, they see some very encouraging results. So that would be a sort of one injection kind of thing where you go in once. You get the injection and then never again. If I did injection once a month, how long were you talking? How many months stuff to do it for? So the study would probably run for about six months or the embedded capsule, the CNTF capsule combined with the VR. Now you have to put those VR goggles on for 20 minutes a day and watch this. That's easy. You can listen to music do whatever you want. It's a very passive thing that triggers activity these cells. The activity is key because we know that neurons, you know, you hear fire together, wire together and all this other stuff. But the fact that matters neurons that are quieted, even if you cast an arm, the neurons that support moving to that arm very quickly start to turn off and eventually they can die. So keeping neurons active and alive and healthy involves keeping them literally active electrically. And so that's what this, the VR component's about. So there's the Sinclair kind of turning back the clock stuff. And then colleagues of mine at Stanford are doing incredible work with neural prosthesis, so little robotic retinas as well as stem cells that are injecting to the eye that settle down into your eye and give you the cells that you've lost. And we're not quite there with the human trials yet, but there's a group, the retinal, so repair initiative. I'm part of this thing. It has a kind of funny name, what it's called the retinal dream team, which is a bunch of people brought together to cure blindness, to solve blindness in a particular disease called neurofibromatosis. So there are dozens of labs working extremely hard on this problem. This is one place where I can say there's been tremendous progress in the last five years. There are clinical trials now. For instance, the one in my lab and in two or three years, you're going to start seeing people who would normally go blind. You're going to halt that. And you're going to see people who are completely blind. I think eventually those people will see again. Yeah. I have a amazing, it's amazing. And you know, blind people that mental real, the mental real estate, but like the visual real estate in the brain gets taken over by other functions. I, um, there's this guy, Dan Manseena. He's a skateboarder. He's completely blind. It's amazing guy. And skateboards blind with the cane rides up to, rides up to curves and handrails always on to him, kick flips out this kind of stuff. Regret. Yeah. And, and I've talked to him a bunch of times because he was having some issues with his sleep because of one of the issues that blind people have is because light is controlling when to be alert when to be asleep. He was having some issues with this. So he contacted me. We're also in touch because we're trying to, he's trying to build skate parks for blind kids so that they can. Right there. Oh, yeah. Check out Dan. Wow. That's insane. Such a beast. I mean, most people would be, would be afraid to do this without the, yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. And what's, what's so great about Dan is he also, you know, he's in graduate school. He's, I mean, he's such a, he's tapping things. So he knows where they are. But how does he know the scale of the ramp or the, the pitch of the ramp? He has an internal representation of it. Wow. Yeah. That's bonkers. He's from Michigan. See how cool it is. There is. Yeah. He's, he teaches blind kids like what's possible. They Wow. Because talk about COVID and being indoors blind people. I spent a lot of time with blind people because of the visual restoration stuff. And there are people like Dan who are out there trying to get blind people to come out of their rooms to get into society. If you have a dog, you're better off, right? Cause the dog you outsource your vision to the dog. There are now glasses that blind people can wear and walk down the street. And it communicates with somebody in a, like a dispatcher who says, oh, you know what? There's someone sketchy over there to your right. You know, I want to cross the street. And it works really well, but it's very expensive. And of course privacy is an issue. Yeah. Home you start undressing. You know, you don't want the person like looking at you in the mirror. Right. You know, and maybe people do, but that's a whole different business. You know, but, but people like Dan are amazing. And I do believe, you know, the hope is that people like Dan will eventually see again. Um, but that's going to require new cells and actually for him, he's going to need new eyes. So Dan actually has had, um, because he had this coach disease that led to it, right? Nice pigmentosa. He had his eyes removed. Wow. So whenever people are like, the, sometimes you'll see on social media, people will say, I don't believe he's blind. It's like, guys, I don't even have eyes. Yeah. So anyway, there's a, that's a whole universe of stuff. But if you would like to explore visual repair and visual restoration offset and vision loss more, um, the happy to further just, yeah, I would love to. Yeah. I'll be a guinea pig. Get the party rolling. Dude, we just did three hours. Oh my. Not crazy. Sorry. No. Okay. Apologies. Awesome. Great conversation. I really appreciate it. Um, if people want to get a hold of you on social media, what's your Twitter? You have Twitter, Instagram. What do you have? I have a Twitter, but I don't use it. I'm on Instagram. It's Huberman Lab, HUBERMA and LAB. I teach in our science there. I'm big on public education. Beautiful. And, um, we recruit subjects that allow for studies every now and again, I will announce them there. And, um, yeah, that's the deal. Eventually, I'm supposed to write a book, but I'm, I've been too busy doing science. But listen, man, this was so much fun. And I think we could probably do a hundred of these. So let's do it again. Great. Thank you very much. Thank you. Really appreciate you. All right. Bye, everybody.