Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Did you watch it? Did you watch UFC? Oh, my God. Islam market joke. Fuck, dude goes up one way. Claus goes up to 170. He was the 55 pound most dominant champion ever, most title defense of 55 ever. Just dominate at 170. Like every round. People are saying it's boring, but listen, man. It's boring. If you're a casual, the fact that he was able to do it every round, it was a little frustrating because you want to jack to try to adjust. But he couldn't, man. Is Islam shut his game down right away? He low kick the shit out of his front leg real quick. How do I'm limping real quick? Like within the first round, he hit it three or four times bad. I imagine being a beep, you know, just your proteges is coming in. And compete is even better than him. Right. That's what's so crazy. That's how good those guys are. But it's not better stand up, though. Islam has really good stand up. Like his stand up, Kabib stand up was a means to an end. It was like his stand up was to crack you so he could get a hold of you. Fuck you up. Just drag you to the ground smash you. That was Kabib's move. But Islam is fucking cayolin' people, man. It's different. Yeah. He's different. He's head kickin' Volcanovsky. That's like a different level of stand up. Yeah, Kabib's saying you're going to be better than me. It's crazy crazy. The back of Danny Boyz is here to stay. You know what's crazy, dude? Ballamahamut, you know, who was the champ at Walter Wade, went down to D to Daggistan and train with those guys. And he was like, I thought I trained hard. I really did. I thought I trained hard and I trained with those guys. That's what I'm going to follow. If I ever have a son, I'm just dropping them. As soon as he's hit puberty, I'm dropping them off. And Daggistan, say leave them here. Forget. That's the thing they always say. Daggim the Daggistan two, three years. He comes back telling you what to do. How are you going to fuck with that? Because that's real. That's how those dudes are really rolling out there. That's how they're really living. They pray five times a day. They're super religious. There's no gambling. There's no drinking. There's no partying. There's just trainings. Trainings. Just training and training with a bunch of fucking animals. Eatin' together, trainin' together, just gettin' after it every day. And then it's Iron sharpens iron. Because everyone who comes out of there is a fucking killer. Yeah. Crazy. Yeah, you gotta be real. Real, most people don't want to live that life. Yeah. And they don't forgive the disrespect. No. No. They just fuck Dylan Dennis up this past weekend. Did you see that? Oh yeah, yeah, that's the fight in the crowd. Yeah. Yeah. You got to watch what you say. Bro, and Daggistan, they not talk a shit for promotional purposes. No. No, no, no. Yeah, be real careful. No. In the marrow of the bones. Do you think that there would ever be, like, be you think Conacret ever apologized to Kabib in like, bear the hatchet or something? He would have to, it would have to be in private. And he would have to really mean it. You know, he would have to really mean it. And you'd have to convince Kabib that you really meant it. And that it was all, you know, because he just doesn't play that game, that talking shit to sell a fight game. He doesn't play that game. No. Especially when it comes like his wife, his people. Oh, everything. Everything. Oh, clip of DC. The saying like, he did, he had like Conacret on his show. One time, it could be was like, no, what's that about? Yeah, like that's my enemy. Right. And you're my friend. Yeah. And you know, DC was like, oh, yeah, I didn't, I didn't look at it that way, but I had to check myself. Like, yeah. Because you're a journalist, if you're, or if you're doing a podcast, you're going to have some people on the don't like people that are close to you. But you got it like, that can only go to a certain level. You know, if someone is your like, sworn enemy. Oh, right. And this other guy's your training partner and your brother, you can't really have that guy on. Oh, yeah, of course not. Yeah, absolutely not. Like there's, there's no scenario with, with Kabib was going to be friendly with John Jones, because he knows the history like he might be respectful. But he ain't going to catch him kicking him. Yeah. No. Well, I think John and DC have pretty much buried the hatchet. Really? Yeah. I think they have. I think they communicated. I think they, I think they've had some interaction. You know, it's like that when you have two better rivals like that. And one guy comes out on top. This is just always going to be that way. Always forever. Yeah, because they're different kind of people. I forget that sometimes. Like the competitive, the people that like them are competitive. Totally different kinds of human beings. Doesn't go away. Their drive is, it's like you don't understand it. You don't live it. You know? And like wrestlers like elite wrestlers are the only people that train the way like could be even his group train. Like in any other combat sport, like if you're coming over from kickboxing and you know, and then you want to fight MMA and you know, you think you've already trained like an animal already. Like, yeah. There's a difference. There's a difference in the kind of exhaustion that you get from like hardcore wrestling training. And that's something that these guys have that it's like, that's why wrestling is the number one base for MMA. Because anybody gets really good at wrestling. You got to be a fucking animal. You got to be a fucking animal. Yeah, I wrestled in high school for the first couple of years. And it was like, this ain't for me. You know, it was, it was hardcore man. Like so hard. It's because besides the technique and stuff, you have to be able to suffer. Yeah, training to suffer. Yep. Yeah, they break you all the way down every single practice. training to suffer and then the losing weight, the losing weight and competing on the same day. You know, I went to school with this kid. He was five, six. All his brothers like six foot, six foot one. It's because he wrestled all throughout his childhood and cut weight all through his childhood. He essentially starved himself and stunted his growth. Well, my friend Jeffrey, you know, Bernie used to work at the club. He used to perform club, but he was a wrestling guy, you know, did real well in California. And now he like, he doesn't, he doesn't know when he's hungry. Oh, Jesus Christ. You know, like he just has to eat because he's like, oh, I haven't eaten in but his whatever connection it is. Like you broke it. Yeah, like he'll forget to eat. That's crazy. Yeah. It's like that. It could really fuck with you. So usually a fox with guys the other way, where they cut weight too long and then they just blow up like balloons when they don't have to fight anymore. They get crazy and they just can't stop eating. They develop really eating disorders. It's like, it's really common amongst guys who cut weight. When that's when I quit, I quit. I did, I did a tournament and it was my, it was the first tournament. My brother was coming to see me and, and I miss weight by a pound or something like that. And so I ended up, I still got to wrestle, but it was like the all the loses bracket or wrestle, you know, people off on the side and there was a guy that he had on. What I know now is an insulin pump, but I didn't know at the time. Oh, you told me this. Yeah. He just kept fucking me up because I didn't, I was scared to hurt him and he didn't give a fuck about me. And I got my ass whooped and then, and then when it was finally all over, I was like, huh, and I went to the vending machine and I, I fucking opened the snicker bottles and my coach came up. He was like, what the fuck are you doing? You know, I was like, uh, with the tournament, so he was like, you miss weight. You go, come over here and he snacks. And it was, and I was one of them kids were like, I was just defying it. And I was like, fuck you. You know, and that was the last time, that was the last time he's on me. I was like, you know, because if that's what this is going to be, I can't do it. Those snacks after losing. Yeah, especially missing weight. I mean, he had looking back, he had a point. How much did you miss it by a pound? I miss it by because because you know, it's like, you can't, it's certain households were like, you know, my, my, my mother give a fuck about no mega weight. You go eat that food. You know, it wasn't like, I didn't have control over my diet. Right. Yeah. So then you just have to run it off. Oh, yeah, run it off. Yeah, but figure out how much calories you actually like burn when you do a hard workout. It's not as much as you think. Like this is dude. I forget what he ate, but he had some crazy meal with like fucking pancakes, pizza and all kinds of shit. Like 10,000 calories or something like that. And then he went running to burn off the calories and he tracked it like on an app. He ran for 10 hours. He ran like 30 miles. Because he was really, yeah, dude's in really good shape. But when he did this, like he was tracking like where his cow, how many calories he had burned so far. And it took him like a marathon, like 30 hours of running to burn off a thousand dollars. 30 miles or rather, 30 miles of running. No, it was more than like, it was like 10,000 calories. Whatever it was. You know, I forget what he ate. It was like pancakes and all kinds of crazy shit. Very calorie. But the purpose was like to see what happens if you eat all this stuff, like what does it actually take to burn this off? So he measures all the calories and then he just goes out running. It's kind of disappointing when you realize it takes a long time. It takes a long time to burn off 10,000 calories. Like that's a lot of work now. That's why I'm all I'm normal to stay fat till I die. You know, because I got this I got this real machine and then like it's tough to tell you how many it is. It is more discouraged. Discouraging anything. I had to turn that shit off. Did you lose any way when you do that carnivore diet for a month? Oh, yeah. How much do you lose? I don't know. Maybe like 10 pounds. Yeah. Well, imagine if you did that for six months. Oh, yeah. Yeah. The diet is everything. That's the whole way to lose weight. You don't really lose weight in the gym. I mean, you do lose a little weight. Your body gets toned, get healthier. That's all good. But the real way you lose weight is your diet. Yeah. It's just discipline. That's hard. You know, it's hard. It was easier when I was poor. You of course, of course. It's because I always I try to tell people this, but it's like when you when you're your own boss, you can't also be a shitty employee. Right. You know, like I'm the one setting of rules, but I'm also the one enforcing the rules. And I'm like, you good. Yeah. That's funny. Get it next time. Yeah. You almost have to create a boss in your brain for like certain things that you have to do. Like a general just tells you what to do. Yeah, sir. You just fucking go do it. Yeah. It's gonna be a robot. David Goggins could definitely sell a app. Just some motivation to laugh. He could. But just call you a bitch. Yeah. I mean, really all you need to do is just go watch his videos. If you want to get motivated, just go watch those that guy's videos. Yeah. What do people have a goal to like just go stay with him? Yeah. He's just done that before. David Eiler. Is that what? What was his name? Yeah, the dude that wrote the book. Fuck. I can't believe I can't remember his name. Like he's also like Diamond Dallas Pay shit. We're like, he'll just well, he not really. No, this dude was writing a book. Jesse. It'sler. That's it. Stayed with them. And you know, David's like, all right, we're going to train. And you know, you're going to do whatever the fuck I tell you to do. And we're going to do it. I forget how many days he did it for. He wrote a book about it, right? Like living with a Navy SEAL. I think it's 30 days. You probably got a pass a pistol. Well, yeah, you could die. You could definitely die. You definitely have a heart attack. Let's see. That's the thing. He don't care if he died. Right. Yeah. Remember he had something something happened. Some kind of heart. Rob do my locus. He had wrapped in my locus. He's had a bunch of things. He's had heart surgery. But he had wrapped on my locus that he got because Rob does when you push yourself so hard. Let's put that into perplexity. Our sponsor find out exactly what Rob do my locus is. Because I'm going to fuck this up. What is perfect? We got an AI sponsor. No bullshit. A flexity. Yeah. What's like a doctor? No, it's an AI. It's an AI. Large language model. And it gives you answers. So processes when muscle tissue damaged by trauma, excessive exercise, prolonged immobility, metabolic, or genetic disorders, infections, toxins, or certain medications. So obviously in David Goggins' case, excessive exercise. So the muscle cell breaks down substances like mild globin, create, creatine canays, electrolytes, and enzymes leak into the blood. Myoglobin filtered by the kidneys can cause urine to turn dark brown or red. And in large amounts can cause acute kidney failure. So when your piss starts looking like diet Coke, that's when you know you got a problem. I think you just gave Hollywood the worst idea. No. Instead of people coughing into an napkin. So you notice it's taking a pisses on tourniquet. Well, it's only if someone works out so hard that your body's breaking down. That's really what it is. Like you're literally working yourself to death. Yeah. But then exactly now, doing this crazy motherfucker finished the race. It went to the hospital. He went to the hospital, recovered in the hospital, went back to the exact spot where he stopped and completed the race. And then did like a hundred pushups at this finish line. Like you just went to the hospital for dog extra. You just can't, you know, you just have to accept. That's who he is. That's who he is. He's got no knee cartilage. He still runs. He's just a different, he's a different human. But again, it's like the Dagestan thing. Like there's levels to discipline and commitment. And those guys have, it's a very hot, it's also like very high level training too. It's not just discipline. It's like they're very technical. Abdul Manap, who is a Khabib's dad was a phenomenal trainer. Just phenomenal. But where did he learn all of this? Well, it's all, you know, Russian sambo and they all have like a long history of like, I think his dad, let's, let's Google this just to make sure I'm not speaking out of my ass. But, you know, you got to think like sambo or combat sambo, is that's where Fader of Million Inc. Okay, from two. So Russian sambo is like MMA, but they wear like a judo ghee top and they have shorts on and wrestling shoes, MMA gloves and fucking headgear and they have combat sambo championships. They throw each other using the ghee. They have ground in pound, they're kicking and punching. It's crazy. So it's like judo mixed with it's like judo mixed with MMA. But they're wearing wrestling shoes. Like it is, it's really kind of crazy. But there's no ground in pound. There's ground in pound. Yeah, it's basically kind of MMA. So Abdul Manov, he was named by the Russian book of records as the most successful combat sambo coach in the country. So he was the head coach of Eagles MMA, coach two UFC champions, his son, could be the normal men off as well as Islam, my ketchup. But so he practiced from a young age while serving in the army, Soviet army began to practice judo and sambo. First big success is a coach came in this brother. Nirma Gomad, Nirma Gomadov, one at the world sambo championship for Ukraine's national team in 92. He traded total of 18 world champions through his coaching career. That's how good that guy was. 18 world champions. That's crazy. Show him a video of combat sambo. Like, um, how about show fader or competing in combat sambo? It's kind of crazy when you see him because he was competing in combat sambo. I believe while he was also fighting in MMA, he was still competing for Russia and combat sambo. And there's a difference between combat sambo and some other kind. Yeah. Well, there's sambo, which is like, um, just the grappling art of sambo. But look at this. They, they're fighting with punches with the grappling Gion and shoes on. This is crazy, right? Oh, wow. Isn't that nuts? They got wrestling shoes on shin pads. Oh, no, knees. Yeah. Um, did they, they can't throw knees here? Is that what's going on? I don't know. I don't know what the rules are. Cause I feel like if they, if they could, he would have done one right there. Pretty crazy, man. Cause that's fader or when he was world champion in MMA. Maybe the greatest of all time. He's definitely in the argument of the greatest of all time. Fader. Yeah. It's the argument is him came the last guess for heavyweight, um, Francis and Gano and John Jones now, uh, that is a heavyweight, but he hasn't really, the only heavy weights that he really beat, they beat Stipe when Stipe was kind of, right at the end of his career. It's gonna be gone, but he caught Gion in the guillotine real early. Clearly one of the greatest fires of all time, but the argument of him being the greatest heavyweight has only got two heavyweight fights. Um, then the other guy, um, is for Breshe over doing, for Breshe over doing. On paper has one of the best arguments because he tapped everybody. He tapped all the world champions for Breshe. And people forget, man, because they only look at a guy when the guys lost, like MMA fans want someone to lose and they start, they have a few losses in real people forget how good they were when they were in their prime. And for Breshe over doing in his prime, tapped Fader or a million, an echo, Cain Velasquez and Minitaro no Gara. And, and which is crazy. What you're saying is a window, right? Was it nine years? About nine years. When fighters came up, but I feel like they're best, they have heavyweight window. Short and real. It's short. What's the most defensive and heavyweight? It's steep. It's like, it's like, it's like two or three, right? Uh, let's find out. It's just three. Deepe, you know, Chitch is the, he's the consensus most successful heavyweight of all time. You could say, maybe he's the greatest of all time. You know, it's all when you catch him. I mean, the guy got through Francis in that first fight when Francis was just like taking people's heads off, like they were attached with sticky glue with three if three. You would think it would be more than three, right? Cause like, cause every, all the other way, classes like, uh, uh, what's like heavyweight? It's like four. Hold on. Scroll back up. Yeah, three in a row, but he's got the most title defenses. Scroll back up, please. This episode is brought to you by happy dad, hard seltzer. A nice cold, happy dad is low carbonation, gluten free and is easy to drink. No bloating, no nonsense. When you're watching a football game or your golfing, watching a fight with your boys are out on the lake. These moments call for a cold, happy dad. People are drinking all these seltzers and skinny cans that are loaded with sugar, but happy dad only has one gram of sugar in a normal size can. You can buy happy dad on the go puff app and your local liquor and grocery store, including Walmart, Kroger, Total Wine and Circle K. And you can't decide on a flavor grab a variety pack, lemon lime, watermelon, pineapple and wild cherry. They also have a great flavor in collaboration with death row records and Snoop dog. They have their new lemonade coming out as well. Visit happy dad dot com for a limited time offer and use code, Rogan to buy one happy dad trucker hat and get one free. Enjoy a cold, happy dad must be of legal drinking age. Please drink responsibly. Happy dad, hard seltzer. T and lemonade is a mall alcohol located in Orange County, California. So he's got the most title defenses in the division's history with four. All right. Cause he took the bail back from from Cormier. Right. And then defend it against Cormier and then defend it against Francis, which was the craziest one. And then lost it to Francis. No, no, no, defend it against Francis. Oh, no, no, no, I fucked this up. Defending it against Francis then got knocked out by Cormier. Cormier knocked him out after Francis fight. Now you absolutely right. Then they fought a second time and Steve, they beat him. Stopped him. That was the time when he was hooking him to the body shots. Oh my God. He had that beautiful left hook to the body that he just had wired. So he beat Daniel, beat Daniel again. He's beaten by decision in the third fight. And then in the next one, he fought. Scroll up. And the next one he fought Francis again and got KO'd. And that was a brutal one. And then John Jones hit him with that beautiful, spitting back kick to the body. But it's like he's in the argument too, if one of the greatest of all time. My thing about Fabrizio, though, is like people forget like how hard it is to submit a guy like Fador, Milionenko or a guy like King Velasquez and to be the guy that submits all like out of the guys who you consider possibly all time greats. He submitted three of them. That's nuts. When the last guest first came when the scene, I thought nobody was going to be able to be him. Proud he was a monster because he was a heavyweight with cardio, like a lightweight. It was nuts. Nothing like that. Yeah, but everybody has their day, man. There's nobody that's going to be the boy. Well, what happened with Kane is he didn't adjust to Mexico City. So they had a fight. Kane and Fabrizio fought in Mexico City. And Mexico City, I think is like 7,000 feet above sea level. Where? Yeah. Put that in there. Let's see what Plexity says about that. I'm pretty sure that's the case, though. I think it's about 7,000 feet above sea level and it's real thin air. Also, it's a lot of pollution. So it's not like the best air. Like it's it's not much air and it's polluted. And Fabrizio got their way early, like months, months in advance. 7,350 feet. Yeah, above sea level. So real, real high altitude already. So your cardio is already going to be taxed if you're a heavyweight. Yeah, that's crazy. That's 2000 feet above Denver. Why didn't he go? Did he have a good reason? I think there was some domestic issues. Oh man. So I think someone didn't want him leaving. You know, he got he only got a chance to be out there. I think for two weeks. And that's not enough time. That's not even close. Not even close. Fabrizio was up there. I think for six months. I think they told him that he was going to be fighting for the title. And I think he went up there for I might be talking on a school, but it was many months. It was at least four months. And he was up in the mountains above Mexico City. So he's like, fuck it. Let's go 9,000 feet. Let's get crazy. And so got accustomed to even higher altitude. And then when he came down, he was in prime shape. And he caught Kane and a guillotine and submitted him. It was nuts. It was like seeing him, he's like I said, he submitted three of the greatest of all time. Like that, that alone, you got to think. So he showed up two months or for Doom did his homework, probably the fight showed up two months early and established a training camp at the mountains, conditioning his body, even higher elevation around 12,000 feet. So I was wrong on both counts. It wasn't four months. It was two months. And he was at 12,000 feet, which is fucking crazy. Yeah. That's, um, yeah. I said, for the first two weeks, I was here. It felt as if I'd never trained before at all. I was so tired. So if you got used to doing that, okay. So, okay, Kane only went 10 days early. Oh my God. I feel like that's some shit. The joy of St. Pierre would do just for every fight. Just one for right. You know, the opposite of deprivation tank or something. Well, beach, I was doing that for a while. Beach, a pen was sleeping in a tent. See, it was a plastic tent that he would see off and would sleep inside of it. Like you put it up around his bed and there was a thing that you, you that sucked oxygen out of the air there and it made it like you were sleeping at high elevation. Apparently that's the move. The move is sleep at high elevation, but train at low elevation. And the reason for that is when you train at low elevation, you have more oxygen, you can get more reps. You can put in more rounds. You can put in more work. So, and then the recovery is where you really want your body to be adapting. So then once you're done training, go back up. Like say if you were training in like in like in the valley and then you went up to Big Bear and you were sleeping at Big Bear, which is like, I think Big Bear's like 6,000 feet or something like that. But doesn't that only work if you're, if the fight is it? It's not an elevation like if you're fighting. No, the idea is sleeping at altitude is all you need. Sleeping at altitude gets your body. It's the whole thing is about getting your body to sort of adapt to this new altitude. So you just sleep it out. You can fight it out to suit. Exactly. Exactly. You'll have more oxygen. You'll have more. And you'll be able to work harder. Like this. So it's like they used to think training and sleeping at altitude is the move. But now I think actually it's probably better. And maybe this is debated. I'm not sure if like the consensus is out. But I think what they're saying now is train at sea level and then sleep at altitude, which makes sense. It makes sense. That's what people does already training. Yeah, definitely. Definitely. I've run out of breath just going up to altitude. That's why that's why Denver whenever you go to Denver, like I love doing comedy there, but it's so it's so dry. It's dry. It's so dry. Your book is get sharp. Yep. Yeah, your nose starts to bleed. Yeah, your skin is all flaky. There's no air. And then, you know, you can get higher than that too. You can go to Aspen. When they used to have the Aspen comedy festival, they used to have oxygen waiting for you backstage. Word. Yeah. K's dudes are fainting. Why'd they stop that? I don't know. I think, you know, they stopped a bunch of those comedy festivals. They had where it was the original one was in Montreal. And then they started doing an Aspen. I think they did Vegas too for a while. If I remember correctly, it was the same people. But it's used to see those things used to be effective. It used to be you would, you know, take time off the road, go to Montreal, do your best set and maybe you'd get a development deal. And if you got a development deal, maybe you get a sitcom. That was the whole, that was the carrot that they dang on the end of the stick. Career changing. Yeah. Like for some people, it was career changing. It really was. But that stopped. And then so it was like, why are we going to these festivals? Because I'm not getting anything out of this other than you selling tickets. Well, I think that that's happened. That happened. What happened to most of the institutions in comedy or just show business period is the people that used to be the tastemakers, the people that used to tell the business, who was next. Yeah. I think people get because this happens all the time. There'll be some good, there'll be some, some might start a comedy show than all of a sudden somebody will make it from that show. And then it becomes the show in the scene, or in the city. And then they start wanting to maintain that reputation. So instead of them just fucking with who they believe in, they'll wait to see who has a little momentum. Yeah. So they kind of give it up. They wait for the industry to tell them who's popping. Right. And it happened to the store. It happened to JFL. It happened to all this. And maybe people look, maybe it's coming back now. We also have to realize who are these people. They're just people that got jobs working for whatever media company that is, whether it's NBC or Netflix or whatever it is. They're just people that got jobs. They might not have any idea like how a joke is made, what the processes of developing material, who's got talent, who's derivative. They probably, they might not have any idea. But what they do is they lick their fucking finger and they hold it up in which whoever way the wind's blowing, they pretend they're a genius. And that's what they do. And oftentimes they'll dismiss someone who turns out to be the best one of a lot. It's real common, man. And then they always want to stand by those ideas like, I don't see it. And like, okay, the guy's fucking selling out arenas. I think you missed it. And but it happens a lot. Yeah. It happens a lot with these folks because they're, they're not artists. They're just business people and they're pretending to be artists. It's weird. Like some of them give you advice. But some people do have, like there's a, there's a, there's a talent for dealing with talent that some people do have. That'll make it right. Adam, he gets a perfect example because Adam is an artist who's like job is to be a talent coordinator, but he's genuinely an artist. Like he's, he gets it. He's, he thinks like a comic. He behaves like a comic. He was a funny co-host of Norm Mcdonald show. You know, when Norm had that show, Adam, Adam was on a show with him. Like he gets it. He understands the business. He hit you, he hit you with a single from Tyler Todd. Funny dude. He got a couple in the chamber. He's a funny dude, but he's also a smart dude. Like and, and he knows potentially sees someone and he can give them genuinely good advice. Like genuinely, like you could take this and develop it this way. Maybe you need to work on this. Maybe you need to, you know, but you know, more importantly, he has, he has the courage or his convictions where it's like, like when I, when I first got to Hollywood, you know, I went, you know, I went everywhere. At least once or twice. And you know, people, you know, people come back next week or, you know, you got to wait till this time or whatever. Everyone saw me, saw me at least once. Adam saw me. He was the only person that was like come back next week. Like come on, you get a spot next right. Because he gets it. Yeah. Yeah. And like he started fucking with me immediately. And it wasn't any hesitation at all. From the time I met him, I was just getting spots at the store. Yeah. Yeah. And so to do that, to have that belief in your, in your eye. It's from the time I met him. I was just getting spotted the store. Yeah. Yeah. And so to do that, to have that belief in your eye, you know, instead of needing other people's, because of how most of show business works is everybody's just, no one wants to be the first one on your dick, but no one wants to be the last one. So even if they see something they think is dope, they'll be like, does anybody else think it's dope? No, okay, me neither. Right. You know, but then as soon as a couple of people think it's dope, then they were like, I, I saw it six months ago. It's like, you know, is that kind of shit? So yeah, that's what they're pretending they have talent. Yeah, they're talent. But the problem is you don't have to have the talent talent to be in a position of that, it's a position. No, you don't. You can just get a job and they need someone to do it. And if you sell yourself, and if you worked, you know, in production before you did something as an agent or whatever the fuck it is, you're in the business. Or you just suffer under some tyrant. There's a lot of that. There's a lot of that, a lot of suffering under tyrants. And then these guys, they wind up, you know, fucking ruining companies. Because they don't know what, like how many terrible specials have you seen? They just fit the right demographic. Fit this like silly thing. Like that was another problem that Adam was having at the store. Is that like he couldn't just give spots to the people that he thought was funny. There was pressure to make a certain amount of gay people on the set, a certain amount of women, a certain amount of, they had like people telling them you didn't have enough of certain demographics. But where's the pressure coming from? Oh, I don't know. It was coming from, you know, I don't want to talk about school. But it wasn't just comics. There was, you know, people that were buying into it. And that's nonsense. My mind, I mean, he went to something silly. Like he just, he just wakes up. There's a deal. Don't it's pillow? No. Just like, no, he was, you've been warned. He's been told. He's been told. And it's just like, you know, there's a lot of like vicious people in this fucking business. And if you're a guy and your job is working at a club, and that's all you got. And, you know, all of a sudden that job is threatened because people are complaining about you. And they think that you're not doing your best to make the line up more diverse. Which is like, it's so silly. Because this is the thing that we always talk about in the green room. Like, look how diverse that club is. There's everybody there. Like, all kinds of different kinds of people. And the idea that like, it's one thing. This is the most dumb straw man that gets tossed around. It's all right when comedy club. The vast majority of the people that work there are left when people. The vast majority. But the fact. Yeah. And you can't like, you can't tie it down. You know, it's all white males. That's bullshit. There's all kinds of people. There's Arabs and Muslim peoples, people from India. There's people from Asia. There's black people, white people, Australians. There's people from fucking everywhere at that club. And just this one thing in common only. Well, I think that you love comedy. Are you trying to get better? Are you funny? There is something to be said about being aware of your blind spots. But I don't think that the way, how they would always does diversity is wrong. Because they'll go, instead of going to find, they'll go, we're missing this slice of the pie. Instead of going and finding the funniest people, they'll just pick anyone. You know? And I don't know of that always. This is almost never the best way to do this. It's never the best way. It's like the same thing for neurosurgeons. If you're like, you know, I'm really looking for a Danish woman or a neurosurgeon. Like, no, no, you got, you have brain tumor. Like, no, no. I want to really want a Danish woman. Like, no, no, no, no, no. You got to get the best guy. The best guy's a Chinese guy. We found him. He was at Harvard. This guy. No, no, no. Like, that's crazy. And that's the same thing with everything. It should be a meritocracy. And I think ultimately, you're going to have examples of all sorts of different kinds of people that rise to the top in a true meritocracy. I mean, but the, well, the pendulum always swings both back and forth, but it's almost never a meritocracy. You know? In comedy? Or just, I'm just talking about comedy. Comedy is one of the only things where it's a genuine meritocracy. When it comes to the crowd, you can't cheat. You can't cheat. No. It's that it is what it unless you're stealing. That's the only thing. If someone's other joke thief. Or unless you're a fucking hack, you know, you can get away with a lot. But you can't get away with a lot with your peers. Right. You, your peers won't like you. They don't want to be around. They don't want to go on the road with you with your whack-ass jokes. No. And unless you're super famous, people are just, people are just holding their nose and going to road. There's a few. That's true. There's a few that will do that. But ultimately, though, when it comes to like sustaining a career and having, you know, years and years of people coming out to see you in multiple specials and stuff like that, either, it either works or it doesn't work. It's, it's, it's real simple. Like once people find out about you, now you've got your foot in the door. It's all just about keeping it on the gas. Keep your foot on the gas and keep producing, keep making stuff. Keep, keep writing, keep working on sets. And you'll, you know, you're working for those people. They'll keep showing up for you because you made them laugh. I hope that stays true because that's, that's the only thing I'm good at. You know, I'm bad at everything except, except my comedy. You know, well, you're really good at your comedy, though. But some people never get really good at anything. But they, but I feel like every year, you can, you have to be good at something else. No. And it even sketches, scripts, they want you to act. They want you to. You don't. You don't. You don't. Look at David Hill. It does one thing. Does one thing. Stand up comedy. Everybody loves him. It's amazing. Yeah. Does one thing. That's it. It doesn't even go on social media at all, which is the only reason why he's not selling out enormous arenas. When we had him at the club last weekend, everybody was like, dude, he's the best. He might be, he's one of the best of all time. And he's working close. I mean, a lot of people, a lot of people put him at the very top. He's up there, dude. It's like, it's kind of silly to rank comedians. Yeah. Right. And every comic that's alive today owes a debt of gratitude to the people that came before us. We all do because it's a relatively new art form. Yeah. I mean, I go, I go by joke by joke by joke by joke. I don't really have a favorite comedian, but I have some bits out there when I'm like, that's fucking. And some of those come from a few of them come from the same people. But, but it tells one of the people where you just, sometimes you just want, you just in awe. Yeah. You know, but I love that. I love what, like getting to watch a comic to make you go, God damn, I need to just ball my shit up. Like throw it over. Yeah. That's the best feeling. That's where the fire starts burning gets you going. You need to feel that. That's why comics don't exist in a vacuum. You know, we were talking about this the other day that we're talking about like, my can, some of the can is in this thing where he might have to move. And we're like, buddy, you gotta stay. Like you're, you're killing it and what you're getting funnier. You're like, funnier all the time. And I think one of the reasons why is what you're around. Comics don't exist in a vacuum. You're not going to go to like South Dakota and find the best comic that no one's ever seen. The best comic in the world lives in South Dakota by himself. And he's, you know, he works at this little local comedy club and everybody comes to see him from miles around. No, the, the best comics are around other killers. You get to see a guy like David, tell go up and you're like, God damn, you get to see Shane Gillis go up. You go, God damn. You get to see Joey Diaz. You get to see all these fucking killers over and over and over again. And when, when you're around that and you see Ron White every week, like that's how you get better. Like that's where it's on. He brings the, he brings the heat. He's fucking talented and he's smart and he's a great guy. And he's fucking just a curious, interesting thinker. He's got, he's got a, he's got a, he's got a zany. Yeah. Delivery. Yeah. Whenever I follow me, he always brings me up like he auctioned in slaves. So, yeah. I'm right. See a fit. You know, he says my name like, like Leonardo DiCaprio in Django. Yeah. Brian. Watch. We gonna get it. We gonna get, we gonna get that on tape somewhere. Yeah. We'll get that tonight. Oh, I'll break them in tonight. Oh, yeah. Is he coming in? I think so. I think so. I gotta text them as soon as we get out of here. Oh, speaking of the comedy, my, my, don't tell us that came out. Just go check it out. It's already, Oh, it's out this week. It was out last week, but it's, it's, it's going. It's taken off. Nice. Beautiful. Yeah. It's like a, a couple of, a couple of million. Beautiful. That's not until comedy. What, that, Wop jokes one my all time favorite jokes. Oh, yeah. That's, that's all my other. Yeah. So yeah. It's a, yeah. We got a lot of stuff online man. It's like, some people are like, I just now discover review. I'm like, That's how it works, man. Yeah. Yeah. There's so much shit out there. That's the thing, man. A million people can watch your shit and nobody saw it. And then that's. Yeah. That's how many people there are the wrong ones. There's, there's people that are huge fans of yours that don't even know you do stand up. It's crazy. You know what I mean? How's that possible? Well, there's just too many things to pay attention to. Like how many times have you heard about a actor? Like my, my kids will tell me about someone. And I'm like, who is that? And they're like, oh my God, that person's huge. I'm like shut up really? And then I go to the Instagram page. They have 30 million Instagram followers. I'm like, how am I that old? It happens to me all the time. I have officially reached on status. Yeah. I'm on status for sure. I'm like grandpa status. Grandpa Joe, Grandpa Joe doesn't know anything. Cause I'm not looking, cause the thing is I'm not at the point. Like I'm not looking for new stuff. If the kids don't tell me. Yeah, I'm not looking either. But then that makes me feel old. You know, they'll be, it'll be somebody that's like world famous. And I'm like, who the fuck is that? I know. Yeah. I completely missed the, the baby shark thing. I just started hearing people talk about it in jokes. But it'd be shark. Yeah, apparently it's like the number one YouTube. It's the most stream YouTube video right in me. A couple years ago guys. But it's still number one. Not right. What if we say missed it. Baby shark, doo, doo, doo, doo. Baby shark, doo, doo, doo, doo. I literally hadn't heard that song. It had been out for maybe a year and a half. And I hadn't heard anything about it. I just heard a comic making jokes about it. And usually when something's in the pop culture, everyone be trying to have their own. I heard another comic say joke about it. I'm like, what the fuck is that? Show enough. It's like I completely missed it. I mean I'll have kids that make sense. That's what it is. Okay. This is it. That video. That's a big video. the world's most watched YouTube video hasn't made his creator rich. What? How come? Hold on. A company behind ubiquitous song is hampered by ad restrictions on children's content wants to raise funds for expansion. What does that mean? Raise funds. You had one viral video. You ain't a company. 16.4 billion views. That's insane. That's insane. That makes money. This is roughly equivalent to Taylor Swift's 10 most popular YouTube videos combined. Whoa! Yeah. Last year the company generated equivalent of about $67 million in revenue, including earnings from YouTube. Wait a minute. That's a lot. So it seems like they are making money. I don't understand. Is it saying the quandary underscores how certain restrictions may scroll up a little? I think we must admit something. But why is it doesn't make any sense that the company hasn't made any money? It's saying they made money. Am I reading that wrong? Revenue is that the same as making money though. What? Revenue is just money. So I'm guessing. So I'm guessing. Their expenses are so high. They could have spent a lot of ads to get it out there. That's what it could be going into saying. I don't know. But I guess a 16 billion views probably should make you more than that. Is that what they're trying to say? So revenue is your... Oh, that's how much money they made total, including what they got from YouTube. That's not just from YouTube. Oh, so they make money from other stuff. Yeah, they probably hit... Probably sold them out into that. So scroll up so you see the little graph there. It's just like... I mean scroll down, sorry. So operating profit, revenue. So they make them a lot more money. Oh. Yeah, but that's South Korean wine. Oh, yeah. That just sounds amazing. Yeah, they're falling down their own hole. Big out. Just like bring back the A.I. Yeah, I don't know what that is. Like that baby shark thing. Like why would one thing catch like that? Because it's something for kids and people love ignoring their kids. You just played it, put that shit on the kids up. I can't just be that because there's so many things that kids can watch. It can't be just that. It's gotta be said. There's some... Remember that banana song, banana phone, ring ring ring ring ring ring ring ring ring. Banana phone. It was like... I never heard that before. It was like in the 2000s. It became like really popular. I think it was popular on O.B. Anthony. They kept playing it. It was like really catchy. Totally innocent. And then it was like everywhere for like three or four weeks. And then it went away. And I always wonder like what the fuck is it where something just catches fire? I don't know. Remember when tickle me Elmo? Because what was the last time we had a viral holiday toy? Like we was the toy everyone had to have. That's not holidays, but those LaBouboos when Prairie Vile. LaBouboos are pretty viral. Yeah. People love the LaBouboos. And I don't get it why though. Are they collectors? Is this like... Because they know A.I. is about to take over the world. And then they know the aliens are landing. And Jesus Christ is coming back. And they just they're freaking out. They just buy stuffed animals. They don't know what the fuck they're doing. They just follow the lead. What are you looking at? What are you looking at? What are you looking at? What are you looking at? I don't know. I hear about them. My brain shuts off. There's a little bit of gambling involved. And you look at the mystery. You don't know what's inside the box that you bought. And then the book and sell those boxes based off of what could be inside. Is it a stuffed animal? Yeah. So stuffed animal. And you got to gut your stuffed animal to find out. No, no, no. It's in a box. It's in a package. And then you don't know what's inside that. You just buy a luboo without knowing which one you're going to get. And you might get a limited edition one inside. It's like a real life. That's a limited. Yeah. It's like she and baby without knowing what you got before. And you might get the princess die one. That's brilliant. You can get a limited edition of the boo boo. That's a great one. I don't know. How much is the by mystery. I could be 20 bucks. Let's take it guess. Let's say yes. How much do you think cost to get a luboo boo? I'm going to say 40 bucks. I think I'm with you. I was going to say 36. And after that, how much do you think it is a resale? Oh, 100 50 bucks to get them. I bet it's like buying one of them like a hot new car. So retail is 28, 27. 9. Okay. And then what is it cost online? If you want to buy one right now, I need a luboo boo. Like a mystery. A mystery luboo. What do I get? Are you googling it? Yeah, it's going to. Oh no. That's enough, I remember. That's an 80 to 120. That's not that bad. Oh, well, a few human sized auction pieces. Oh, that's big. $100,000. Wait a minute. They have human sized luboo. Yeah, that's Jesus Christ. What? That is so ridiculous. I mean, what is someone doing with a human sized luboo? Who's fucking there? Luboo, because you know someone is. Let me see what the luboo is look like. Is this something like a furry would fuck? Let me try to go with a human sized. Oh, do you hear the latest that that dude who shot Trump might have been a furry? Yeah, I saw they found some more stuff. What? Yeah. I think he was a furry. That's like an art piece. It's not really quite a big deal. Well, it's not really human sized either. Human sized luboo would all sold for 150,000. Let me see what it looks like. What do they mean might have been a furry? I feel like you would know or not know that. They're finding stuff. Let's find out what this is. Yeah. There it is. There's the big luboo, whatever. This lady invented them? She invented the luboo. How? Again, how? How's that work? How's that catch on? How's that catch on? Like build a bear has been in the fucking mall forever. I mean, I think I know what it is. It's probably something hot, smoke and hot kpop star. Probably they saw her with one on. You know that this certain way would they follow and anytime she doesn't be fashion things, it just spreads like wildfire. Yeah, there's a thing that does happen when a popular person starts wearing a thing. Yeah. They literally tricked all women in the wearing diamond. What in the diamond? Well, you remember it was like in my actress to do it. Judas Priest had everybody dressing up like a gay motorcycle gang member? What? Yeah. That started with Judas Priest? Yeah. Rob Halford from Judas Priest's gay. Like openly gay. And now at least, you know, I don't know if he was back then. But he dressed like a gay biker. And that became like metal. Oh, where? Cause Judas Priest is so good. They wanted to dress like this gay guy who dressed like a gay guy who would go to like a gay biker club. Yeah. It smells like hot women around the world. Cause dudes will do anything that they think, yeah, we'll get them late. And women will do anything that a pretty woman does. That's true. Anything to make yourself look prettier too. Yeah. And so it's like, cause all of the dudes now talking all that gay shit, they was dressing like dead in the 70s or the 80s. Like earrings, makeup and purses and all of that. Bell bottoms, big collars. Yeah. Cause they thought it was one of them late. Flounce you, you were just like prince. You could dress like a little richard. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Anything that works. Platform shoes, anything that works. Anything. Okay. Thomas Crooks used they then pronouns had obsession with political violence and muscle mommies. Uh oh, that's what I like. Yeah. What's wrong with that? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I like a woman that could move a count. Yeah. I do. Uh, the lone sniper who grazed Trump in the ear killed a beloved fire fighter, critically wounded two other Trump supporters apparently had a muscle mommy fetish and repeatedly searched for videos about female body builders and muscular women. But what was the, um, the furry stuff though? I was reading some furry stuff. Um, Crooks had two accounts on two possible accounts on deviant art, a site that hosts fan art, has become notorious for its community of furries. People have identified as anthropomorphized animal characters and or, and or are sexually attracted to them. They were telling me about the time that I accidentally stumbled on a furry convention. No. Ha! We were flying in the Pittsburgh for a UFC. Uh, one of deviant art accounts linked to Crooks shared just one post reposting of a towering muscular female body builder and a slight man in his underwear. Yeah. I'm a lot of. Yeah. That's like, uh, our crumb type stuff. Hilarious. Yeah. I don't think, I don't think shame. Whatever. I don't think shame either now. Have fun. Me and Duncan wore furry outfits once. And we put a pod. Yeah. And we had to take the hats off after like five minutes. Respect to furries. I can walk around all day with this fucking thing on it. It was heavy. It was hard to breathe. It was hot. We took it. Oh, yeah. That's what he likes. Yeah, baby. Who doesn't like that? I don't know. Some little dudes. Some little dudes don't want to be dominated. What's a man? Someone going to use them like a dildo. Um, when I was, uh, so I was flying in the Pittsburgh, we were flying in for a UFC and, uh, we got a rental and we're driving to the hotel. And as we're driving the hotel, I'm like, wow, these mascots on the street. The fuck is going on? It was real weird. Like we didn't understand what was going on. This is a while ago. Like at least 10 years ago. And we're driving. And I'm like, what the fuck is this? Like what's going on? We get to the hotel. And I'm like, and I go to the guy behind the kind of guy. What the fuck is going on? He goes, it's a furry convention. Like I didn't even, I kind of vaguely knew what a furry was, but I never really don't do it. You know? So I go, what are you talking about? He goes, it's a convention of all these people that get off on dressing like animals. I go get off. He goes, dude, they're asking us to serve them food and bowls on the ground. Okay. Then when they get room service, they want their room service in a bowl. They want it put on the ground so they can get on their knees and eat it out of a bowl. And they were asking for a litter box. I know a lot of people don't believe this. Like cause I told the story about a friend of mine who lives in Utah. His wife was a school teacher there. And one of the parents had a child that was a furry and they wanted to put a litter box in the bathroom. Now this was entirely relayed to me by my friend who was relayed to him by his wife who worked in the school. I don't know if it's true, but everybody got so angry. And they started saying what I was saying was transphobic. And I got so confused cause I was like, this is a couple of years ago. Wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. I was just have to do with trans people. We're talking about someone who wants to shit in a box. Like where's the trans part of this? So somehow or another, furries and that kink are getting like lumped into this LGBTQTAI plus whatever. And they're trying to lump furries in there. And this debunking of my conspiracy theory. Well, furries are their own. They're their own. That's what I didn't understand. Some of them are not sexual. But these guys it was. When I was talking to the guy that worked behind the counter, I was like, what is going to go, dude? He goes apparently with these guys like to do is they have like a hatch on the back of their furry outfit. And they like to bang each other without even knowing who they're banging. All they do, they pretend they're banging a giant squirrel. And they're into it. And it's apparently like part of the fun is that you don't have to think about your your ashamed of your body. Maybe you don't like your body. Maybe you just like, I'd rather someone just fuck me and think I'm a raccoon. And so that's what they do. So I pretty, I pretty God I don't find out that that's my kink because it's just too much work. It's a lot of work. The head is heavy. You know, heavy is the head that carries the throat. Anything, any kink that requires maintenance. It's a lot of washing. You got to wash that furry outfit. If someone jizzes on it doesn't tell you. The other thing it might be a subsection of the community, but they like they like it's not washed. They want the dirty furries. They don't wash themselves. Yeah, come on. Let's go. We're furries. Are we furries? Are we mad? I once had a, I used to work at this pub in San Diego. And one time we had it was like, it was like, I don't know if they're a sub sector to the furry world, but it's like they're like my little pony people. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And what do they call them? There's a name for that. Bronies. Yeah. Like a whole day. Yeah. And they were all very nice and respectful. And you could see, you know, they were a handful of women involved and you could see everybody trying to angle for the, what they took, they just, they filled up our pub. And these are all the my little pony people. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And they brought, and they are, and they hardcore like they, they, they don't tolerate any teasing whatsoever. Like if you try to come at them about it, it's going to be a problem. Yeah. You know, like you got to be able to take some teasing. Yes. If you want, if you, if you, if you want me to take you seriously, I'm telling you, brother, they're going to throw hoofs immediately. Ah, people will find a thing that they're really into. No matter what it is. They will find a fucking thing that they're really into. But that's the reason, that's why I don't think shame because I'm like, Hey man, if you just be lucky that all the things that make you come are, or things you consider normal, you know what I mean? Right. Cause I feel like imagine if you found out, right, that that was your thing. Yeah. You could only, you could only get off if you was dressed as a wolf. You know, one touchdown can change everything. The crowd, the momentum, the game itself, it never gets old. Feel that same rush with draft king sports book, an official sports betting partner of the NFL where every touchdown could bring you closer to cashing in. We're drafting sports book, all the actions in your hands, first touchdown. Anytime TD live bets every play, every snap, every game matters. When there's something on the line, every drive feels bigger, every moment, more intense and every trip to the end zone could mean a win for you. Here's the best part. New customers bet just five bucks. And if you're bet wins, you get $200 in bonus bets instantly. When your team hits the end zone, you could hit the payout. Download the draft king sports book app and use the code, Rogan, that's code, Rogan, bet five bucks and get $200 in bonus bets. If your bet wins in partnership with draft kings, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1 800 gambler in New York called 877-8 open wire. Text hope in Y 467-369. In Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling call 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly on behalf of Budhoke, Christina, when resorting Kansas has to have per-wage or tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction, void and Ontario. Restrictions apply. Bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinnamon odds required. For additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co slash audio. Limited time offer. He gets a psychological thing where they don't like who they really are. I mean, that's if I had a guess what the furry thing is. I don't think there's any well. I mean, I don't know. Maybe there's some well-balanced furries out there that just have a weird thing. But I think most of them just don't like who they are. And so they just want to hide in this thing that's all smiley and hi kids. You know, you look like a fucking some sort of a giant animal. See, I have a theory. I think whatever. I think the first time you encounter something sexual, whatever's happening, it's like burning into your shit. That's going to be imprinting. Yeah. Like, I got a homie that's like into like, you know, the BDS and more on us. And he has no idea. And I was like, well, how did you know that? He was like, I don't know. And then, you know, years later, without completely unrelated, he's telling me one time about him looking for Christmas presents and going in the back of his parents closet and finding the whole chest of, you know, whips and chains and shit like that when he was like six or seven years old. He didn't make the connection. Oh, yeah. Well, that's why you're, yeah, duh. My parents are into whips and chains and shit. And I don't know if that had to happen because I think you're a king's lager than that. Really? Yeah. What do you think that? I think I've read that, right? Well, I think some information has probably passed down from parents to kids and I would imagine kinks could be in there. Because like, artistic talent is passed down. Obviously, athletic talent is often passed down. It would make sense. I bet a lot of that. I bet they don't know exactly what you're giving to. Well, let's, let's find out because if it's true, I mean, that's going to make you look at your momma real different, right? You don't want to know that. That's horrible. Yeah, but I, like, I pity the poor people that have accidentally walked in their parents fucking. Oh, but you never did that? No. I mean, the horror. No, actually, that's not true. I never walked in, but I definitely knew that that's what was happening. I can block that out. Red. You can't block out the visual. because you definitely touched the door knob in there. You're down with his feet up in your air. Mommy is asked. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. I can't, yeah, see, there you go. I can't live anymore like that. I can't, I can't go through this where I might have to get a lecture shot therapy. But imagine if you if you walking, you know, I mean, what would have to happen for you to be a furry for what would you have to see? I don't think it's that. I think it's, I think it's probably, there's probably some social disorder involved in some of those folks too. There's like furry lights, which my kids go to school with. There's some kids that wear like, they wear like ears and like maybe a tail. And every now and then you see one of those. This brownie thing might have started as a fortune troll that probably was too far. Fortune rolls. Like a few other things have done. They're the best. They're the best. Do you see what they did with the free flow of free bleeding project? What is that? Hold on, wait a minute. They tricked women into thinking that it's like a sign of feminism to just bleed and not have a tampon or a maxi pad. Oh, like old school. You just let it go. Free bleeding. Okay. And so they did it as a joke and then some women that adopted it. Who did it? It was like, radical feminist. Cool. Crazy ladies. So now free bleeding is like a trend? No, it didn't last. It's disgusting. It's probably totally unsanitary. It's smell like fish. It's hell. It's hell. You have a pussy blog running down your fucking pants and you're showing up at the office. You expect to keep your job here at United Health? I don't think anybody was showing up at no office. These are definitely just with no jobs. At Starbucks, you're showing up at Starbucks? Oh, that's not real. No way. That lady will die. Well, the she was. She would literally be dead. That's like if you shot her with a fucking arrow. The thing is, there's no, um. Is this lady free bleeding? These are the four-chan posts that people try and share. That can't really real. I'm not putting this on this. But that could be a lady that's just doing a marathon and forgot a tampon and it's like, fuck it. I'm going to push through. But these were the four-chan posts that people were trying to share that. That can be real. I'm not putting this on the screen. But that could be a lady that's just doing a marathon and forgot a tampon. It's like, fuck it, I'm going to push through it. Because I saw one lady who died re-ed herself. Yeah, yeah. It went all down at Lag and everything and she completed that fucking range. Well, the thing is, it's hard to tell what's really what's AI. That's real. That's real. That's a real. That's a real pussy-blood right there. I can tell. I'm an expert. But the thing is, look, but free bleeding is one thing, but it's like, but just getting, you know, pussy blood every once other people's stuff. They don't care. Give me don't answer their home when they're grass. They're mocking their territory. What did people do if they invented tampons? Like, I mean, are you supposed to just wash it out? Like, what are you supposed to do? What does nature want you to do? Like, nature doesn't want you. That's why toxic shocks syndrome is a thing. When women have tampons and they leave them up there and then they can get really sick and women have died from toxic shocks syndrome. People even care about this. I don't know if this might be full satire, but this is someone talking about how it's not made up and it's a real thing. Oh, yeah. People tried to claim this. They started this. Misconced users of the online form for Chan would claim that they jokingly started the move in 2014 and see how far they could make angry feminist go. Fake memes and Twitter accounts apparently belong to feminist activists began posting content about free bleeding this backfire. It's spectacularly for the four-chan trolls when they unwittingly created a discourse around the normalization of periods. What? The free bleeding movement, whether fake or not, quickly became very real and got women talking about their monthly cycle. Since then, notable moments in the free bleeding movement have included Quran Gandhi running the Boston Marathon without something, while bleated, they missed something. And when it was out while bleeding through her sports shorts, poet Rupi Carr also became notable in the movement when an image of her menstrual blood on her pants and bed sheets was repeatedly removed from Instagram that same year. Imagine like you're a hero because your pussy blood is on the internet. This is so kooky. This sounds like this is not tired. I mean, that's it could be. Who wrote it? What's it in? It's a blog of. I think you have a hard time convincing most. Yeah, most, but these are crazy people. Most people don't want to fuck wearing a squirrel outfit, but crazy people do. Some people do. I'm not saying furries are crazy. What is the blog? And do they have other things that seem like satire? Because that seems like time to check in real time. It's hard to tell it to edges. When you get to the edges of radical feminism, radical leftism, and radical right wing, you know, patriot front type shit, it's hard to tell what's that to art when you get into the edges. When you get to the most extreme examples of any movement. Also everything's AI now. My home. People just say bullshit. Also all those, whether it's the right wing movements, like Proud Boys or whether it's Antifa, they get infiltrated. Those guys get infiltrated by government officials. One hundred fucking percent. I guarantee you there's some FBI agents in Antifa and I guarantee you there's some FBI agents that are in the Proud Boys. I think the head of the Proud Boys was already outed as an FBI informant. Isn't that true? I think that, find that out. Google that. Really? Yes. I think every single movement you think is. I think you still want the jail too. I think you still want the jail for January 6th. Yeah, I mean, they still locked up. Let's see. Let's say, what does it say? Head of the Proud Boys want revealed to have been an FBI informant in Riko Tario. Tario served as a national chairman of the Proud Boys from 2018 to 2021. And was a central figure in the group's activities, including its role in January 6th, 2021 Capitol riot. However, it was later disclosed that Tario worked as an informant for federal and local law enforcement agencies between 2012 and 2014 prior to his leadership in the Proud Boys. Oh, beforehand. That's even crazier. That's even crazier. Like, well, they tell him what's the truth? Like, that he's not doing it anymore. It's like, fucking, who knows, man. It's layers upon layers of those Russian nesting dolls. And you open it and there's another one in there. And you know, there's another one. And there's another one. And all the time, I broke deep, deep, the Epstein files. I heard there's no files. I heard it's a hoax. And then all of a sudden, he's going to release the files. Well, I thought there was no files. Man. He wants an investigation now. Listen. Like, what is going on? They voted for 127 to one. Who's the one? Who's the one? He re... I didn't see why he said, but he didn't know what he was. That's no security. No fucking way. That's not what I know. No security. If you found out all of Congress voted for something that you'd have only wanted to do, can you change your vote? You can't be the one, guy. It should be. It should be that it has to be like, no one can know what the vote is before you do it. Bro, I would love to hear his reason. How you the one? Well, you know, I was feeling like, let's move past it and just get on with our business. And... You came up past it. He's billionaires or good people. Okay. You can't do it past. They're good selling people. Who? Where's he at? Arkansas. Yeah, there he goes. Yeah. Yeah. One of the bottom ten in education. Somebody got to him. That's crazy, though. For an N20 to one. I have been a principal note on this bill from the beginning. What was wrong with the bill three months goes to. It abandoned his 250 years of criminal justice, procedure in America, as written as bill reveals and injures thousands of innocent people. Witnesses, people who provided albias, family members, etc. If enacted in its current form, this type of broad reveal of criminal investigative files released to a rabid media will absolutely result in innocent people being hurt. Not by my vote. The oversight committee is conducting a thorough investigation that has already released well over 60,000 pages of documents from the Epstein case. That effort will continue in a manner that provides all due protections for innocent Americans. If the Senate amends the bill to properly address privacy of victims and or other Americans who are named but not criminally implicated, then I will vote for that bill when it comes back to the house. He's in that motherfucker. Well, that's a point, though, right? Like there was people that had like people that had dinner over Epstein's house. Like Epstein had dinners and had celebrities go over his house. Like Chelsea Handler was one of the people that went over his house. I don't think Chelsea Handler is out there molesting kids. No, I'm not. I get to know. I get that. But I think we're we're past that. We're beyond that point now because. But you just have to be able to say, hey, I went to his house for dinner. Yeah. I'm not saying because because people try to do that to you with like pictures. You know, you're using a picture with somebody. Right. You know, but it's like it's that there was being been in the picture with somebody and being in 500 pictures with them. Right. You know what I mean? Flying to an island. Yeah. I think because this is a big problem. I mean, related back to what we've talked about earlier with Hollywood too is that I think a lot of I think a lot of these motherfuckers don't respect the public. They don't respect our intelligence. You know, like living the average American is smart enough to know the difference between somebody that was just in there or somebody that testified. Then somebody that was banging children. See, the thing is the average American probably can tell the difference, but there are sub average individuals that all they want to know is you're on the list and they hear you're on the list and they might try to kill you. And that that is a fact. What was but here's the thing. The problem is they're not advocating for not releasing the files. I'm just saying there's enough dumb, nutty people that will think that you're guilty. There's there's been so much obfuscation with this. It would be different if they if there was no pushback. But there's I think what's at stake is people's belief in the integrity and a process. You know, that's already cooked. Oh, well, yeah. That's pretty good. Whatever. Whatever. The last little shreds of it that I left was like, no more. you getting the sift through and the side because he's you know, it's easy to say that. But the truth is they want to be able to decide whose names get seen and whose names don't and people are with that. Like, you know, and they shouldn't be with that or or we agree with this guy and then we let them Kennedy joints out. We've been waiting for them. Think about it. They said the same thing about the Kennedy shit. Well, we don't want to hurt. And every time they suppose a release it, they kick it down a road. They released some new Kennedy documents, but no, I never heard anything come out of it. Yeah, it was supposed to be it's supposed to be released to a three president. There's no way those people are alive. Right. The long what we know is this. We know that I forget who said it, but justice, the latest justice denied the longer we wait, the more we let these fucking snakes kick the can down the road, the more they get the off you skate and muddy the waters. No, you know, Trump said about the JFK files. What? He said, I saw them. And if you saw what I saw, you wouldn't release them either. That's what I'm screaming. That's crazy. Yeah. What does that mean? What does that mean? I don't even I can't even imagine what that means. What does that mean? What could that mean? What does that mean? I don't know. Does that mean a foreign government? Does that mean our government? Does that mean the mafia? Does that mean a court coordinated effort with all the above? What does that mean? I have no idea what it could possibly mean. That's crazy for something that happened in 1963. Yeah. And and almost everyone involved, almost everyone that could be in embarrassed somehow was dead. 62 years ago, man. So it would have to be something that like destroys an institution or something. Something like this. That's the issue. Right. Like, but just the amount is sheer amount of people with insane amounts of money that are attached to this. Because my conservative friends be like, they think they think I give a fuck about a Democrat. So they'd be like, Oh, well, well, well, what a bill. But then they're like, I don't give a fuck who in there. I don't care who in there. You don't care. I put that shit in the street. Yeah. I think you do. Yeah. I don't have I don't have a already identity. I don't have a favorite politician. I don't have there's nobody. I don't give these motherfuckers money. No, there's no politician that I love enough to it. Cause this is what's killing me. It's there's people out there that are literally like, wow, this 16 really. You know, like they're like, they're trying to just the like, because they want to come out of this with a by still showing support, but, but they don't want to be connected to the crime. So they're trying to just try to justify their support of all of this. That's crazy. Like there's no politician I love more than I love my country or more than I have my principles of like, yeah, I think if you can't draw a line at kid fucking, then you probably should stop talking in public. Like you shouldn't have public discourse. You know, yeah. I mean, I think this is a pattern that exists has existed forever in politics. They want you to be compromised when you get into any sort of a position so they can control you. And I think these things like Epstein and there's probably a bunch of other similar operations that are being run. They provide you with like a really good time or maybe you're a high profile, extremely wealthy individual. And it's hard for you to get host. And some guy tells you, hey, we've got everything covered. You know, you come to my island, nothing. You know, what happens on the island, stay on the island. Bro, they just, they make it to my other royal family. Oh, yeah. Who Prince Andrew? Yeah. Yeah. They, they kicked him out of the family and there hasn't even been like a former trial yet. But what does that, what, what happens when you not, they just walk you out to Castle and you just, you just on a street? I think he's in a house like way out in the country. Like you stay here. I just, in my, in my head, I just picture him like crying over some KFC because he's never eaten peasant food. Yeah. He's just, I don't think he's an eaten peasant. So he just means that it's not a regular person. I think he's in a manner like a beautiful home in the country. Okay. So, so being kicked out of the royal family doesn't mean that you just, that you lose everything. Who know? I mean, what does he have and where do you get it? Is it just money from the government? Because they, they do get paid by the government. They do. But also think they're all, they're still dukes of something and lords of something. Here it says what he lost. So after being stripped of his royal titles and forced to leave his long time residence at Royal Lodge, Royal Lodge, Prince Andrew, now formerly known as Andrew Andrew Montbatten Windsor will relocate to accommodation in the San Gringam, San Drigam, how do you say that? San Drigam, a state in Norfolk. He is now excluded from royal duties and public life. And his status has been dramatically reduced. His status has been reduced. Loss of titles and status, eviction from Royal Lodge, relocation to San Drigam estate. So he's, he's relocated to an estate in, in the countryside, public exclusion. He remains excluded from all royal engagements and official events, except for private family gatherings. But that sounds sweet. I feel like, yeah, I mean, he's getting away with not having to be, you know, like not being in the public eye. That's it. Whatever. Basically, like, you know, all the parts about being a royal that suck. Yeah, you don't have to do those anymore. Look at this. Financial support. The king will provide for Andrew's basic needs, but his former royal funding and security benefits have been ended. Andrew has sought private business opportunity support himself, but no public roles are expected. Wow. I'm going to business with you, my guy. He's going to go, he wants to go into business. He's going to open up a Starbucks, getting money from the king all this time. This whole thing is nuts because they, they get money. And I don't think they have to do anything. Like, I don't think they have like real function in government. Do they? Where's the San Jago mistakes? Oh, that's where you got poor guy. Oh, that's so sad. It's so sad. They may never stay in that castle. Look how beautiful that place is. That is so nuts that this guy got kicked out of there. Bro, you got kicked out of wherever the fuck he was, the royal law. Unless they tell me his punishment is like, they give you that estate, but they take all the servants. Bro, look at the gardeners house showing the gardeners house. That's where the gardener lives. That fucking place is beautiful. That is hilarious, dude. Like, if they give him that place, but they don't give him no servants, and he just got to clean everything. He got to walk a mile to the kitchen. Yeah, he's got to do his own dishes. No, but this is the guy's living the life. So he just gets banished to a mansion. He don't got to do no public duties. And they probably just bring hose out to the mansion. You're going to get to puppy. It's not where you stop banging hose. Right? I mean, I don't know what I don't know what he's in trouble for. Right. That's the thing. They haven't told us. But to get kicked out the royal family is my school. They didn't even kick mega-marker-law to family and she may race this. Legal and public impact. What is this? These changes result from longstanding controversies over Andrews association with Jeffrey Epstein and subsequent legal settlements always get settlements, particularly the civil case bought by Virginia Guffrey, which concluded without any admission of liability by Andrew, but resulted in a multi-million pound settlement. Do you know that there's a the amount of money that's been paid out to victims of Jeffrey Epstein is like $300 million so far from where? I don't know. Is that true? There's also a bunch of money that just moved after he died that no one really understands you. Those are just zazas sketchy. Bro, I'm telling you a lot of people, it's a really released edition and earnest. A lot. It's going to be it's going to change everything. I hope I hope it's that powerful. You think you will be? Well, all I know is the most powerful person on earth has been doing a lot to keep that shift from coming out. And I don't I don't know like everybody else. I don't think Trump is in there in a criminal way. But I think a lot of he has a lot of powerful friends that have put been put in pressure on him to keep that shift on the reps. I think that definitely is going to be royal people. It's going to be prime. And this is going to be Supreme Court justices. It's going to be all type form of presidents. Yeah. Some CEOs is going to be all type of shit in there. Scientists get it out. Yeah. Get it out. Yeah. The world already, there's nothing with the loose for America as a whole. What a crazy operation they were running. What a crazy thing to have a bunch of people fly them out to an island that somehow or another you own. Like, where'd you get the money to buy a fucking island, bro? It's not as expensive as you think. A whole island? Yeah. We looked at that island. We were trying to buy it. We were actually, I shouldn't say we're trying to buy it. We were thinking about it very briefly, but it was too expensive. It was like, $95. It's not discounting now? That's a discount. That's the discounting price. Okay. I would imagine it's worth well more than that. Like, if you buy a beautiful house in like Miami, it might be $200 million if it's on the ocean. Those like crazy manners and like West Columbia beach. But it's like, but the island's basically haunted. You got a sage. It is. The world motherfucker thing. It's too late. You got to level it. You got to move the dirt and go get dirt from my sales. Yeah. It's too wild. Yeah. You got to remove everything. It would be. That's the same reason why we never bought the one world theater. The same thing. Oh, that weird cult. Yeah. The cult thing. I was like, oh, man. There's not enough sage in the world. Yeah. You have to come by with some holy water of mountain oil. That is a beautiful property. But it's like, what do they do to those poor people there? You know, and that island is like, I wouldn't be shocked if that dude was one. What was the name? The cult leader of that cult. Well, I had different names. His first, I forget what his real name was. I had the same name as a boxer. Forget it. I forget this fucking name. What's the cult? That members, the cult leader's name and holy hell. They changed his name twice. So he made, he had a fake name when he was teaching yoga in West Hollywood when he started the cult. And then when the cult awareness network started going after him, because after Waco, they started going after all the cults. They're like, these motherfuckers are arming. I'm like, this is dangerous. Let's find out. And also, it's like a lot of people lost their family members. Hime Gomez. That's right. So he was, uh, Michel Michel and then he became Andreas once he came to, um, Texas to Texas. So what happened was he, they were after him. And so this dude picks up shop and just moves to Austin. And just to throw people off has his followers build a theater so he could dance in front of them. They built that his followers built that theater. It's the I have in beautiful place for people to get sucked in the stuff like that. But I feel like we know enough now where it's like, if you're unsure if you're in a cult, like as soon as the guy wants to fuck your wife, you should be or your dad or right. Well, just anyone. Like as his scammers fuck it, everybody. As soon as the, as soon as the leader need to fuck your family, yeah, that's probably that's the red flag right there. If there was no alarm bells before that point, like when they think when they actually give up all your stuff, yeah, maybe you still have hope, you know, when they started giving you duties as a servant, maybe you still help. But when they need to fuck your family members, I feel like that should be, that should sit off all the alarms for me. They wait until you're deep in the cult before they bust that one out. Like David Kuresh, didn't he wait like a long time? I think there were already on the compound. He was like, God just told me I have to fuck your wife. Like for really was one of that, it was that dumb. It was like that dumb. Like God spoke to him and told him that no one was allowed to have sex, but him when he knows that to everybody's wife. Group pressure is very powerful. Final question. Like none of us are really above it. You know, it's gonna be careful. None of us are. Groups you around it. Right. Yeah. That pressure took from form, you know, because I guess, because I guess that he's not just like, I got to fuck your wife, but he's surrounded by people going, do, do, do, you know, I'll cheer it on. We're all, we're all saying. They say, you know, right, that pressure to praise Jesus. Yep. That pressure, that pressure to please everyone. Yeah, because there's a certain type of person that gets up, wrote into those things. Well, I always wonder about that. Like, is there a grand pattern to the universe? Is there a mathematical, mathematical formulation that we exist in, where you have to have a certain amount of gullible people and then a certain amount of devious people that try to trick people and con artists. And then a certain amount of people like you that are like, what the fuck is going on? Like that, all of this sort of like dances together and balances itself out. And just like nature has predators and it has wounded antelope that get too close to the water hole. All these things like kind of have to exist at the same time in order for progress to be made. It seems like it's just a certain amount of people that are just born gullible and not just gullible, but kind of like wanting to be tricked. He reportedly annulled marriages of couples and who joined the sect and took multiple women as his spiritual wives, some of whom were very young girls. Former cult members have alleged that Kresh slept with wives of other members and maintained a harem. Sometimes with women who were already married and fathered numerous children with various women. Kresh also instructed male followers to practice celibacy and surrender their wives to him. This behavior was part of his doctrine and control over the group's women and children often accompanied by allegations of sexual abuse and manipulation. Yeah. See, the thing is, those guys, they're not influential guys. Their superpower is their ability to know who, like they can, they can sense who's broken in just the right way and come in and be daddy. Yeah. Cause yeah, cause how can you imagine? A mother of a teller, you to be celibate while he bang in your wife. Kresh. Kresh. And you're living in a compound with him and you have the arms. And you gave him all your worldly possessions. And he sings and he's terrible. If the list I'm saying, you ever listen to him saying? Or he dancing on a stage that you built? Listen, play some David Kresh movie. He's like, he has like, he would sing songs. They were terrible. He has music. Yeah, he was terrible. Yeah, he was a musician. He was a frustrated musician who became an evangelical. Duh. I don't know. Give me one. Anyway, they're all, I'm sure they all suck. Listen to David Kresh recording in Waco, Texas, 1989. If I was in that call, they'd be like, I don't want to let him fuck my wife now. But how about that name? The name, is that like the name of a woman who was trying to fuck? She's Shawnee. I mean, that's a weird name. What does it say? Very unusual name. I've never heard that name in my whole life. It probably was some girl he was trying to say. Probably has to be. Oh. Hebrew lilies mentioned in Psalms 45 and 49. It is meaning, it's meaning in these Psalms is uncertain. Some believe it's kind of, click on that. What it says? A kind of lily? What is that saying? Lily shaped straight trumpet. What? A six-string trumpet. A word commencing a song or the melody of which these Psalms were to be sung. I didn't even know. So it was probably some girl's name. Yeah, it probably checked. I saw Lille and I was like, was that Lilleth? Do you know Lilleth is? You ever heard of Lilleth? I mean, like the demon? Lilleth was like apparently before Eve. There's like, this is like, now again, I don't know who to believe or who not to believe. And what I don't even know what scriptures show Lilleth and what don't. But really, I know about Lilleth is from Diablo, Laura. Oh, that's funny. No, Lilleth is like a character in ancient religious texts. Right, but she's a daughter of who is, well, we're going to find out because I'll butcher it. I'm very hesitant to say what I think it is because I don't really remember. She's a daughter of B. Elsobu. This is, did West Hof tell us about this? No. You know who talks about this? Kurt Metzger. Kurt Metzger was ranting and raving about Lilleth. Do you know? You know about Lilleth? This is a few different ones, but this is the one that you was talking about. Lilleth is not a character in the Bible. Her name is only mentioned in one verse in the book of Isaiah. This one here. Okay. Origin of the legend, the story of Lilleth as Adam's first wife comes from later Jewish folklore, such as the alphabet of Benseiro, which was not included in the canonical Bible. The legend's core story is according to its folklore, Lilleth was created from the earth at the same time as Adam making her his equal. When she refused to be subservient to him, she left the garden of Eden. That sounds like the true story. So I'm going to talk to you. She's claimed the Genesis one and Genesis two describe two different creation stories and two different women. This is considered incorrect and ludicrous by many biblical scholars and theologians. Evolution of the figure over time, Lilleth's story evolved from a simple night demon from Mesopotamian cultures to more complex figure in Jewish tradition in modern times. Some have reclaimed her as a feminist symbol of independence and equality. That's funny. The Lilleth there. That's where that Lilleth is. See there. That picture of Lilleth, that's from the, that's from the, that's from the upload of video game. I would play as that character. Can you play as her? No, no, no, she's the back. She, she fucks you up. There'll be a dope character for Quake. If you could be Lilleth and run around a map, fucking people up. I think you can be her in Fortnite or something. Nice. I think they buy every, for that's what she looked like in the game. In the game. Oh, yeah. And she was, she's hard to be. Yeah. Yeah. I've only beat her once. But I haven't really long time. But yeah, everything I know about her is from that game. And it sounds like it's all wrong. But isn't it funny that she's shining in the name or whatever the fuck it is? They don't even know what that was. Like it might have been a trumpet. It might have been a flute. It might have been a person. Huh. Could have been a song. That's a good thing. The way you sing. I bet you like us some Hebrew scholar could probably tell you. Maybe. It seems like it's up for debate. That's the problem with a lot of really old shit. So like they're just guests and they're really old shit. They're just guests. And like what is, what are they trying to say in the book of Ezekiel? What are they trying to say? Is it crazy? Oh my God. I haven't read a Bible in like 20 years. Ezekiel stuffs bananas. There you go. I asked the perplexity a little more about Shoshana. He was a group or entity related to the branch Davidians called led by David Kresh, a group or entity related to it. The name seems to refer to Kresh as followers who identified themselves as students of the seven seals. Oh, so they were, they were his people. Yeah, that's what he called his people that group. A little ration that gives you every time. Reflection reflecting their focus on apocalyptic teachings derived from the Bible's book of revelation. Kresh positioned himself as a messianic figure, calling himself the land, who would open the seven seals and event that would lead to salvation and the apocalypse, followers under Kresh's leadership and ideology, where sometimes referred to as Kreshians. You know what would be crazy? What really would be crazy is if heaven was real and the murder, like them being murdered sent them to heaven because they were, those people were murdered. Like you ever, you ever see what the actual footage of the, when they stormed Waco? No. Oh, bro, it's crazy. They killed those people. They lit them on fire. They drove tanks into the buildings and flames are shooting out of the tanks. They just cooked those people, not just Kresh, not just people that like everybody, men, women, children, they got, what are they trying to do in the first place? Just have them disarm? Well, there was a problem with, it's, there's a lot to the story. And it seems like in the beginning, there might have been some governmental overreach, like they were trying to get a win and they were trying to, like, who described this to us? Was it all of stone? Who, who is telling, it might have been Darrel Cooper. Darrel Cooper has an amazing series all on the Waco, no, he doesn't. It's the Epstein files. Someone has, he doesn't have, he doesn't have, he doesn't have, he has one in Guyana. That's what he has on somebody has one on Kresh. Is it Cooper? So who has a series on Kresh? Well, what the, I'm sorry, I'm blanking here, but the point is they wanted a win. So they wanted to take out this cult. And so they, they exaggerated what they were doing and they had to stand down. So they stood outside of the, of the gates with fucking armored vehicles and cops and men with guns and they waited them out and eventually it escalated. It, it escalated to them getting agents on the roof, agents on the roof got shot at by the people that were in the cult. And so then they started shooting at them and it became a gun fight and then they brought in tanks and lit it on fire and killed everybody. It's, it's a crazy story, man. It is crazy. It is the whole thing. There was a, I know there's a documentary on it as well that like details, like all the different things that led up to the eventual storming of the compound. And did that, because what needed to happen? Was that like 80? Yeah. It was like, I think it was like in either the early 90, like 90, what was it? The seed was in 93. Oh, was it really 93? I don't remember that. I remember it. Like I remember it. I think like I vaguely remember hearing about it. But in my mind, it's like, it's not like something that happened. Yeah. You know, because that's the same. That was ready. Well, wasn't it around the OJ murder too? Yep. Yep. Because that trial was 94. Okay. Yeah. So I was like, to me, that's a. That's the same. That was right around the OJ murder too. Yep. Because that trial was 94. Yeah. So I was like, to me, that's a significant cultural event. And I don't remember the wake up thing being like, I remember hearing about it afterwards. I don't remember hearing about what was happening. Oh, I heard about it. But how did the people react to the government just killing people? Even though they didn't know. Even though it took, there was no internet back then. It took a while before people really got hip. There was a few documentaries that released or some news footage that was got released. And maybe you'd get a hold of a VHS tape. Some obscure VHS tape that might have something to do at Wakeo. But people really didn't know until they started making documentaries about it until they saw it on the internet. Once you can see it, because most people are just going to believe the narrative. What's the narrative? People had guns, which they did. The guy was a piece of shit and a cult leader, which he was. But how did it lead to a mass murder? How did it lead to them? Well, it led to, they blocked out this guy's house. And that's not even the worst one. The worst one is Ruby Ridge. That one's horrible. What happened to Ruby Ridge? Put that into perplexity. Ruby Ridge. This one's a crazy story. Because the Ruby Ridge story is like totally avoidable. And horrific. Like they shot a mother while she was holding her baby. Like crazy. These family, there was like a family of like preppers. There were like out in the woods. And you know, maybe the guy was like a little radical. But they completely escalated it. Was this in Texas too? Murdered. No. I don't remember where that was. Where was that? Idaho. Okay. Incident was 11 days standoff in August of 1992 in Boundary County, Idaho. Involving Randy Weaver, his family and a friend. Kevin Harris against US Marshals and FBI agents. It began when US Marshals sought to arrest Randy Weaver for failing to appear in court on federal firearms charges related to the sale of a modified shotgun. The situation escalated after Weaver's dog was shot by a marshal during surveillance leading to a firefight in which Weaver's 14 year old son, Samuel, was killed by gunfire. Kevin Harris, a family friend, shot and killed deputy marshal, William Degan during the exchange. FBI hostage rescue team was called in. And during a sniper shot, Randy Weaver was wounded. The sniper second shot intended for Harris also hit and killed Weaver's wife, Vicki, who was holding their infant daughter behind a cabin door. The siege ended when negotiators, including activists, Bo Gritts, convinced Weaver and Harris to surrender. Harris was arrested on August 30th and Weaver with his daughter, surrendered the next day. Criticism later arose over the FBI's rules of engaging in and use of deadly force, particularly constitutional legality of the sniper second shot that killed Vicki Weaver. The standoff highlighted tensions between federal law enforcement and citizens, especially among anti-government and white separatist groups. Weaver and Harris were charged with several offenses, but were acquitted of the most severe charges, except Weaver's conviction for failure to appear in court. Interesting. They were both acquitted. Damn. But they got in a firefight with the feds, and they were acquitted. Well, Kevin Harris popped it off. And you know, just get that statement. Weaver and Harris were charged with several offenses, but were acquitted of the most severe charges, except Weaver's conviction for failure to appear in court. That's all they got them for. So, not failure to appear in court. They killed his wife. They shot his kid. They killed his kid. They killed his dog. And it was because he failed to appear in court. Because he sold a modified gun. I don't even know what that means. Was it a sawed-off shotgun, which is illegal? Did he change the trigger? What did he do? Something. Did he put a large magazine at the bottom of it? Like, what did he do that was illegal? That's crazy. But also, why don't they allow to kill you a dog? Exactly. That's what popped it all off, right? Oh, you want to hear one of the worst ones of that? There was a mayor. I forget where he was the mayor of. It might have been Washington, D.C. But he was a mayor. And he had a postman that was doing some sneaky shit. And the postman was getting weed delivered to his house. Because they figured if I get it, I'm delivering the mail to the mayor's house. And if I get the weed delivered to the mayor's house, no one's going to check the mayor's packages for weed. So, I know which one my friend sent to the mayor's house. I'll just take that. And that way, I'll have the weed and no one will be any of the wiser. Well, unfortunately, someone was tracking that package, and they knew that that weed was going to this particular address. They didn't know it was the mayor's house. So they stormed the mayor's house, shoot his fucking golden retriever, chase it out in the yard, or it's cowering and shoot it. You've been around my golden retriever. Gold retrievers are not biting anybody, ever, ever. They're the worst guard dogs in the history of the world. Anybody who comes into my house, like, hey, you want to give me a treat? He loves everybody. And they shot his dogs. They fucking zip-tied his family, checked the whole house where we couldn't find anything, and then eventually it unraveled, and they realized what had happened. Like the guy who was delivering his mail was also involved in this weed dealer. And they didn't piece it together until after they shot this guy's fucking dogs. But who's they? The cops, the SWAT team. They burst down his door. They did the whole thing, man. They came in guns, armor, fucking zip-tied everybody. They thought they were breaking into the house of like a drug. That's how bad their information is. It sounds like they need to find that story. Because it's a crazy story. And it was so heartbreaking, because the family had to, the kids had to see their dog get shot by these cops for fucking no reason, no reason. They really got to start letting cops smoke weed. I think some weird mushrooms. Some eat not strong enough. But something, but also it's like therapy and also it's like, hey, no for sure. Like really doing investigation. How about find out who lives there? Oh my God, it's the mayor. Well, like if you should have gone over a dream, you should probably have to retire. So here it is. Maryland. So police say Maryland mayor appears to be innocent victims of a scheme by two men to smuggle millions of dollars worth of marijuana by having it delivered to about a half a dozen unsuspecting recipients. So he was one of the many people that this guy delivered mail to. So he got on from work, saw a package dressed to his wife in the front porch, brought it inside, putting it on a table, suddenly. Police with guns, drawn, kicked in the door, stormed in, shooting to death, the couple's two dogs, and seizing the unopened package. And it were 32 pounds of marijuana, but the drugs evidently didn't belong to the couple. Police say the couple appeared to be innocent victims of a scheme by two young men to smuggle millions of dollars of marijuana to unsuspecting recipients. Two men under the arrest include a FedEx delivery man, investigators said the delivery man would drop off a package outside of a home, and the other man would come by a short time later and pick it up. Wow. Isn't that crazy? And only the dogs died though? Our dogs were our children. Yeah. Police apparently killed the dogs. He said for sport, gunning down one of them as it was running away. Our dogs were our children, so the 37-year-old child was a lab. Two labs. Two labs. Oh, they were labs. Oh, they were black labs. I thought they were gold retriever. I fucked it up. Our dogs were our children. Again, labs same thing. Labs aren't biting anybody. The sweetest dogs in the world. So the 37-year-old child, they were our reason. We brought this house because they had a big yard for them to run in. Unfucking believable. He was handcuffed in his box of shorts for about two hours, along with his mother-in-law, said the officers didn't believe him. We told them he was the mayor. No charges were brought against Kalvo, or his wife, who came home in the middle of the raid. Fuck, man. They ain't even upon a jasselt killing dogs. Killed labs. You found a wash. I just came from Tulsa, Oklahoma. You're like the Tulsa massacre? What's the Tulsa massacre? It was like black wall street. It was like, why was this? This was the 20s or maybe the 19th... Like in 1910s. After the trails of tears, the civilized tribe, they were told that they could have Oklahoma. The land smell funny there. It was in their found oil. That set off a whole bunch of shit. You got a bunch of natives in free slaves. That's about to be rich. You see the movie, the flower moon movie? No, I didn't see it. It's kind of like that. They couldn't sell their land, some traps couldn't sell their land. So you had to marry into the family. And then if you killed everybody, it was yours. Really? Yeah. But Tulsa was... It was black wall street, but it was like the greenwood area of Tulsa. And it was basically like a prosperous, wealthy black community. And there was a riot one night, and they burned it all down. And so they did this because of oil? No, well, that was the backdrop for Oklahoma. But they did this just because of racial jealousy. Just like... Oh, they did it because they were doing well. Yeah, they were doing too well. And there was a lot of racial tension in the community. Because the whole idea behind institution racism is that poor white people don't mind me and taking advantage of because they know that it's black people somewhere that's throwing worse than them. But that doesn't work. If you live in next to do, this dress is better than you. They got cars, they got cars. I was at the Harmony Club, I mentioned to the owner. I was like, I've stayed in Hiltons all over the place. Why does my Hilton say, why does it have these pure things everywhere to tell you that the air is clean and the water is clean? And he was like, oh, yeah, they just started filtering the water that goes to the north side of town like a few years ago, like the black side of town. I was like, what? Like how long? I recently, he was like, 20. And me and my friends were like 20. He was like, yeah, He was like, have you not been to the museum? I'm like, it's so we went over there and it was like, it was a heavy day. Wow, this is crazy. Look at this statistics here. Look at how many blocks, 35 square blocks of the neighborhood. Yeah. At the time, one of the wealthiest black communities in the United States colloquially known as black wall street, more than 800 people were admitted to hospitals. There's many 6,000 black residents of Tulsa were interned, many of them for several days. The Oklahoma Bureau of Vital Statistics officially recorded 36 deaths. 36 dead. Wow. Yeah. And so they just now started it like, the guy told me, look at this, estimates from, up to from 36 to up to around 300 dead. 35 blocks. Yeah, they don't know how many are there because there was a lot of mass graves and stuff that they just started looking for. Holy shit. Man. But even still to, even still to this day, they're not allowed to teach about it in schools. Like, they just now started being a lot of teach about it, and they're allowed to say who was who. Even the YouTube video is age restricted. I was going to show it to you, but they're kind of on, on do it. Yeah. This shit was crazy. And so Joe, if you want to, if you want to feel real uncomfortable, I'll, so I'm going to museum and they have these holograms. So you, you, you sit in the barber chair and you can see yourself in the mirror, but there's a hologram of a barber, like cutting your hair in this three of them in the row. And they're like having a conversation about what's going on around town. It's, it's heavy, bro. Wow. Could put that back up. So the cause of it, they're saying, so it says the mass of a can began during Memorial weekend, after a 19 year old dick, Roland, a black shoe shineer, was accused of assaulting Sarah Page, a white 21 year old elevator operator, and nearby Drexel building. He was arrested in rumors that he was to be lynched spread. The most likely, most widely reported and corroborated, inciting incident occurred as the group of black men left, when an elderly white man approached OB man, a black man, and demanded that he hand over his pistol. Man refused and the old man attempted to disarm him. A gunshot went off and then, according to the sheriff's reports, all hell broke loose. The two groups shot at each other until midnight, when the group of black men were greatly outnumbered and forced to retreat to Greenwood. At the end of the exchange of gunfire, 12 people were dead, 10 white and two black. Alternatively, another eyewitness account was that the shooting began down the street from the courthouse, when black business owners came to the defense of a lone black man being attacked by a group of around six white men. It is possible that the eyewitnesses did not recognize the fact that this incident was occurring as a part of a rolling gunfight that was already underway. Holy fuck, man. Yeah, shit went down in Greenwood. And the thing is, it's still not back. So then they put a highway right through the middle of that neighborhood, and they completely destroyed all of the economy and everything. Wow. Yeah, man. I thought I knew about this shit, but then when I went there, it was real intense for me. But then we ate some good ass food, that was me and it was me and Lucas McCurry. And we got done. We got back to the hotel. He was like, that's the blackest day I've ever had. I was like, might be mad too. This is the place. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's called the black washery museum. And they just recently admitted this? They admitted it probably in 2010 or something like that. They acknowledged it. I mean, everyone already knew. But now they're just not at this point, but they're allowed to teach it. But they still aren't allowed to say what the people look like. So they can say group A did this and group B did that, but they can't say black white. They can't say clan. Yeah, they still won't say people's certain people's names. Because these are like, the clan is heavily involved too. When you go to the museum, there's like a clan ledger of like the meeting, like a roll call. Wow. Yeah, it was a wild idea. And the thing is, they still haven't recovered. That neighborhood is still not recovered. I mean, it never will at this point. The history of Oklahoma is so crazy. Oklahoma is not what that's the thing. So we get done the tour. We walk out of the tour guide. And I walked past this guy. I didn't know he was one of the guys. Because we didn't take a guy. We just walked through the museum ourselves. And he goes, you look familiar. And I was like, you probably know me from comedy, but he was like, oh, yeah, yeah. And he is like the guy. And then we walked around with him for like an hour. Oh, wow. And he just he told us he was like, yeah, they don't even say everything. So this is also, he took us to like all these historical spots. And we ate at this place called Sweet Leases, which you could taste. You could taste the struggle, the season, everything, the season, just perfection. You know what I mean? You could just tell this recipe came from the ancestor. It was incredible. And it's like in this little shop, they just got indoor seating. You know, it was like it was like, it was almost like, I guess because in my mind is easy to learn about shit like that and think of it as something that happened a long time ago. But then to be there and realize like they still haven't come all the way back. You know, you see that photo of that lady that Native American lady that's in front door, whether she's breastfeeding a child. You seen it. Oh, wait, the mother's here. Here, here in this room. Oh, no. I went outside. You never saw it. You know that that one, you've seen the painting of a Native American face that's on bullets. It's like all the backup. You see that? That's Kwan a Parker. That lady sent the Ann Parker. She was kidnapped by Comanche's in Oklahoma. So what they used to do in Oklahoma is this is so dark. They would give people these plots of land knowing they were going to get attacked by the Comanche's. Like, hey, go, you could go live out here. And they basically like use them as bait. They like, they started conflict to try to conquer these territories by just having people go out there and get shot at and get killed and get slaughtered. And then eventually they would have to send the army out. And then they won after a long time. They eventually went through that and went through here where it texted to the Comanche. They ran this place too. But they killed her whole family. And they stole her when she was nine years old. And they kept her because they had a hard time having children. Because they had so many horse riders. They were riding horses all the time and a lot of women miscarryed. So it was very difficult for the keep their numbers up. So when they would go on raiding parties, they would kill everybody except the children. And then they incorporate the children into the tribe. Cynthia Ann Parker was the last of that tribe. She gave birth to Kwanaparker, who was the last chief of that tribe. She married the chief of the tribe. She had a baby with him. That baby, that half American baby, was Kwanaparker. He was the last chief of the Comanche's. So now there's no local Comanche's? I mean, they still exist, but they don't have a reservation. Like, you know, they don't have territory. Oh, words. They were nomadic. And they ran all, I mean, I'm sure they, is there a Comanche? Is there a Comanche reservation? We should find that out. Probably not. But they don't get represented. Because they didn't have art. It's crazy. What it was like, what it was telling me that like, so there were four tribes considered the civilized tribes. And those are people that agreed to like stop fighting the United States to like learn English to like be Christian. Those kind of things. And they were promised local home and knowing that it was already commented. So they got out there and got to. The United States government did that with everybody. Oh. The Comanche nations of Federal Records eyes tribe headquartered in Lawton, Oklahoma. But do they have a reservation there? There's no longer a Comanche reservation in Texas. The historical one established in 1854 near Clear Fork of the Brazos River. In present day, Thoc Morton County, the Comanche were later forced to relocate to Indian Territory, now known as Oklahoma in 1859, after the reservation was dissolved. And the current Comanche nation is based in Oklahoma. So it seems like they don't have a reservation. It's man history that I'm so ignorant about. Got to read this book Empire of the Summer Moon, get it on audio. It's incredible. Empire of the Summer Moon. Empire of the Summer Moon. It's all about the Comanche in Texas and in Oklahoma. But that's part of the story. So like what I was getting at is like the history of Oklahoma is just seeped in violence. And it's but it's still not fixed. It can't be. But a lot of people are moving there right now. Well, I bet it's a lot of people want to move to a place where they don't get fucked with as much. New at California. It's called a new Empire of the Summer Moon. You know what California is proposing? I don't know if they're going to do this. If they're going to be able to pull this off. But there's a new wealth tax that's basically they're going to tax your savings account. Look that up. It's only for 200 billionaires. What is that mean? It's not for like every person. Okay. Even if it's for 200 billionaires, that's their fucking money. If you have a savings account, that means you pay taxes already. Like that's the only way you get a savings account. They're taxing billionaires savings accounts. This is what I was reading today when people were talking about the proposition. This proposition of a wealth tax for savings accounts. That sounds if I'm not reading into this incorrectly. One time. It sounds crazy. Whatever. I understand. But why do you get to have a one time tax of money that's already taxed? California is not currently have a wealth tax, but multiple proposals have been introduced, including a recent one, for a one time 5% tax on individuals with a net worth of over 1 billion. Yeah. I'm going to jam you on this, fuck them. Yeah, but not fuck them because that could be you someday. Here's the thing. It's like it starts with them and then it trickles down to someone who's worth 500,000 or 5 million or whatever. 5% on money that you've already been taxed for. And then to go to what though, when you say fuck them, all it does is make more bloated government. Because what are they going to do? They're going to spend it wisely. No, they never spend any money wisely. The reason I say fuck them is because most of these billionaires, they go out of their way, not to pay the taxes they suppose to pay anyway. It's not like they get in tax. A lot of these mothers don't even pay any taxes. Oh, that's not true. No, they all pay taxes. Everyone pays taxes. It's just taxes on what. Like a lot of them the way it works is all your money is in assets and you get paid a certain amount by the company. Like that's how like so when someone's worth X amount of money, that's not like how much money they have liquid. Right. That's a lot of it. But the point is, no, the government should not be taking your money that's already been taxed. If I'm reading into this correctly, so if you get a paycheck from the mothership and then you do your taxes and then you take that money and you put it in a savings account, you've already paid your taxes. So if you've already paid your taxes on that money, how can they tax money that you've already taxed? Oh, no. That's crazy. I agree with how much money they own. Okay. If there's a loophole in the tax code, fix the loophole. But if it's there and that's the law and they're able to skirt around that law in whatever way that's legal, you don't get to steal their money. According to the Washington Post, this is from a healthcare workers union. That's a recent proposal and it will go to fund healthcare spending. It still has to be voted on also. But either way, all you're doing is taking money from people. And the group believes this could raise about 100 billion. Right. And what would they do with it? What do they do with the fire money? What happened to all the money that was raised for the Pacific Palace AIDS fire? Does anybody know? That was a charity bank. That wasn't the government. Right. But this is what I'm saying. It's a group of people. You're giving them a bunch of money and they're supposed to allocate it in a positive way. Whether it's the government or whether it's a charity, who fucking trusts anybody that's doing these things to be wise with the money? Where it makes sense. Where you're a billionaire going, you know what? I like it. Take my 5% and we're going to fix crime. You know, I'm fixing shit. You're just going to take my money and you're just going to be more incompetent. Do you know when Gavin Newsom got into office, they had a surplus. California had a surplus. Really? Yes. Why don't you Google that? What was the surplus of California? And during the time where Gavin Newsom was the governor, how much is the deficit? It's not only here surplus with the drug to bill Clinton. Bro, they spent $24 billion on the homeless crisis and it got worse. So this is what I'm saying. You're going to take tax money and you're going to do what with it? In 2022, California Governor Gavin Newsom announced record-breaking budget surplus of approximately $97.5 billion, which was projected to fund new initiatives like cash payments to residents and investments in drought-relieved childcare and education. However, the state later forced a significant budget deficit, excuse me. However, the state later faced a significant budget deficit primarily due to overestimating revenues from a booming stock market that later declined, coupled with increasing, accre-spending commitments during the surplus period by 2024, Newsom was proposing a budget to close a multi-billion dollar deficit, which required spending cuts and other measures to balance a budget. So the surplus of $97.5 billion, it became a multi-billion dollar deficit in two years. Because of the stock market? Seems like there's a lot of stuff. Over estimating revenues, increased spending commitments, which is probably a big part of it. They probably spent too much money during the surplus period. What if they all... But the point is, it's mismanagement. But if they only tax the people who are less on the Epstein list. Ah, you only get so much. You just take all their money? Yeah, if you're on the list, take all your money. They'd probably only get a few hundred billion dollars. That's the thing. It's like at the end of the day, they're going to blow through that money. It's not fair on paper, but it's hard to have empathy for people that have way more than the people. You know what I mean? Oh, yeah. It's not having empathy. I'm just recognizing the law and recognizing where this goes. The problem with any decision that we make on people that have more money than us, eventually it's going to trickle down to you. Because if they could just tax these people because there's only 200 of them, they can't really talk too much shit. You know, like, okay, but why are you doing that? If they did something illegal to get that money and you know, you're going to punish them for that, I'm all with you. But if they have the money and then it's in their savings account and then you decided to tax the savings account because you need money to do what? More incompetent bullshit? That's the problem. Like they're not competent. If they were, if you're going to take that 5% and you knew this is going to be what cleans up the palisades. This is going to be what fixes education, but it's not. It's not going to do anything. The homeless crisis gets worse. It's bigger than ever. Well, that's a whole. That's the homeless thing is a whole racket because I experience that firsthand. It's just people making money. That money isn't going to actually help anybody that's on the streets. I mean, it kind of is, but not really. There's so many charities that are dirty. Just like people that are dirty, you know, like those creepy guys who pretend to be male feminists and you know they're really a piece of shit. You know what I mean? Like that's the type of people that set up charities, but they really just want the money. Like there's people that have run charities where the charity makes the actual thing makes like 6% 10% of the money generated. Most of it goes to the people and they have lavish lifestyles. They get paid tremendous salaries. Did that what I tell you, the run charity? The shelter I was living in, the guy that was running the place got high and then the exact same thing. The executive had to show up and he pulled up in a fucking phantom with a fancy ass pseudo. And a nice ass one of those. I don't know. Because that's the first time they hit everybody like, oh this is a business. It's a business. Yeah, it's a business. It's a business. They're generating income, spending the least amount possible, providing you with the least amount of care that they have to and then pocketing the rest and say we got a high overhead. Very high overhead. As long as somebody dies. Yeah. Because that's the thing. It's all a racket and everyone knows it's like all wink wink. Yeah. But they were the rules actually applied to the actual homeless residents. Yeah. But it was all nonsense. It's like, they were real strict about you. Make sure you sign in these papers saying you were doing these activities because they were getting grants for those things. Exactly. But I was like, well just put my signature on there. This is all bullshit. That's crazy. But yeah, I think most charities off-cam. Most charities have an element of scam. Yeah. There's a lot of legitimate charities out there for sure. There's a lot of really good charitable people out there for sure. Well, real people that are doing charities for the right reasons. Yeah. Well, the workers, a lot of the workers are in there for the right reasons. Yes. But it's just like colleges, right? Where it's like, it's just that the entity has become so bloated with, because I think if you think you can look at up-jimmy, most of the top universities, most of their money goes towards administration. So they just, you know, they first they hire people to collect the money and then they hire more people to watch over those people. And more people get more than before you know it, the whole admin side is so bloated that the college gets upside down if they don't raise tuition. Yeah. And it just keeps going and then just the cycle just keeps going and going and going and going. And we have donors, which is weird. I don't understand how that works. Where is the amount of money people donate to colleges? Yeah, that people love they all my mothers, but there must be a tax thing too. Where does the money from most universities go? The money from most universities primarily goes towards faculty and staff salaries, student services and campus maintenance. Significant portion is also allocated to research academic programs and scholarships. University spend on maintaining buildings and facilities, supporting student housing and dining healthcare technology upgrades and activities like sports and events, government funding tuition, investments grants, donations, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Eventually administrative costs and strategic initiatives also consume parts of the budget. Overall salaries and wages usually make up the largest expenditure category for universities. So it's salaries. Yeah. They get a lot of money. It's salary for the for the for the admin people. Yeah. The coaches. Yeah. Some of those coaches. Well, there's weird, there's weird gigs that people have. Well, like a major university will pay someone like a half a million dollars a year to do stuff. Like, does Elizabeth Warren get paid from Harvard still? There's weird gigs that people have. Well, like a major university will pay someone like a half a million dollars a year to do stuff. Like does Elizabeth Warren get paid from Harvard still? You look, you could do like a lot to speak. Yeah, like, you know who had one of them gigs? Biden. He had one of them gigs where they gave him like a million dollars a year and he pretended he was a professor and then, you know, like he said, when I taught Rod, Penn State or wherever it was, he taught a lot. He's like, professor in the next year. Yeah, but he never taught a class. Like it's, oh, shit. Oh, he was never any guy. You got one of them sweet gigs where you get, you get money from the university. Bro, the sign me up. Those are like mafia jobs. Yeah, I'll take a bullshit job in my heart. Elizabeth Warren currently in United States Senator. She's on leave from her teaching position in Harvard and no longer receives a salary from the university. Her current annual salary as a senator is $174,000. She and her husband also a Harvard professor report additional income from book royalties and investments. Her salary for this 2010 to 2011 was reported at $429,000. This figure came up to scrutiny during her first Senate campaign with critics mischaracterizing it as payment for teaching only one class. PolitiFact rated this claim half true because the amount covered a two year period in which she taught two classes and was on leave to advise the Obama administration and also reflect their status as a high ranking, accomplished professor and researcher. Stop, Miss character. I'm Elizabeth Joe. What is her net worth? Goop, put that in there. Net worth. Let's find out. Bro, this shit is always wrong. Okay. It's not a good place to look. Yeah, because I look, the net worth shit, the internet be, they said they said they said I'm worth four million dollars. I said, what the fuck that money yet? Yeah. Maybe they just say you should be. I think people just be making up shit. Well, they definitely do that. Yeah. They definitely make up stuff, especially those web. It's like some Indian website. Some scammer dude is just faking it. I'm trying to get clicks. Maybe they say it. It says an estimated, this is an open secret. Oh, in the Senate. In the Senate. So an estimated net worth of $7,977,000. Bro, isn't it? In 2018. That was in 2018, she was worth how much? Isn't there an app where you can match the stop trades of senators? Yes, the Pelosi tracker. Oh, it's just, she's the best. Oh, she's the go. So if you just make all the same moves she makes, you'll be good. You'll make some money. Yeah, 100%. Especially if you act quick. I'm sure there's a lot of people doing exactly what she does the moment she does. I gotta get one of those guys and just be like, yeah, put it all on. Okay, she makes, okay, now she's worth 30 million. No, no, no, no, no, no. What's that? This is the Pelosi tracker. Oh, there's 14,000, 557 copiers. I was gonna say she's worth way more than 30 million, right? That's just that much money. Isn't she worth like a couple hundred million? I think so. Yeah, she's worth a lot. She's about to retire. Of course, she's got $400 million, she's a million years old. Why is she still working? It's crazy. Imagine working at that age 82. I think that addicted to the power. Your power, because you can't have it. You can't have it. You can't have it. You can bring up a merger Taylor Greene's recent stock trades. Oh, she's been making some stock trades. Yeah, follows everybody. Bro, they all do. They all do. They all do. I think that's that should be illegal. It should be illegal. I don't think anyone in the federal government should be able to trade stuff. Well, especially with stuff where you have some inside knowledge about a bill that's going to be passed, it would be very, very good for some corporation. Right. Or they all have to invest through like there's like, there's a nonpartisan government agency where they can put all their money to one of the investors that invest everyone's money in the same thing. No, no, no, no. No, you start doing that and then you got more corruption, more room for bureaucracy, more room for bullshit. You got too much money flowing around. So they're not going to be they're not going to be. So then what do you say to the argument that they should be able to know? No, no, you're inside of trading. What if they just tell people to do a forum? How do you stop that? Well, that's what they're still doing now. But yeah, I mean, what's the end? That could be no, that could be a problem. But at least then they could catch you and you can get in trouble. That's how inside of trading works. Like so, say if they do that and they do it, you know, through WhatsApp or something like that. And then the government gets access to your WhatsApp. And then they find out you're trading. That's an email thing with the lady getting emails. Stacy Plath, during it. Yeah. What? No. Yeah. If it was to me, it'd be judge, dread shit. We're like, we're right. You get you get four times and then they take you out and they just put you put you out in the desert with nothing. They take all your shit. Don't end it back to the people and they just send you out. You were in charge for, you know, have a long and now get the fuck out of here. There's no way you make a hundred and seventy thousand dollars a year. And you're worth, let's say she's worth a hundred and eighty billion. I've heard it's a lot more than that. I've heard estimates as high as 400 million. But there's no way of regular person who makes a hundred and seventy thousand dollars a year ever gets there and keeps that one hundred and seventy thousand dollar year job. Get the fuck out of here. There's not a chance in hell. You keep that one hundred and seventy thousand dollar year job where you're working eight hours a day every fucking day. And on the side you've racked up 400 million. Well, bitch, that's where you're good at. Imagine if you were doing that all day long while you've been working in the Senate. You would have even more money. Are you crazy? You're wasting all your valuable time and resources doing a job that pays you one hundred and seventy thousand dollars a year. But it has nothing to do with your investments. Why, why would you even suspect that it has anything to do with the profit that I make for my business? That's just personal and Congress. She got to be up there. She can't be. Well, there's probably some billionaires who signed up and won and got into office somewhere. There's probably a lot of them. But they all, the thing is they're all richer when they leave. Well, Bloomberg wasn't like a multi billionaire when he became the mayor of New York City. I'm not. I don't know. I think he was. Is it Michael, Michael Bloomberg is crazy rich. I think he was a billionaire while he became mayor because he wanted to fix New York City because he loved it. That's the. Did he work? Did he work? I was just there. It was nice. I mean, 109 billion estimated. Yeah. These were a lot of money. Imagine richest person. Rattle sandwiches. Those sandwiches you put in? Giovanni's Italian deli. Bro. But you could barely get your mouth on them. They're like that big. I want him to come out here. I want him to open up a deli out here. Will you, will you, will you talk to him about it? He said he would be interested in doing it. I mean, look, he's a fucking hilarious character. It's a very funny guy. And his food is fucking sensational. And all that gets imported from Italy. So he can import it from Italy ingredients. Yes. Everything is imported from Italy. Oh, or the more to Della, the mozzarella, all that stuff. So he's getting it all from Italy. All the sun dried pepper. Bro, it's sensational. Yeah. I mean, it looks good. I feel that. Next time, I never had a chance to try next time. Next time I go to New York, you're coming with me. All right. Bro, you're going to feel so bad the next day though. Oh my God, Sunday. I'm not eating. I'm not eating anymore. I looked like I was pregnant. My stomach was out like that far. I so much. Yeah. He gave me a four foot long sandwich, dude. Because four feet long, I just kept stuffing into my fat face. Yeah, I was getting it. I eat meatballs. I ate four or five canoleys. I ate so much. I should not have gone that deep. And what did they cater to the event? Because why do they jump off giant sandwiches? He just does it for me. Does like I've blown him up online, I've blown him up on the podcast. His deli's killing it. That's a good guy. He's a great guy. And I found them just randomly, G&R deli in the Bronx. That's how I found them. After you left. What do you mean? After you left New York. This is like, oh, yeah, this is recently. It's like within a couple of years. I find, you know, because most of the time I eat really clean, most of the time it's just meat. But when I go off, I go, I like to really go. Well, I've seen you literally like eat like a hostage. Like somebody that just got released. It's a problem. I'm a real glutton, man. I eat mass. I just not just eating food that I shouldn't be eating. I'll eat a massive amount of it. Yeah. Some good pasta. It's not a stop. I can't stop. It's hard to stop. Oh, yeah. Well, so I ate at this place to resee with my wife on Friday night. That was incredible. It was Italian food. I ate way too much there. Way too. It was insensational. And then the next day Giovanni shows up with these two giant four foot sandwiches. But my rule is when I'm in New York, all bets are off. All that diet shits out the window. I'm eating for fun. I'm just eating for fun when I'm in New York. I eat a diet dewy. How do you say it? I do it. I do it on Sunday. And then I did sushi for scratch last night. Oh my gosh. Shout out to Jesse Griffith. Jesse's the head chef and the owner of Daidu. Oh, man. He's a man. Right. I stumbled on that place. And I thought I was putting you on. You were like, oh, I know that guy. Yeah. I found out about that place years ago because he was on my friend Stephen Rennell's podcast. And I was like, oh, that guy is so interesting. And so I actually had, I don't know if I had him on my podcast before I ate a disrestaurant or after. I don't remember. But then we went to his restaurant like during the pandemic when we first moved here and it was like, yeah, to be spread out. We actually ate outside the first time we did it because we couldn't eat inside yet. Bro. And you know, you know, because I love because you know, it's great restaurants all over us. And I know I know it's going to be good whenever the staff is generally happy to be there. You go and do it. Everyone fucking loves it there, especially like if you see old people working there, yeah, uses my, like, you know, the pushing 50 and they still love and happy and gingerly that it's, you know, it's going to be good. Yeah, I do a sensation. The thing, and the thing about them is everything is from Texas. There's nothing in there. You can't, like you can't even get like a diet coke in there. They don't have anything that ain't from Texas. Nothing. So good too. Yeah. And he always has like exotic shit on the menu. The menu is always changing, but you can always get those, um, those pork chops. Oh, yes, pork chops are a lot of sensational. Wild pork chops. Sensational. Yeah. Everything sensational. Jesse's like one of the best chefs in the country. I've been there enough times now where I know like anything you want is going to be good. Yeah. We are spoiled here, bro. Yeah, big time. There's so much good food in Texas and specifically in Austin. At the, at the medium to high level, the fast food is trash. Like if you know it seriously, like if you, if you're, if it's not a Texas fast food place, it's such a phenomenon to me. Like what's trash? Like everything that's not a Texas, but like Dan's is great. What a burger's great. But like, but like Chick-fil-A is not as good. McDonald's is like Chick-fil-A is going to be good. Wendy's is terrible. I had Chick-fil-A like a month ago was amazing. No, it's okay. But, but it's, but it's, it's not. It's different. The service is not as, let me take the same everyone. You go inside to check it out. Going inside or else. Or play as a drive through thing. And you want eating your car like a pig, but it's a disgusting person who hates himself. Chick-fil-A might be somewhat of exception, but like even in and out, even in and out, he is not as good. But were you telling me that Chick-fil-A has like a aluminum in it? Were you one? No, that's probably good. I was telling you, I think. Who's Tony? Yeah, it was Tony. Yeah. I was saying Chick-fil-A has aluminum in it or something. What? What is it having it? What is the controversial ingredient? It's, I think it's the buns or something, but it's aluminum. It's in a lot of stuff. Aluminum. What though? It's not just a aluminum. No, no, no, no. It's not. It's like oil. It's foil. They grind up. No, it's, it makes it thicker. But sometimes certain, certain, main sound scary. Right. Right. But it's just something normal. Right. Like vitamin C sound scary. Exorbitic acid. Like, oh, no. sodium aluminum phosphate. Yeah. Is that a preservative? Oh, look, man, fuck preservatives. That's what's wrong with us. Everything is preserving your gut biome. It's all getting in there. I'll just back to your beauty. Sodium aluminum phosphate. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think that's bad. But also, also, I, I've probably eaten so much of whatever that is. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's, um, when you think about like food like that, you're just not supposed to eat it every day. That's all it is. It's really good. If you just want to eat it and enjoy like, you ever have canes, those chicken fingers? Yeah. Yeah. That was good. Canes, yeah. Canes, yeah. Canes, pretty good. Pretty good. If you, if you just don't do it every day, just every now and again. But again, even canes, even canes is better in other places. What? Are you a canes connoisseur? No. No, but I'm just, I've eaten, I've been fast food. I've eaten a lot of fast food. I've heard that in and out here is not as good. And now here's not as good. When we, when these is not as good. Does the in and out here have the same KFC's bag? Does it in and out here have the same sort of menu or you can get off menu stuff? No, it's the same, it's the same everything except the service sucks and the food is not as, it's just not as consistent. You know what I mean? Okay. Like, because I've never before been before here, I've never been to it. Cause you know, like, Chick-fil-A in and out. That's a certain standard. Especially if you come from LA. But you said McDonald's too. You have the McDonald's here's trash. It's a food dish. You have your shanish. Is it? Yeah. I've been once when McDonald's actually bought like my favorite pizza place from Ohio. They couldn't expand it, right? Because like you couldn't get the same ingredients you get in Ohio. So you don't like equality. But doesn't McDonald's like send all the ingredients to all their places? That means you don't have one giant McDonald's farm. You don't? No. No. That's not how I mean, we would know where that is. You know? Oh my God. You mentioned the slaughter going out of the McDonald's farm. How many fucking cows are losing in life? Yeah. But if I'm going to eat in McDonald's and he said, uh oh, you can find the good McDonald's. Like you just go with the good McDonald's in. But here there aren't any. They're all terrible. Interesting. And so it's a food distribution thing? I'm pretty sure. How are they getting bad beef in Texas? It's not bad beef, but it's just not the same. It's not consistent. It's not the exact same. So the process might not have this. Because the thing is it's not it's not great food. You eat in McDonald's because you know what you're going to get. Right. It's it's just like it does every other time you've had it. But it's not because it's the best. But when it so when you when you settle for McDonald's, right? And you just, you know, it's like you have a standard. It's like calling your ex, you know, it's like you settle for it. And it's not as good. You just like it. No. It's like it's got to taste like it. I'm expecting. Got it. You know, but it's just it's just off. Have you ever seen some people argue that restaurants are just who can cook the best sisco food? It's like all getting it from the same kind of distributor. Well, I think most of them are really. But it's I mean, that's it's really dwindling it down to the base of like that's not really what everything's happening. Yeah. Like I'm pretty sure if you see like Southwest egg rolls, like it's probably a 50% chance that that came from a Cisco freezer. You know that Mexican place you turn me on to one under. I know. That's a bomber. I can't believe it. All of ours. That was called. No, no. It's how it's called. Four bars places. It was called man, but it was incredible. It was so good. Yeah, maybe they just moved. Maybe I need to look with them. I forget the name of it. I don't know, man. I think they went under because they spent a lot of money on that place. Remember the artwork in that place? Yeah. Well, the location was not because they weren't near any other restaurant. It wasn't terrible though. Wasn't hard to find. Yeah, but it's still off the path of like any way. Like if you had to go over there, there was no other reason to go over there. Right. And we're right. It's been over there. But you go over there for a restaurant. Yeah. Like it seemed like they were packed when I was there. That's what it was confusing. They were they were but towards the end, it started being less and less. And it happens, man. People get excited about a new place. And it's popping at first and then it sort of dies off. But that's the first one of the first time I've seen a great restaurant go under that I like. I know. And quick. Yeah. It was probably a year. Yeah. It's a fucking tough business, man. That's a tough business. Yeah. And that was and that was started by a guy who like knew what he was doing. Whoa. That's how tough it is. Right. Don't you know that guy? Um, I met him. No. Okay. I met him there. Um, you know what I wish they would bring here as a bizarre meat. Oh, yeah. I mean, it's probably he probably would go to like a bigger city than Austin maybe. But well, he's got one in Chicago. He just opened up one in New York. Oh, really? Yeah. We had the one in Chicago. It was great. No. In the new one in Vegas. He's got a new one in Vegas. He moved spots. Oh, okay. It's really different. Yeah. Same deal. Oh, oh, sensational. Oh, sensational. Got to be sensational. Off the chart. Oh, probably. They always look. Yeah. They're great. Yeah. That's the Jose Andres came on the podcast. The head chef. Oh, word. He was great. Such a nice guy. Man, that guy genuine, like you want to talk about real charity. That guy genuinely goes to like war torn regions. Anywhere there's a some sort of a natural disaster. And he brings trucks and they start cooking and they feed people for free. They feed people that level of food. Yes. His food. His food. He loves helping people, like genuinely loves helping people and loves cooking for people. And he went to Poland and was catching the Ukrainian refugees when they were leaving Ukraine. These people were starving and he set up shop, start feeding them. That's that's how good a guy is. Yeah. He's a master. Master shop. Yeah. His restaurant's incredible. He came in here, he was making food for us while we're doing the podcast. Wow. Like he had a he had a he had a piece of ham. He was cutting off ham and shit. Oh, he had like that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm on the thin slice. Yeah. But that comes with like a span. Yeah, man. He gave me a whole leg. I took it home with me. Yeah. That way it'll last forever. It'll last forever. Yeah. Last forever. It's cured. Yeah. Bro, so good. It's so good. Good food's going to be the downfall of me. Yeah. But you could have both. Yeah, you got both. You just got to you got to have like you ever see the rocks cheat meals? Yeah. The Sundays of rock will have these legendary cheat meals. I don't know if he still does it, but he would post him on Instagram. It was like a stack of pancakes, giant chocolate chip cookies. No, but the rock shrunk down now. Like down there. Yeah. I think he got too big because he did that movie, the movie about Mark Kerr, the smashing machine. But by the way, it didn't get into the love it deserves. It's a really good movie. It's not just an MMA movie. It's a very realistic MMA movie too. It's like really like the rock is Mark Kerr. They even gave him like a forehead thing like a prosthesis. So he looked more like a Neanderthal like Mark Kerr does. I thought he was going to get a nomination for that. He gained 30 pounds of muscle or 22 prosthetics and trained an MMA camp to physically transform for his role as Mark Kerr. Look what he looked like. Scroll up so you can see what he looked like. Look what he looked like there. That's Mark. That's the actual mark and that's the rock next to him. But that's the rock obviously playing Mark when he was younger. Oh, is Mark Kerr still alive? Yeah. Yeah. He did my podcast recently. Oh. Yeah, man. That smashing machine documentaries. Curry. I thought the rock was going to be nominated. He should have. He should have. It's he did a fantastic job, but nobody watched it. It's one of those just slipped under it. If it comes out the streaming, I can't recommend it enough. It's a really good movie and it's not just an MMA movie. It's like there's moments in that movie where you get anxiety like, oh, my God, don't do that. Jesus Christ, what are you doing? It's one of those movies. It's crazy. But he does a phenomenal job. Phenomenal. You're not been nominated yet. They haven't come out. Oh, okay. No. He will. He should be for that. I don't think he will get, you know, it's hard. The Academy and the martial arts movie and it's like, you know, it's for me to head. Jamie, I'm surprised you ain't got no sponsorships with a search app. Hey, man. Actually, you literally know if you're looking shit up. Oh, they should call me. How much boy? Let's grab this bitch up. Let's get it. So tell everybody, name your special where they get it. Especially with his live from mothership, you can see it right now streaming on Netflix. You can also watch Don't Tell Thing just came out and you can come see me on tour brands and some comedy back. Come and my podcast B.S. with brands and also on YouTube and all the other show you. And I will see you in a few hours. We're going to have some fun tonight. Let's go. All right. Goodbye, everybody.