New York is the fourth biggest state in the US by population and inherently important place. It's embedded in the fabric of American history. It's the site of the largest city in North America, certainly in this country, New York City. So what happens in New York matters are 20 million people who live there. But what happens in state government goes pretty much ignored by the rest of the country, even within the state of New York. And there are a bunch of reasons for this. And one of them is it's very hard to listen to the governor, the current governor of New York, Kathy Hockel. Speak. It's an attack on her personally, but there are certain politicians you wonder. How did anyone vote for you? You're just very, very difficult to listen to. So we don't spend a lot of time previewing clips of Kathy Hockel talking. But here's one from right before Christmas of last year. This is December 17th, 2025, in which Kathy Hockel, governor of New York announces a massive progressive victory for the state. What could that be, wonder? Such a progressive place already they have every progressive right and program. The left theorist could devise what could they possibly be doing that they haven't already done well as of December 17th, 2025. New York state now allows doctors to kill its citizens, physician assisted suicide, euthanasia. That is now legal in New York. Kathy Hockel was pretty excited about it. Watch her announcement. It's fascinating. So I'm proud to announce that after weeks of negotiating with the legislature, we are now good in making medically and dying available to New Yorkers going forward. I believe we've crafted an elegant solution to a problem that people have fought for, but also wrestled with for a long time because I want you to not arrive at this lightly. My last thoughts were sitting at a funeral, a Catholic funeral Saturday morning, just past weekend. And I heard the priest talk about being called home to eternal life. And I realize we're not talking about ending life early or about ending dying early. We've crafted an elegant solution to the problem. Now what problem could Kathy Hockel be referring to? Well, the core problem of life, of course, is death. It's the fact that it ends. Fun as it is. There's an expiration date on it. And that's a problem that people neither created nor have been able to solve despite the best efforts of many for thousands of years. People still die. And Kathy Hockel clever and well funded though she is probably doesn't have a solution to the problem of death. And this bill does not of course solve the problem of death. It hastens death as she herself just said. So what does the problem Kathy Hockel has found a quote elegant solution for? Well, the problem is healthcare costs. And in New York they are very high. In fact, on average about 37% more than the national mean. So it's very expensive to deliver healthcare to the people of New York and there are a lot of different reasons for that. But the bottom line is this is something of a crisis, particularly in New York, given that people who add to tax receipts tend to be leaving and people who are a net drain on the state treasury tend to be staying and in fact moving there in large numbers. And so what do you do about that? You've made these promises to the population. We're going to take care of your healthcare because you've earned it. You deserve it. But you can't afford to do that. So there aren't that many options. You can walk back your promises and admit that we can't actually pay for this. That's not a winning solution. Or you can kill people. You can encourage people to die before they accrue higher healthcare costs and is widely known and often remarked upon. In many cases, the highest healthcare costs occur in the last weeks or months of life. As hospitals, doctors and nurses try their best to keep a dying patient alive and in the process spend an awful lot of money and if that's public money it's a problem. So if you can convince people that submitting to a shot from a doctor that kills them is a good thing. It's some kind of liberation. Hey, I've got an idea. We can kill you. This idea came to me in church. In a Catholic church during a funeral, I was meditating on the life of the deceased. I thought wouldn't it be great to make it easier for people to die? Such a great time here at the funeral. How can more people experience this? That's what Cathy Hockel said led her to this conclusion. But of course that's not true. The Catholic church, by the way, is opposed to euthanasia as is every Christian denomination. As is every Abrahamic religion, as is pretty much everybody in the world who doesn't live in a white country in the West. If you look at a map of where euthanasia and mercy killing physician assisted suicide, hastened death, killing by the state of its citizens in hospitals. If you look at a map of where that's legal, not in Asia, it's not happening in Africa. It's not happening in Russia. It's been banned there. It's not happening in Iran. It's against the law in Iran. No, it's happening in Western Europe, New Zealand, Australia, the United States and especially Canada. We're going to tell you a lot more about that in just a minute. Now, draw your own conclusions from that. What is it about the English-speaking world, the Anglo world, the white world that is made it so enthusiastic about suicide? And is it in fact enthusiastic about suicide or is it being led to that enthusiasm by people like Cathy Hockel? It's so hard to know. But what we do know is there is a direct relationship between the cost of health care and the enthusiasm with which people like Cathy Hockel promote state-sponsored killing. Because whatever else it is, and there are certainly moral debates to be had about suicide, which has been since the beginning of time, been considered the most ignominious and certainly the saddest and most traumatic way to exit this world. And leaving those debates aside, living in a modern socialized medical system is extremely expensive to the state and to insurers. It's a drag on GDP. And so if you can find a way out of that mathematical problem, that mess and branded as liberation, not just from your oppressors, but from life itself, it's a massive win. Now, that sounds kind of dark. There's no politician or leader who would actually wish death upon his own population in order to save money, right? There's no one in the West who considers people in his own country useless eaters in the famous phrase from Nazi Germany, the phrase that justified an almost identical program from 1939 to 1945 in which the Nazi government murdered hundreds of thousands of its own citizens because they weren't productive, liberating them from a life of suffering into who knows what, but getting them off the rolls. We wouldn't do that here. Well, actually, as it happens, more just in Europe alone, quite apart from New Zealand, Australia, Canada, the United States, just in Europe, the site of the Nazi regime, more Europeans have been killed by the state with euthanasia since the end of the Nazi regime than during it. Hmm. That's one of the lessons from the Holocaust. Apparently we didn't learn. It's not a good idea to give your government the power to kill people it considers useless. There's something about that that's prima facia grotesque, but the implications of it go far beyond the act of it. In other words, once you're allowed to consider your own citizens no longer worthy of life, God knows where it might end up. In fact, it always does. So in any case, you may be asking yourself, could this happen here? Really? It's so dark and gross. And obviously, evil. Anyone admit to that in public? Well, actually somebody did. So we're going to play you a clip from 2010 from the Aspen Institute meeting from July, I think July 8th, 2010 in Aspen, Colorado. It happens every year. It's a nonprofit organization where the deepest thinkers or their facsimiles congregate an Aspen to talk about where we should go next. Lots of chin tugging. Lots of porosity. Lots of cliches getting thrown around. But occasionally, the truth is told, particularly by the more artistic participants. And there's no one more artistic in the Aspen Institute class, of course, them Bill Gates. And that's not an attack on Bill Gates. In fact, it's said with gratitude because people like Bill Gates tend to say things out loud that other people wouldn't because it just emerges. So in 2010, Bill Gates made the case that, hey, we may get to a point where we have to impanel some kind of group of officials to decide, is it really worth the cost of keeping these people alive? And he actually said that. And the reason that we need to reassure you of that and actually play this clip is because over 10 years later, this clip reemerged. And it found its way under the internet and social media and all the people in charge basically had a connection. And Ben over backwards and forwards and sideways to tell you that this wasn't real, this was misinformation over at the Associated Press, the AP, the fabled newswire. They dispatched their misinformation reporter to back this down. No, don't believe your eyes. Bill Gates did not say this and he certainly didn't mean it. And there's nothing sinister about that. And if you think there is, you're the crazy person. And so it kind of died because when people are told that the thing they just saw isn't real and they're fools for believing it, it does even in the kind of most rigorously independent mind so that seat of doubt that maybe I'm misinterpreting this. But you're not misinterpreting it. You never were misinterpreting it. If you haven't seen this, watch here's Bill Gates in 2010. That's a trade-off society is making because of very, very high medical costs. And a lack of willingness to say is spending a million dollars on that last three months of life for that patient, would it be better not to lay off those 10 teachers and to make that trade-off and medical costs? But that's called the death panel. And you're not supposed to have that discussion. Oh, you're not supposed to have that discussion. Bill Gates would like to have that discussion. Of course, there's Bill Gates making the math-based argument that, hey, is it really worth it? Not this old person, this old person, no name, but just some old guy who's dying and all attempts to revive him and keep him alive are fruitless and stupid because he's not a billionaire. He doesn't have a dream of chrome. It's not worth keeping that guy alive. I mean, really, it's a surf, whatever. But we could take that money. Let's take us to million dollars, Bill Gates just said. Let's take some million dollars to keep this guy alive for a couple extra days when he's going to die anyway. And that's money that could be spent on teachers. By the way, you can tell how antique that clip is 16 years old because people were still saying in 2010, we need to do something about education in this country. Nobody thinks that now. There's no effort to reform American education who cares. You're sending your kids to a public school. That's your problem, surf. So all meaningful education reform efforts are basically dead. You go to a cocktail or dinner party with rich people. They're not fretting over the state of public education. They don't care because that's completely a class of people. And God knows what they do. They lip service to caring about them. Love black people so much. But we're not actually going to try to bring them into the rest of society with a decent education. We could have tried that for 60 years. It didn't work. Clearly, they're immune to it. And so we're going to kind of pretend that everything is fine and we're instead going to talk about what's going on at Trinity or Spenser, Buckley or whatever, our private schools we send our kids to. But anyway, back in 2010, that was still a kind of resonant debate point. We could use the money for education. It cost a million dollars. But what's so interesting and that's not probably wrong. It is very expensive at the end of life. And maybe we should reassess our understanding of death itself. And maybe we should have a conversation about what happens after death. And maybe people wouldn't be so desperate to say alive if there was a promise of living forever, if there was religious faith, there was a belief in something beyond the material. It wasn't just Amazon deliveries, but this like meant something. But we're probably past that at this point. From perspective of official America, the West, the leadership in every Western country, like this is all there is. And so living forever in this life in this body is the goal and they're trying, of course, famously to do that. So transhumanism is. But we're not having any of those conversations. Of course, there's a solace in death that there's nothing after death and how can you feel peaceful about it. It's just the end. Like what does this all mean? Nothing. So people get panicky and we spend. It's true, Bill Gates is right, an awful lot of money in the final weeks of life. But what's so interesting is we spend an awful lot of money and a lot of things. No one ever suggests that maybe that money could be spent, I don't know, on something more fruitful or decent or life-affirming. So for example, Bill Gates has a cost of million dollars theoretically to keep the average old surfer alive. Probably better is to have kill him. He clearly thinks that. But you don't hear Bill Gates say, well, it costs $4 million for a single patriot and missile. It costs over a billion for a patriot missile battery. We seem to be handing those out to Israel and Ukraine every week. We certainly did for many years. Maybe that money could be spent, I don't know, an education or on roads or on nicer airports or on public parks or libraries or anything other than killing people. You never hear that because it doesn't offend them because it's killing people and killing people makes them feel powerful. And in general, as you assess this debate over euthanasia and of life care, whatever we're calling it, keep in mind that it's not simply a debate about money and science. It's a theological debate and there's clearly a theological component to this, the enthusiasm that some bring, not all, but some bring to this debate, the enthusiasm with which they call for the deaths of other people, whether it's in Ukraine, whether it's in Iran, whether it's in your local hospice, is unusual. It's not rational actually. It's almost as if there are certain people who feel they derive power from controlling the deaths of others, even from causing the deaths of others. Actually, that's understating it. It's not that there are some people who seem as if the truth is there are a number of people who definitely do derive power from that. And it's not just Lindsey Graham. It's many. And there is a almost one to one connection between the people who are enthusiastic about sending complex missile systems to various parts of the world, so other populations can kill each other and the people who are enthusiastic about, I don't know, a board of people who are in the ocean on demand for its own sake, abortion, just a good thing, just a good thing, ending life a good thing, because it's freedom and euthanasia, all kind of connected. And there was a time when people studied things seriously, or the American version of seriously, slightly more seriously than say, Wikipedia entry, when it was widely understood that there was a connection between the Nazi euthanasia program, the Nazi murder of the Jews and gypsies and Poles, the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union, Operation Barbarossa, that these are all kind of connected, that people, like animals, once they taste blood, tend to be incited to draw more blood. It's a pretty recognizable principle. You see it all around you, but for some reason, since the Second World War has been reduced to a single story and codified in museums, there's really nothing else to learn, other than the Germans are bad, very few universal principles are drawn from the horrifying experiences of the Second World War and the horrifying behavior of the Nazis and of others, by the way, it wasn't just the Nazis who behaved like animals. It was a lot of people because war brings out the worst always, but those lessons are no longer taught, no universal lesson about anything is taught. It's always specific to a time and place into people and lost is the deepest of all truths, the most recognizable of all truths, which is the capacity for that kind of behavior resides in every human heart and in every soul, people are the problem, not one specific group of people, but all people, they can do this. And the willingness under certain circumstances to do this never goes away. It's inherent to people and that's why once again, more Europeans have been killed by the state and euthanasia programs since Hitler killed himself in April of 1945, then during the Nazi regime, which is not to say that modern European countries are not sea regimes. It's only to say that the capacity to kill the weakest, the inconvenient, the useless eaters among us, whether it's unborn children or the elderly or people with complex emotional problems, people who suffer from seasonal depression or whatever, anybody who's not pulling his own weight, anyone who's in a moment of weakness, who can't fight back, anyone who's annoying, anyone who's a burden, the temptation to kill those people to solve the problem once and for all resides in every human heart. And so it takes quite an active will to keep the ugliest of human desires at bay. It requires structures that prevent people from doing everything they are able to do. And the more power people have, the greater the range of horrifying possibilities. When you can do something, you're tempted to do it. And some of the things you do will be dark because that's the way people are have always been and always will be. And so for generations, in some cases, thousands of years, we have had structures in place to keep the powerful from abusing their power and those structures have disintegrated bit by bit over time. But and this is of course widely discussed. But one of the groups with the most power who are almost never acknowledged as powerful, who are more powerful than they've ever been in all of human history or physicians, healthcare workers, doctors and nurses, people with needles. They have the power of life and death more than any member of Delta Force, more than any FBI agent or capital police officer. They can decide whether you live and die. And this is obvious, of course, it's the nature of their job. And so a thoughtful responsible society sets up structures to make sure that they cannot abuse that power, not because all doctors are bad or nurses are bad, but because that's an awful lot of power to vest in any individual. And so you need to have rules to prevent those people from abusing them. And the medical profession for literally thousands of years since the ancient Greeks has had those rules and they're broad, but not maybe as broad as you think. It's called the Hippocratic Oath. And once again, it's been around since ancient Athens. And it's most famous line, first do no harm, doesn't actually seem to appear in the text. But you may be surprised to learn what does appear in the original text and how it has been changed. And because this tells us so very much about where we are right now, we thought it would be worth reading it. So here's an actual line from the Hippocratic Oath, the real Hippocratic Oath before it was rewritten post war in the West. And it says this, neither will I administer a poison to anybody when asked to do so, nor will I suggest such a course. Similarly, I will not give to a woman a medical instrument to cause abortion, but I will keep pure and holy both my life and my art. Thousands of years ago, wise people understood that the power to kill resided inherently in doctors and that the temptation to kill possibly the request of the patient would be ever present. But that crossing that line would turn the doctor from a healer into a killer. And in that process, the essence would be lost. You don't go to a killer to be healed. You can't. But that those several lines broad and general as they are proved too restrictive for the post Nazi but not really post Nazi medical establishment of the 1940s. And so they changed the post war medical establishment changed the language. Here's the new version of Hippocratic Oath and we're quoting this directly. It may also be within my power to take a life. This awesome responsibility must be faced with great humbleness and awareness of my own frailty. Oh, so we go from you cannot kill people. Your job is to heal them even if they ask you to kill them. You can't do that because that is crossing a line from what you cannot return. You are no longer a healer, but a killer. And that was in place for thousands of years. And then we get to post Nazi, but not really post Nazi. We get to yeah, you can kill people. But as you kill people, just remember that you're only human. Is it possible to remember that you're only human as you're taking a human life? Probably not because by definition, you assume a facsimile of God like power. You are ending life. You are the destroyer, she with a destroyer. And so that is the temptation. More powerful attention than sex or money, the ultimate temptation, the temptation to extinguish life. And we have granted that without really any oversight at all to our entire medical class. And it's interesting to note that after the much discussed and written about and publicized atrocities of the Nazi euthanasia program, very few of the physicians involved in it were punished somewhere somewhere hung. But many, the overwhelming majority were not. And in fact, some of them doctors who had killed children who admitted killing children because they weren't smart or they were in institutional care. So they just killed them, starve them to death, injected them with poison. Those doctors not only escape punishment after the war, but in some cases in Austria, for example, became very famous, very prominent physicians testified in court as experts. We're looked to as the person you would go to in a court of law for the truth about medicine and medical ethics. So they weren't punished because they're not actually doctors. Very priest class, very much like the Aztecs or the Incas or any human sacrifice based religion has a priest class. And their job is to decide not who lives or dies, but when their job is not too heal, but too kill. And that's where their power comes from. So if you're wondering, could this happen in our country? Oh, yes, it is. Would doctors go along with it? Oh, absolutely. In fact, they are. And there's nothing to stop them. But then you asked yourself a way to second, could this really happen at scale? Isn't euthanasia kind of the thing that only desperate people reach for? You get ALS, stage four pancreatic cancer, some horrifying illness whose end is certain. There's no treatment for ALS. There's usually no treatment for stage four pancreatic cancer, except in rare cases, same with lung cancer. Same with any of the illnesses that people you know and love have died from. At a certain point, you know what's coming. And you know, part of what's coming is awesome and horrifying, horrible, grueling suffering that you as someone who's not undergone it yet can't fully imagine, but dread. Well, that is the most human response possible. Nobody wants to go through that kind of suffering. And nobody wants to see a loved one go through that sort of suffering and be diminished. There's control of himself, loses mind as you do with dementia. These are the most basic things that people fear. And so if you approach those people who are right to be afraid of that level of suffering, there's no minimizing it. It's every bit as bad in some cases as we imagine it is. If you approach those people and say as Cathy Hockel did, well, we've got a solution. We have an elegant solution to a problem. We can hasten death. We'll just kill you. Of course, they won't say that. You imagine that only in those cases would it be used. Now, it may be worth pausing to ask, why is there so much suffering in death? Why is there so much suffering in childbirth? Clearly this is a matter of design, not all animals suffer in childbirth. Not all animals seem to suffer in death, but people do. They suffer in the way in and they suffer in the way out. Is there a reason for that? Is there a purpose behind the designers or something to learn from that experience of suffering? These are not questions we ask in a materialist society, whereas shallow is a coffee stain. No one even considers questions like that. Previous civilizations have thought a lot about this and have reached very different conclusions, but in a society based on the avoidance of pain, the easy prescription of pain-killing drugs. No one even entertains these questions. But the one question, even if you dismiss all of that as metaphysical nonsense, the one question you should be asking is, hey, if applied nationally could physician-assisted suicide extend beyond people with ALS and stage four pancreatic in a soft and geocancer and all the normal horrible diseases that people you know get and die from? Is it possible that government officials and physicians and nurses would be so unethical or so morally ungrounded that they would allow pretty healthy people or depressed people or people who could get better with treatment that is just too expensive for the state to provide? Those people to be killed, well, we don't have to guess about this because euthanasia, state-sponsored killing of its own citizens has been in place for more than 10 years in Canada, which in case you're not familiar with it is the second largest country in the world, which is directly above us. We share the longest land border on earth with it. It's our largest trading partner. It's also the most resource dense country in the world. In some ways, it's the richest country in the world that has the most natural resources to population of any nation on the planet. Canada is inherently important to the United States and to the world not that you would know that because no one approaches it that way, but that's just inherently true. There's no changing that. So in Canada, a place that we ignore as a matter of policy. In Canada, the so-called made program medical assistance in dying has been the law per the Supreme Court of Canada since 2016, almost 11 years. And in that time, over 100,000 Canadians have been killed by their government. And what's interesting about this is that in a country with fewer than 40 million people, that's now a leading cause of death. That is one of the leading ways that Canadians die. They are killed by their government. That's the first thing you notice. That's an incredibly large number. We haven't bothered to get the calculator out to do the proportion in the United States, but 100,000 in the country of fewer than 40 million. What would that mean in a nation of 350 million? That's a lot of people in 10 years. That's a huge number of people. How could 100,000 Canadians be killed by the Canadian government over the last 10 years? And you may not even know that happened. Most Canadians are not aware that that happened. In fact, that number 100,000 was not advertised by the government. They did a lot to keep that secret. That government number was unearthed by a private researcher, Kelsey Sharon, who were going to speak to in a minute, who's one of the only people in the entire nation of Canada was paying attention to this. But make no mistake, this is what matters. If you're trying to assess what's important in the news today, could it be some pop stars wedding at Madison Square Garden or the fact that 100,000 people were just killed by their government right north of us? Really go with the latter because when you really get down to it, what matters is who lives and who dies? Those are final decisions. Right north of us probably go with the ladder because when you really get down to it, what matters is who lives and who dies? Those are final decisions. And if you want to judge whether a country is thriving, you look at that question through a bunch of different measurements, birth rate, life expectancy, etc. etc. Suicide rate. And of course, the number of citizens that government kills. And by those measures, there is no darker country probably on the planet Earth than Canada. Again, the countries that we describe as rogue and outlaw and out of control and run by religious extremists, whether it's Russia or North Korea or Iran, certainly not a compliment to those countries to just say none of them have killed 100,000 of their citizens in the last 10 years. That's not an advertisement for North Korea or Russia, but it's just a fact. But Canada has. The second thing you notice is who's getting killed by the government? So in Canada, the overwhelming majority of the people killed over 95% of the Canadians killed by the Canadian government have been white legacy Canadians. And that's interesting because Canada is just over a little half white at this point. Demographic replacement in Canada has been so brisk, so overwhelming over the past 20 years that a country that was 98% white in 1981 is just a little over half white now. Whatever you think of that, that happened in 40 years, really unprecedented in human history. But you would think that government statistics on death would pretty much match government population stats. In other words, if let's say Canada is 59% white, that the number of people killed by the government in the state sponsored suicide program would be about 59% white. But that's not what you find at all. You find that they're all white, almost all the people who got killed by the government are white. And by the way, you also find that in the United States. The United States is what 60% white, something like that, 95% of the Americans killed by physician assisted suicide are white. Now, if this were any other measure other than physician assisted suicide euthanasia, there would be a press conference by every big city mayor the nation about this. This is outrageous. If 95% of pick anything, plumbers, truck drivers, astrophysicists were white, it would be a national emergency. But when 95% of the people killed by the state are white, well, what is that? Well, go to Google AI and ask them, why is that? Well, it's because whites, and this is almost a verbatim quote from Google AI, because whites have a long history of disproportionate better access to health care to health care. Now, keep in mind, that's in response to a question about why 95% of the people who were killed by doctors in the United States were white. And the answer is because they're privileged. So profound is their privilege historically that they get killed in much higher numbers. So in other words, even in death, they bear the shame of their privilege, even in death, they are mocked for being privileged. You would hope that as this spreads across the United States, and it will, this is a top priority for, well, the death lovers in this country, making sure that every American state hastens the deaths of its well, 95% white population, you would think that there would be some outcry, some pushback. But in Canada, if that's a measure of what's to come here in the United States, there really hasn't been. In fact, not only has there been no pushback from organized clergy, from political figures, from ordinary people, there've been no mass demonstrations, 100,000 of your citizens are killed by the state in 10 years, and no one has a protest about it. Nope. Nobody. And part of that is just native to the kind of Anglo worldview, Anglo's always evictions, their own politeness, right? Don't want to complain, 100,000 people killed. Don't want to say anything about it. Don't rock the boat. And also a product of the kind of tragic herd instinct that derives from thousands of years in the British Isles, the conformity of the Anglo mind allows tragedies like this to happen. But whatever the cause of it, you would think that people would at least notice it or push back against it or say, hey, this is really a good idea because of course in Canada, almost all the suicides of people who aren't terminally ill and even in some cases who are are the results of poverty. The Canadian healthcare system, which the Canadian is bragged about for generations, and this is not a political point or an ideological point, doesn't work. It doesn't provide the care. It promised it is collapsing. And people who are pushing for universal healthcare in the United States are very hesitant to admit that or even notice that it's happening, but it is happening. It's happening in the UK too with the NHS, the National Health Service. It is collapsing. It does not provide the care that it promised. Now, could universal healthcare work theoretically show me where it has? You can't because it hasn't worked. But it has made solutions like, hey, let's just kill them very easy because it is stated minister, the entire healthcare system in Canada and the UK are stated minister. Once the state decides we're going to save money just by killing people rather than treating them, it makes short work of it, just like the Nazis did. Exactly like the Nazis did. Sorry. So in Canada, there's been no pushback. And in fact, it hasn't just been the state promoting the killing of useless eaters. It has been the business community jumping on board. Here's an actual advertisement from a couple of years ago from Simon's department stores in Montreal, promoting, celebrating the killing of a young Canadian woman who had a genetic disorder that caused joint inflammation. It was not a fatal condition, it caused her pain. She couldn't get treatment for it. And so she decided to submit to being killed by a doctor in Canada. Here's how Simon's department store described it. Here's the ad they ran on Canadian television. Dying in a hospital is not what's natural. That's not what's soft in these kind of moments. You need softness. When I imagine my final days, I see music. I see the ocean. I see cheesecake. Even now, as I seek help to end my life with all the pain and in these final moments, there is still so much beauty. You just have to be brave enough to see it. Man, it's so affirming. That's the greatest thing I've ever done is led myself to be killed by a Canadian doctor. It's really, it's the ultimate liberation. It's like cheesecake. It's true freedom. Now, that ad was voiced over by the woman who was killed by a Canadian doctor or nurse or healthcare provider. Healthcare, used by the way, killing you is now healthcare. In the same way bombing a girl's school in Tehran is healthcare. In the same way, every inmate on death row is awaiting healthcare. It's healthcare. It's like abortion is healthcare. Another health nor care. But that woman's name was Jennifer Hatch and she was in search of actual healthcare, which is to say she had a disorder, not apparently a fatal disorder, but a painful disorder, a life diminishing disorder. And she wanted healthcare from the Canadian government as she was promised and into which she had paid her entire life. And so she went to the Canadian government to get healthcare and she couldn't find any. And we know this because she said so on camera. Shortly before she was driven to die and encouraged to die by the Canadian government because hey, it's pretty expensive to keep you alive, even though she was otherwise a young, fairly vigorous woman. And she said, I'm out of options. I can't get healthcare. They're telling me I can't get the maid program. They can't help me, but they can kill me. And in telling her that the Canadian government as it so often has, and you're about to hear the details in a moment, applied pressure in the same way the Canadian government, the US government applied pressure to the rest of us take the COVID Vax. It's not for you. It's for those around you for the ones you love. It's for your elderly grandparents or you a good person standing around as a useless eater taking a box of gent much needed resources. We could be hiring teachers, but we're keeping you alive. Is that really what you want your legacy to be selfishness? Pigishness taking it all for yourself? No. No, do the right thing. Exit with dignity. This is compassion. This is liberate. Let us kill you. And in that final sacrifice, your life will have meaning because you will be hiring new teachers in Alberta. You'll be paving a road in Nova Scotia. You'll be doing something good. And by the way, it tastes like cheesecake. That's the case they made to Jennifer Hatch. That's the case they made to 100,000 other Canadians. But make no mistake, the state exists to uplift and help its people to love them as a father loves its children. Any instance in which the state kills its people is a perversion of the basic arrangement of the social contract. It is disgusting by its nature. It is always a perversion of the deal when the state kills its citizens, particularly ones who have done nothing wrong other than be poor or not have housing or have some disease they inherited. And your answer is to kill them. You are the criminal if you are doing that. If that is your conclusion, that's not an elegant solution to a problem. That is a crime for which you should be punished immediately. Killing people is wrong. Killing people who committed no crime is the most wrong thing and killing the poor because they are poor or the sick because they are sick is impossible for the human mind to rationalize or excuse. And our leaders are doing it. They are celebrating it. They're telling us it's like cheesecake when it is the worst possible perversion of their duty as our leaders. Eating right is pretty important, but it's hard if you live here about half of the American diet is ultra processed foods. And that hurts you. Fake food harms your body, your mind, and especially your liver. So people think that feeling sluggish and foggy and bloated is just what it is to be older. But that's not true. Eating crap makes you feel that way. While our friends at Dose have a solution, it's called dose for your liver. This doctor approved plant-based liver supplement is clinically proven to promote liver function and lower liver and zine levels. That means you're less bloated, less tired. You feel more like yourself. All you need to do is take a daily two-ounce shot, taste like orange juice, an easy shot of liquid. It's not the vax. People we know use dose for your liver and they have seen rapid results that are blood work and they feel much, much better. The difference is very obvious. Lots of brands claim to support liver health, but do so before their products have gone through testing. This has been tested. Everything checks all the boxes. Visit dosedaily.co slash Tucker use the code Tucker for 35% off. That's dosedaily.co slash Tucker. Code Tucker 35% off. You're going to love it. So with that, here's a conversation that we just had with one of the very few people in Canada who is paying attention to the subject and she is possessed as you will find in just a moment by a kind of holy passion. She seems to feel like the only person in her entire nation who was noticing this 100,000 people dead and no one says anything about it. Her name is Kelsey Sharon and she says a lot about it. Watch this. Kelsey, thanks for doing this. Thanks for having me. I've been searching for a long time to find someone who can explain what is happening in Canada. This is the biggest thing happening in Canada. I would say in North America and no one talks about it. So let's start at the beginning. Your Canadian, your group in Ontario, when was the first moment you remember hearing of this made program? So that would have been roughly around when it was legalized in 2016 when the Carter versus Canada case came forward in 2015 and then it was legalized in 2016. I had seen a new Supreme Court decision that legalized it. Yes, yes, because there's no way you're going to get a population to believe this unless you just strong arm the government or a court system. We had we've had this same thing. I feel like I've seen you guys have this issue. So it was actually a newspaper article about this girl who wanted this lady who wanted to die. And I remember actually thinking to myself, well, I mean, if you want, that makes sense, at least she's not going to jump off a bridge. That's my initial without any deeper thought looking into the process at all. Because I think normal people are hesitant to judge. At least that's how I've always felt like I'm not facing that. Right. Right. And I don't really it's hard for me to judge the behavior of someone who's desperate and suffering. Well, and that said exactly. And then you start to realize what it is and we'll get into that. But the first time I saw it was roughly around that period. And then again, it came up for me in 2020, 2021 when I got a phone call from a friend who's another veteran and he was like, Hey, Kelsey, whenever our guys was just offered made. And I said say again, and he goes, he was offered made. He called because he had PTSD in a TBI's traumatic brain injury. And he was a special operations dude. And he was asking for help. And the guy suggested made. And at first he thought he had suggested like a maid service because sometimes the VA will give us this and called VIP benefits where they'll give you X amount of dollars per year. Someone did tidy up your kitchen. Correct. I have it. I have somebody who comes and helps me because my friends that's different from the government killing you. I mean, I just yeah, but it wasn't advertised as such. But at the time in 2021, that's when the track two came in. So again, we'll get into that. But that was the first time I heard of it. And he said, I think you should talk to him, put him on your show. And I was like, okay, by then my show, the Kelsey shared perspective had started to get some traction. I was talking to a lot of veterans about resiliency. And he goes, I have an audio recording. I said, hold up. You have proof of this. He's like, yeah, so I listened to the audio recording. And it was a Veterans Affairs case manager who was just straight up offering him euthanasia. Now, to be clear, it was never a legal mandate of Veterans Affairs. They still hold to this day, even when I testified in front of the Senate on the largest veteran suicide study just last year. Senator Casey called me a liar rate to my face. Great people, those liberals. And what happened was they said there was only four people. They said they had only offered it to four people. Another friend in mind, Christine Goethe, you had heard about her. She wanted wheelchair ramps. She was a Paralympian. She's very famous for that story. They offered her euthanasia. Another friend in my marketing was she asking for a wheelchair wrap? They said, we can't give you a wheelchair and but we can kill you. Absolutely. Mark, Minkie, they, I believe they said it would be easier than blowing your brains out on the wall. And so all of these veterans had gone and testified, they did a very quick inquiry into this. They said, oh, it was one case manager in one location. I'm like, were these phone conversations? Yes. Christine was also a documentation and French and English. And so as soon as I heard that I felt this deep rage real deep because when I came home from overseas, I started brass in unity based on suicide prevention because I knew I couldn't run a nonprofit, but I knew I wanted to help my friends, but I didn't know how. So I figured if I could create a product to be like the vehicle, I could then take that product, not vehicle and put it in the like the hands of the people doing the work, like boot campaign or defenders of freedom, you know, like these other organizations that are genuinely helping veterans. So I figured, okay, create the company, do the thing. And in my mind, well, then that can help suicides go down. That's just the logic I was wrapping around. Because you thought at the time that we were all against suicide. Yeah, because I mean, at the time you had Bell Let's Talk. I don't know if you know who Bell the conglomerate is. They're like one of the largest telecommunications companies in the globe. They monopolize everything. But Bell Let's Talk would have this thing where once a year, they would raise a bunch of money, it called Bell Let's Talk. Promotes talking about it so that you don't do that. I'm not sure if I can say the word suicide is okay on this platform. I don't want you to. Well, suicide is totally immoral. But yes, but we can describe it. It's an English word. Yeah. Okay. Okay. What's that? You're not, you're not allowed to use that word in Canada. I'm demonetized on YouTube for a lot of words. I can't say suicide. I can't say like if I say euthanasia or I say death cult instead of, you know, people who promote euthanasia, again, I get slapped a lot. Oh, because it's not a conspiracy to commit genocide. Obviously. That's why everyone's in on it and talking about it is the prime. Exactly. Exactly. Okay. So I had felt this like deep disdain. And I took it really personally and I said, well, I can do one of two things really well. I can yell really loud and I can make a lot of noise. And the fact that I hadn't heard about this and the fact that it had already got to track to from track one, the fact that it had been expanding and being discussed to expand to mature minors, which by the way, isn't an age. We'll get into that. It's actually just a mindset. And then children zero to one, I thought to myself, if I'm going to make an impact in this world, it's after COVID took my company. I figured, okay, you know, then at least I can do is I can do this. And so then I just vowed from that moment forward to be a resource for everybody to tell everyone story to yellow, but as loud as I can to become as educated and well-researched as possible and then to give my life over to this, because I believe I am survived what I survived for something greater. And people can say that's conceded or, you know, I'm sure there's a million words people use for me, but I believe I'm being currently, as I sit right now, used as a vessel to do this thing. And that's why I was so willing to do what I did yesterday. And they're like, well, we can reschedule us. There's no rescheduling. There's no rescheduling. There's a reason everything happens. And I believe that I was challenged last night when they cancel my flight to say, how badly do you want to change this? How badly do you want to do this? It's badly enough to drive all night. And I'm grateful that you did. Can you describe what this is? So you said you first heard of this right after it became legal, but you didn't think about it for several years until you got a call from a veteran who'd been offered death instead of like help. What was the description of made when you first heard it? How did they solve it? Yeah, this was beautiful. Gosh, marketing is a beautiful list in language. I wrote a lot in my new book about language and how we manipulate language and language can just make anybody do anything. And that's how cults start. And so they started utilizing the language of dying with dignity. It is a dignified thing to end your life. So that number one, you're not a burden on society. You're not a burden on people. And well, frankly, you're not a burden on the system. Right. And wouldn't it be lovely if you Tucker could make the choice that when you're starting to deteriorate, you don't have to have your wife changing your diapers. Wouldn't it be a beautiful thing if you could just go into an appointment, a doctor will put two IVs in your arms. And then they sell you this just provable lie that it is a painful, a painless and beautiful process because Tucker, you can even bring your family members and they can all witness it to. And that's why they developed a children's book so they could manipulate the next generation. Children's book, dying with dignity. And I believe it's one of the, you know, the grief, the grievous groups developed a children's book that's available on dying with dignity's website. I know I'm like advertising for these people. They're like a death cult. I'm well, not like a death cult. No, they are the they are like a, they're a children's book promoting. Yeah. So what it is, it's like a coloring book that and it talks about the process of how you're going to feel when you watch the person that you love die. What is that going to look like conversations you could have with them? Little coloring parts, you can know, you know, they it's a real thing. And so, you know, Tom and I were discussing, it's like it's kind of like the trans movement, right? They target kids and go up. And then for made, they target elderly and go down. It's no different. It's a social contagion. It's a problem. So many questions. But when you first heard this, the idea was if you're a good person and you want to spare your loved ones, terminally ill, terminally ill, terminally ill. Only. Okay, so this is really important to highlight. I'm going to explain why because the United States is doing this in 13 states and one jurisdiction already. But they're only doing terminally ill track one. Now, that's how it was sold to us two Tucker. It's only going to be grandma. It's only going to be the people who are going to die within a couple weeks or even a shorter period of time. And we were never going to expand. We're never, we would never, we would no reason to ever expand this, right? Because this is truly just for, for relief of suffering. Yeah. Okay. Cut to 2021, track two roles in well, track two, you don't have to be dying anymore, Tucker. You just got to have something that's intermediate or grievous. How did that work? Is this something that you're legislated on? It was court again. It was another situation just like who were the, who were the judges who okay this I don't know the judges at the time, but it would be worth looking them up. Yeah, the court cases are always brought forward by dying with dignity. They're worth around $9 million. They're funded by the Canadian liberal government as well. They have a ton of donors. Dying with dignity is the pro death. They're the cult. The pro death lobby group, but they're funded by the government. They get a lot of funding from the liberal government. A lot of funding, like a decent amount. Yeah. And then they, they spend that said funding and go around and defame me to universities and schools and media and outlets and then. Defame you. Yes. What do you have to do with it pointing out that they're a cult and that they're promoting murder and suicide. And they're also doing it on meta. They spent, you know, I look at the financials. They spent $800,000 advertising on Facebook. I can't sell a bullet piece of jewelry that promotes suicide prevention because it's ammunition technically, but they can promote euthanasia and killing your loved one while your whole family watches. And they do it with a beautiful photo, by the way, of a gentleman in the woods surrounded by an entire group of people with a lathe over his arm with a doctor sitting there like this. Inflation makes credit card statements, particularly scary. You work 40, 50 hours a week just by groceries and gas. Things you, you should be able to afford without thinking that much about it. Then the bank's charged you 20% interest. The system is designed to keep you underwater. It's working, but there's another option. Our friends in American financing are doing something the big banks despise. They are helping people. Mortgage rates in the fives supporting the American dream of homeownership, and they're showing homeowners how to take their hard-earned equity to wipe out high interest debt. Now we're against debt in general, but in this economy, most people have no choice at all. So don't go bankrupt and sleeving yourself to a lender. Average savings are right $800 a month, and it takes only 10 minutes to talk to a salary-based mortgage consultant. Now upfront fees or obligation to see how much you can save. Give American financing a call, 800-685-5696. That's 1-800-685-5696. Visit Americanfinance.net slash Tucker. America's home for home loans. Can I ask you at any point in this propaganda push did anyone ever mention what happens after death? I don't think they care to have that conversation because then the morality conversation would have to come and they'd have to re-face it. Every society since the beginning of recorded history has obsessed over. In fact, organized its society around everyone, the idea of what happens after death because everyone ever believes has always believed because it's real that this is not the end. So kind of weird push death without any mention of what happens after. Because I don't believe these people, I know it sounds very aggressive and I'm not even being facetious when I state this. I believe these people, these organizations, their souls are tainted, something's wrong, something's dark. If you've ever stood in front of you. But does the Canadian government ever say, like, is there any, is the assumption that that's just it, that there's nothing in the non-material world that there's no afterlife? There's no spiritual dimension to anything. It's just pure, but you're just a lump of meat and then you stop breathing. Well, I mean, it's, they only really see you as a dollar in Canada. We know that we've seen that in the way that healthcare system currently works. I wouldn't even call it a healthcare system anymore. I call you to waiting lists you die on, which is, and that the numbers prove that that's not an aggressive statement again over 23,000 people in 2024 died just on waiting lists alone. Our hospital, like waiting rooms are 14 to 18 hours. We had over 2,000 14 to 18 hours. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. It frequently a lot of places. And I'm not exaggerating. The hospital I just gave birth in, which I chose I had to, I was trying to have her at home that I just gave birth in, had closed 11 times in three months because they were either short staffed or funding or now our nurses are on strike. Like it's, it's, it's actually really horrific. We do not have healthcare. We have death care. And the reason why people are choosing death care is because we don't have healthcare. The Canadian healthcare system, universal healthcare, we was the thing that every Canadian bragged about for 50 years. It was the thing that American liberals wanted to emulate. It was the thing I've never stopped hearing about my entire life. We have universal healthcare. Right. We have universal healthcare, but you will die on the waiting list. Like I was just telling Tom again, like I had a really, really, really aggressive knee injury, like a year and a half ago. And I panicked because I was like, oh my God, I'm, this is going to be years. I'm not going to get surgery to him close to 40. And I wasn't even exaggerating. And the only reason I could is because I called the mentor who called the team, who called another team who called the doctor and jumped my list. Yeah. Like that's, you have to know somebody now to not die or you have to come to America. I mean, you've got so many people now just coming down to the States. I come down to the States. I would rather pay it a pocket. Canadians have this perception. Well, first off, they have Trump, Trump deranged syndrome because Mark Carney's a nightmare and he has been doing everything he can to collapse our nation. But it started with Trudeau, don't get me wrong. I know all about his misgivings. But Mark has done everything he can to make Canadians hate America. So the idea of us having healthcare similar to America, well, you're going to be bankrupt for the rest of your life. I'm like, I have come down here and walked into a clinic when I was doing ayahuasca and had to get a blood test and a paid $140 and then I left. But the one dimension of your healthcare system that seems pretty responsive is the kill you part. It's hyper responsive if you're track one. So if you're track one, that means you're going to die within a very short period of time, you're terminally ill, right? And that's the qualifier is your terminally ill. And who makes that assessment? So there are roughly just over 2200 doctors and nurses in Canada that run under CanMap's program and are qualified. CanMap is the Canadian assessors of made, I think made practitioners. It's okay. So it's the people who are adventurers. Yeah. It's the people who train the killers. And they teach them, they teach them a curriculum that we legally can't see, even though they're a nonprofit and Canadian taxpayers paid for that. But we can't see the curriculum. They won't let us see it. Do you know their names? Yeah, Dr. Stephanie Green started it. She's not, I don't think she runs it anymore. There's another individual that runs it. And then you've got people like Ellen Weeb and then you have a list of dogs. You said Ellen Weeb. Ellen Weeb is the largest killer of our country. She's killed over a thousand people since the process started. She's killed a thousand people. Yeah, she's only publicly admitted it to the national post to 400. And then they told her to stop saying the number because she was bragging about it, saying it was the most beautiful work she'll ever do and she'll never stop until the day she dies. She also does abortions mainly actually actually. It's in the national post. It's very public. She's also stated on the better off dead documentary with Liz Carr. And it's, you guys can watch it. It's very out there. Everything I say is just very public. People just don't have the energy time or ability to look at it because the country is collapsing around them and they're just trying to keep food on the table. So Ellen, I went to an event on Salt Spring Island. Last year, I believe it was with a girlfriend of mine, Alicia Duncan, whose mother was murdered with maid. And can we stop calling it made for a second? Can I call it what it is? It's medical murder. And I think that what happens with languages when we soften language, we continue to allow it to exist. So made his medical murder and Alicia's mother was murdered with it. And so Alicia and I become really close friends. I helped break her story on my podcast. And for some reason, people will tell me their stories. And she trusted me with it. And I really appreciated that. After that, I vowed to always make sure her mother's name was known and that we will do everything we can to stop this. So we became close friends and she goes, Hey, there's a talk on Salt Spring Island. You want to go. I was like, hell yeah, I want to go. So we got mustaches, fake mustaches and we went and. think we can to stop this. So we became close friends and she goes, Hey, there's a talk on Salisbury. Ellen, you want to go. I was like, hell yeah, I want to go. So we got mustaches, fake mustaches and we went. And I thought that maybe that would hide us in the room of 65 plus people. We were hats and handle bar mustaches. Who were the people? These were people on the island who were hardcore left liberals who went there as an information session. So dying with dignity will go to libraries. They will go to hospitals. They will go to school like universities, death, doula programs. They will go to churches. By the way, I broke that story when we'll get into the country. I didn't know of a Scotia last year. I broke a story because the RCMP sent an email out to over 800 members. That's the police. Yes, that's the federal police. They sent an email out to over 800 members advertising a mate medical murder session where they could come and learn about it. To a bunch of people with PTSD. And then they thought that was okay. Why would the country's federal law enforcement agency be promoting euthanasia? It was the veteran. It was the association. It wasn't the federal police themselves. It was the RCMP veteran association. They also hate that I just said that I know that for fact. They're going to lose their rent. Because I outed them. And so a member who was on the board who runs that association found out and found my phone number and emails me and he goes, can I call you? And so I was in the studio. I said, yeah, I don't know who you are. But give me a call. Call me. Send me all the proof. And I said, are you okay if I use your name? Otherwise, they're not going to believe me. And so I kept use my name. And this was a guy who was willing after 30 years doing everything to be like, I've had enough. And his local church was hosting this. Now the church said they were affiliated. And then the doctor that promoted it is apparently a neurologist in the area who has some of of the worst reviews I've ever seen, but he also provides euthanasia. So he also medically murders. How many doctors in Canada kill their patients currently? Roughly it's around 2,200 and like a and give or take a few other names public. So here's the thing, they will not publicize their names for safety reasons. So I have been compiling. So how were they going to be put on trial at the end of their will be? But I will make good be no, but they will because I have made it explicitly clear on my show on other shows in my writing on my sub stack everything they do around the subject, which is my entire life. I have told them I will find your name. Like it's very like I have to say in a very non threatening way, but I guess my tone and face is just genuinely threatening, but I will find your name. I will find out where you work. I will let everyone in the province know where you are and I will make sure that you don't kill another person the second I know your name. Because once I know your name, I'm going to make sure that by the time you die because you're way older than me, that your family, your last name and everything you've ever done in touch will be associated as a eugenicist and a murderer. Like I play I have like so the ideas that you can kill people in Canada. Yes, but you get to remain anonymous because it would be dangerous to you to have your identity. Some of these doctors, they some of these doctors, they publicly talk about it. They'll say their names. They're proud of it. They brag about it because they say that how dare I because I look perfectly fine, right? I look like the stereotype where how dare you who's never suffered day in your life have the audacity to tell everyday people that they should not have the right to remove their suffering. I said, well, jokes on you there, kiddo, there's a bridge. It's always existed. I never want you to do it. But at what point did we stop seeing people at the edge of the bridge? At what point did we knock over them and grab them and hold them and say, I got you, I'm going to fix this. You don't see euthanasia. euthanasia to me. At least you never just talking about this. euthanasia to me is seeing the person on the bridge and pushing them. Of course that's all it is. That's all it is. And people don't like that comment because they're like, well, now you're promoting suicide. Like there's this group. I won't say that people say that you're promoting suicide. Oh my gosh. Yes. So there's this group. I won't say their name because they refuse to give them press and they threaten me all the time. They've been going after my sub stack now. They've been getting my stuff demonetized. They've been going after my YouTube and trying to get YouTube. They've downgraded my trust score so bad. My subscribers can't even find me. And so. And just to restate your crime is pointing out that a Canadian's are being killed by the tens of thousands. My entire crime, not even military. Just existence is because I spend from the moment I wake up to the moment I go to bed and then everybody who talks to me who's dead in my dreams is that I expose these people for being the psychopathic serial killers that they are. And then they go, well, how does Kelsey make her money? Well, if we take down the Kelsey perspective, if we take down her sub stack, if we take down all these things that she's got nothing, she got no voice and she got no money to protect herself. And that's what they're actively working on doing right now. Well, having life insurance is one of those things that helps you sleep better at night. Something where to happen to you. What exactly would happen to your loved ones? Your children. We've heard so many stories of families losing a parent and having their life insurance policy save their financial lives. That's the whole point of it. It makes all the difference in the world. The next question becomes, well, how do I get life insurance? That's where ethos comes in. A company we're proud to partner with ethos makes securing a life insurance plan fast and easy and a hundred percent online. People don't get it because it's a hassle and it's expensive. This solves that problem. You get a quote in seconds, apply in minutes and get same-day coverage. There is no medical exam. Use answer for a few simple health questions, then you can get up to $3 million in coverage. Some policies is low as $30 a month. Takes about 10 minutes to get covered. Life insurance through ethos, free quotes are available now at ethos.com slash chuckery. ethos.etshos.com slash chuckery rates and obviously application times may vary. But it's great. Can you, and I should have asked you earlier, can you just walk through the experience of maid? I'm a Canadian. I have some, what kind of ailment do I need? If you want it depends. If you want to be a track one, can you? And then what happens? For example, if you're track one, say you're terminal, you've got cancer, you're going to kick it in the next, I know it's very non-compassionate. Just go with me here. You're going to kick it in the next like couple weeks, right? Well, pallets of care numbers are horrible in the country because people are being defunded like the Delta Hospital society because they won't do medical murder in their locations. So then they won't get government funding, right? Because pallet of care is expensive. It's timely. It's a lot of people. It's cumbersome. So what will happen is you, you, and this is the legal way, but we know this isn't always true because we can prove it, right? So it is supposed to be you, the person, the individual has to ask for it, right? But we know because of the 400 non-compliant cases in their Ontario corner report that Dr. Ramelco Ramona Coello pointed out, which is factually on paper, that there was over 400 non-compliant cases, meaning people were coerced into it. They were pushed into it, where they thought they had no other way out. So what would happen is I call up the phone, you would say, hey, I would like to get made. And then they would then refer you. You can call them made. There's a made like a location, like a, like you can call like a made hotline kind of thing where it goes to so you have suicide hotlines in Canada, but they're to promote suicide. I mean, that's how I feel about them. Well, I mean, it's subjectively true. Yeah, and that's how it that's how it looks actually. So they have like a made like, they have like a made coordinate, there it is, made coordination group. And so they will, they will then refer you to them. So if you're a doctor in Canada and you don't want to do that to your patient, you legally have to refer to the made coordination for somebody else to do it. So if I'm a doctor and my patient says, I'd like you to kill me and I don't want to kill the patient, I have to find another doctor to kill the patient. Okay. So track one. That's that's the law. I believe it's like not it might be written law now, but I know it's like within like the, the health Canada standard of what you should be doing as the doctor. The air quotes ethical guidelines. Correct. Exactly. It's kind of like the do no harm where that used to be a thing, but now it's like we only do harm. It's a little muddy. But that wasn't, you know, do no harm's not actually a legal thing. That's just kind of like their ethics guidelines. So you have to refer out. So that's kind of what happened to Donna's mom, right? She, her family doctor didn't want to do it, but he had to refer. So he referred her to somebody. And then what happens is they call you and they say, okay, we're going to set up an assessment time. Now to qualify for medical murder, you have to be assessed by at least two independently different people who are qualified under can maps program to do the assessment. And it's a form that you can see online and all the questions are there. And they will either qualify you or they won't based on the questions that they ask. And you just got to say a few keywords. And so there is track one, which is your natural foreseeable death. That means you're terminally ill. That means you can die within 24 hours. 24 hours. They can kill you in 24 hours. 24, 48 hours like that if you were terminally ill. Okay. Track two came in in 2021. Track two is people like me. Even though I look fine. I'm not. I have a lot of physical issues. And that is people who are non terminal, not dying, but they have an irimedial or grievous condition that stops them from living a full life. What is irimedial and grievous mean? In my opinion, it means that you have something so significant that you cannot no longer continue living because it's affecting you so much. But is it precisely defined in the guideline? No. So part of the problem with all of this, the legal terminology, the verbiage, it's muddy as it gets. We didn't make a new law in Canada. We amended the criminal code to homicide. So the doctor cannot be charged with murder for track two. Actually, actually. So this was never voted on by your parliamant or whatever they call it there? Parliament? Yeah. No, they ran this through. They rammed it through like they've rammed and we've seen all the bills they've rammed through in the past month. It's insane. Like actually insane. Like, there are censorship bills, which is ironic. And now they're talking about suing people, not just like getting them off and putting them in jail, actually suing people for me. So, you know, there's that. Anyway, so Canada is going down a very, you know, Michael Malice always says this to me. It's like, it's not an elevator. It's not a slippery slope. It's an elevator shaft, Kelsey. And I was like, I know, like I noticed that we're bombing Iran. Yeah. Okay. So we should have to focus on those things. Yeah. And that's kind of the problem, right? It's the shiny object. Just don't pay attention over here. Look over here. Look at people who promote wars like the war in Iran are the same ones promoting euthanasia. It's in fact. It's infuriating to me. I'm aware. Yeah. It's infuriating to me to see our nation give up on its most vulnerable population. Yeah. So I am 100% disabled. Like so many veterans are after the GWAT war. And that based on some of my physical ailments could qualify me for track two right now. But we have people. What are the kinds of ailments that would qualify someone for a while? Well, the new data, which is really fascinating, I believe it's 13% of the people killed in the province of British Columbia were their, their listed reasoning with diabetes. Diabetes. Well, that's how they killed Keanu, right? That 26 year old that everybody talks about Keanu was murdered by Ellen. We in a funeral home in Vancouver, British Columbia after he Dr. Shop his way to her because another doctor in Ontario, because we have killing facilities called made house. They are locations in the province in the province of Ontario in Toronto and then one in Victoria and all they do is kill people. They're called made house. Actually, actually. And what happened was, why doesn't this one burn them down? Well, I think people don't want to go to burn a lot of churches. I noticed in Canada, but no made house. No made houses, which I can't, you know, I don't want to go to prison when I go home. But I will say like, I'm not opposed to like people doing some things at this point where we need to start making some noise. I don't mean burning anything down because that would then qualify me to go to prison because that's like a hate speech thing now and then this defamation. You know, it's a whole thing for me. So what I can say is there are two locations. There's one in Toronto. There's one in Victoria Island. And it's no coincidence that Ontario where that location is and Victoria and British Columbia where that location is, numbers are sky high for euthanasia for medical murder. So what happened was Keanu was scheduled to be murdered in 2022 in made house in Toronto by Dr. Tepper. Now, Dr. Tepper, well, he qualified him. Keanu had diabetes, type one hearing loss. So do I, hence the loudness. And then he had depression seasonal depression. But what the media does seasonal depression. Correct. So what the media was talking about with Keanu. So he didn't like February. February is a rough time. If you live in Ontario or I call it on terrible or you live in British Columbia, we're just rains all the time. So I feel them. But definitely not a reason to die. And diabetes hearing loss and seasonal depression. Those were the three. Yes. Now the thing about Keanu though that people don't really know unless you know the family well and they're okay with me saying is Keanu had multiple head injuries. There's, I'm going to show you a pattern here. So Keanu had multiple head injuries, car accidents, snowboarding accidents, really bad head injuries. And what we understand about concussions and what I have learned at the Resiliency Brain Health, thank God for America because the only reason I actually got help was American charities, not Canadian. Is that this can give you a concussion? Why? Because the brain smacks off the scroll on the inside. Common sense. So he had wicked car accidents and all of these things. And then that's when his depression started to kick off. It's not a coincidence. That stuff happens for a reason. Now, the reason I'm bringing that up is because Donna Duncan, Alicia's mother that I just spoke about who went to the event with me, she had a car she had a bad head injury. She couldn't see a doctor. She started to spiral like this. Then she became suicidal. Then she applied for medical murder. Then she got qualified and then when her daughters found out because they have a tendency to keep the families out because and I quote Ellen Weeb in the national post stated the biggest threat to her profession is the families. Okay. So they don't tell, no, they don't have to. They don't have to tell the families. No, and they don't have to ask either. Even if you're 26 and have diabetes hearing loss and seasonal depression, his mother didn't even know it was happening when he flew to British Columbia. So he flies to British Columbia and then what happened to the process? So it's important to know he was qualified in Ontario by Dr. Tepper. His mother found out and made so much noise in the media. Dr. Tepper said he won't do it anymore. So if you truly talk or believe that somebody should be euthanized, why would you stop? If now your name is just in the media, why? Why would you stop? Right? So then they got it stopped. He started doing better. He was in community things. He was he was doing well. And then he doctor shopped himself to Ellen Weeb because we have no provincial restrictions. Right? So he got on a plane in December of 2025. Left his family, flew out to British Columbia and met with Ellen Weeb. And then Ellen wrote a prescription. He picked up the prescription at the pharmacy, bought it himself roughly $500. I have the receipts. I can tell you exactly what's on them. It's it all in my book. It's I've done substacks on it. You can see them. And he paid for them himself prescription Dr. Ellen Weeb, Keanu, and then he drove himself to the kuru KIRO funeral home in Vancouver. And Ellen met him there. And then she euthanized him. How? So how it works is in Canada, we have two different ways of dying. And in America, so do you. So how it works is euthanasia is the IV form. It's where you go. Kelsey, I want to avoid you of the responsibility of taking your own life. So you lie down in a chair or a bed or you can do it in the woods or you can do it at a funeral home where you can do whatever you want. And the doctor will show up or the murderer. And they will put two IVs in your arms roughly around 14 gauge. They have two kits if they're good. We know that Dr. James McLean is not because he just decided to euthanize somebody without all the drugs. And that person woke up and was screaming help me during the procedure. So now they will then start to flood your body with poison. And they will hit you with a paralytic so that you can't scream or move or say anything. And what we know about the drugs now confirmed also by Alicia. Just the person who's being killed make a last statement, cause family, families normally there. A lot of people bring their families kids watch family members watch. I have a good friend of mine. Actually, I have a good friend of my son, my son's friend. They euthanize his grandfather. And I don't know if he was in the room or not, but it was like a big family thing. It's a big family thing. People bring their families. And they don't talk about the sanctuary trauma. What it's like to watch a murder. And they don't they don't care. They bring the families. Yes, they encourage it. This is the most unnatural thing I think I've ever heard. Yeah, it's why it's it's it's it's watching. It's being it's like it's like, uh, if your dad was Dexter and brought you on all the things, sit down and watch this is unpathetic. He's a bad dude. He raped some kids. So we're going to strap him to a table and we're going to cut him into pieces. Would you like to join? Cause that's well, I mean, that's what Gavin knew some did. You know, but this. Yeah, vaguely. Yeah. So Gavin knew some in 2012, 2002, even though made was illegal in California until 2016, wrote about it in his book and somehow has not been charged. He admitted to participating in a legally mating his mother. He wrote about it. And it's been more and people magazine not that I would ever recommend reading that trash. Even wrote about it. The Washington Post wrote about it. I'm sitting here going. Has anybody told Spencer Pratt that the governor helped murder his mom mom when it was illegal? Anybody nobody nobody cares. Why is the Canadian and Vancouver screaming about this? But none of you know about this. It's because they have got people to believe that this is a moral thing. So, but there's no reference at all to anything transcendent at all. This is just like this is the end stage of like a materialist worldview. Yes. It's in very materialist. It's also very just nihilistic and it is very much it's really dark. And that's why I say there's a spiritual component to this. Yeah, think. Well, but you know, people will tell me to stay away from that. They will say, don't bring up God. Don't bring up God in the conversation. Who created life? Did Allen weep create life? I don't think so. No, she only takes it. She doesn't bore shuns. Well, it will Atlantic. And then she does maids. She married the murders people. But they would say that that's defamation because it's not medical murder. But it's it's an amendment to the criminal code for homicide. So how was that not? The only thing because here's oh, this is what gets me. This is what really gets my goat. All the doc because it's a self reporting system Tucker. Did you hear that? It is a self reporting system. Say you did one and it went wrong. You just have to say it didn't. So there's zero over say zero. Well, they say there's oversight and safeguards, but there's not because I can show people if it's self reporting, there's no oversight. Correct. Now it's not only self reporting. It's entirely self reporting. Yes. It's a self reporting. So there's zero oversight. No matter what they say, safe guards for you to be able to qualify or not qualifies what they say. But I can show you how to break the safeguards in three words. Oversight is when somebody else checks your work. Well, can map the people who teach them how to do it or the one supposed to be catching their work. And they work with health Canada and health Canada funds their new medical journal, which I exposed. What's the can maps make journal journal killing people? They have a medical journal. Yes, they're just starting it now in health Canada's funding it. Yes. And I proved it on my sub stack. They did not like that. Why? Over $3 million worth of their funding it actually. And then Canadian blood services who takes your blood and your organs and all of that, they also are in a triangle. What do they have to do with it? I mean, what do organs have to do it? What do blood have to do with it? I mean, griffles for God's like griffles who would take our blood was selling griffles is a company that's like a blood company, like a blood and plasma company. And they actually in parliament last year, their CEO got got griffles was taking Canadian plasma and selling it to China. It's supposed to be donation. Why is it leaving the country? Why is plasma leaving the country? Stonation. All I'm saying is with that actually happened. Yeah, it was in the part they did a whole parliament said it about it. They asked the CEO about it. She wouldn't answer the questions. I wrote about it on sub stack. I just get it. The thing is everything I'm saying, I've been saying for a long, long time, but they've done everything they can to try to make it so that my voice doesn't hear anything. The idea of me sitting in front of you right now, the idea of me sitting in front of any of these big podcasters shakes them because when I went on Jordan Peterson, why would they be worried about having the world know more about something they claim is morally superior. Because I don't even know that they have like morality to claim. They only, but they're obviously thriving in darkness. So the second you have no oversight, fear exposure, you've just revealed to me that you know you're doing something wrong. But they have forced people to drink the Kool-Aid for so long. Like, Diamond dignity since 94. Who funds Diamond dignity? Part of the government, so liberal government. And then also like I guess said, their financials are public. They have roughly around nine million currently right now as of last the last reports. And then it's privately funded. Is there any evidence that blood or organs from the people they've killed are sold or reused? We have no on the record evidence. But there is a case I want to bring up that nobody knows about yet because the family just spoke to me last week. And I said, hey, there's a good chance I'm going on someone's show. Do you mind if I talk about your family member? Because something happened, which was really weird. And we've never heard of this one before. So there is an individual on Victoria Island who suffered an injury, a spinal cord injury. Okay. And he was told that he could get surgery in Vancouver. So they air flew him to Vancouver for the surgery that could potentially give him his legs back because it wasn't a full split. And he had gone through some hard times in life and he went to the hospital and he was expected to have this surgery. Now, he was not dying. He was not terminally ill. And he had nothing else wrong with him other than a spinal cord injury. And within 10 days of him showing up at that hospital to have a surgery to fix his legs, he was killed. And his daughters were in one of his one daughter was in one of the meetings. And he said to her, and I quote, and I'm going to be these people are going to be coming forward soon. So before the cult starts, we have this that they had said to him since he had been a drinker that they couldn't use any more of his organs, but they can use his cornia. So he was excited that he was going to get to donate his eyes. But then they said something we'd never, ever heard before period. They were going to experiment on him. And during the process of euthanizing him, they were going to discuss hooking his brain waves up so they could see what was happening in the brain. Now, I have been stating since I've been doing this work that, for example, if I stated this key tone here could cure cancer. And then it doesn't, right? That's a liability. You could sue me for that, right? That's a liability. You say it does something. You make a claim and it doesn't. Dying with dignity and the government of health Canada and all of these people make a claim that it is a painless and peaceful process. But they had yet to measure the pain center of the brain during the process. This is the first victim in the first victim's family who has ever brought up the fact that they were discussing hooking him up to something during the process. Was he killed? Yes. That's why they've come forward to me. When you grew up in Canada, yes. During your, your, in your 30s, maybe 36 going on 37. Yeah. Did you ever during your schooling in Canada learn about the Nazi euthanasia program or the medical experiments on its victims? Yeah, the T4 program that created it. Do you learn about that in school? I learned very briefly, but I learned more just because of my family's background. And I found it for me, I, history is an incredibly fascinating and interesting thing for me because as the, you know, the saying goes, if you do not learn about it, you were bound to repeat it. And I think that's why I feel so strongly is because we're not only repeating it. We're repeating it. We're not only repeating it. We're perfecting it. But I just find it interesting. So I'm 20 years older than you and I grew up learning about it. And that, you know, the precursor to the war and the killing of the Jews and the gypsies and everyone else they killed was this euthanasia program that the Nazis, you know, undertook pretty early on their children and on their difficult eaters and on their disabled and they were selling them over, assigned them over to the state. And I only, I only cared about it because my, my grandfather's a Hungarian gypsy. And so the idea that these people were targeted because of who they were, was insane. But then to find out that they were doing to kids because they were underdeveloped, well, the college of physicians and Quebec all the way back to 2022 and reported again in 2025 was suggesting we should be euthanizing zero to one for conditions that will be very difficult to live with down the road. Spinal bifida and things like that. Youth and licensing for spina bifida. Yeah, they were bringing that up. We actually had a, I had a friend of mine whose daughter was at Sick Kids Toronto Hospital. They hate when I talk about them. And her daughter was born with, the family is good with it. The doctors hate it. Let me just clarify. The daughter, the daughter was born with a medically complex down syndrome. Okay, and she needed a new liver. And she was in the ICU and the NICU her whole life. She was like 18 months. This little girl was amazing. She was super beautiful. And this mother called me and Alex Schadenberg from the euthanasia prevention coalition. And they're like, we need to move her. It doesn't feel safe. They poisoned her with potassium overdose her when I wasn't there. And it was too nurses that did it. And I said, do you have any feelings? Have you heard the word made at all? And they're very religious? And they're like, we would never do that. And I said, but have you heard it spoken? And she goes not explicitly by word. I said, okay, can you do me a favor? Start audio recording every meeting you have? Because in Canada, it's one pretty consent. So she started audio recording everything. And she asked a question. She goes, is the reason why my daughter is not getting a a liver because she has Down syndrome? And the person paused and said, I think you know the answer to that. So you have to understand this is sick. It's hospital. And you know what was even crazier. The head of her daughter's pick you team Adam. Well, Adam speaks often at Ken Mapp's conferences under mature minors discussion of children. So because in Canada, because we're really wishy washi with our language, mature minors doesn't have the age. It is what the doctor deems if the child is responsible enough to understand the decision making. So this goes back to what I was stating before where. Wait, this is the idea is that you should be able to kill kids. Correct. And now people will say that anybody under the age age of 12 is a child. I say anybody under age of 18 is a child. That's just me. Now, the reason this matters is because right there, they play with language. They say as long as the child can make the decision, right? What about the parents? Well, so you lose parent consent on in certain provinces to have access to child's health care records and make decisions at the age of 12. Sick kids is that hospital as well. At 12? Yes, sir. Why doesn't someone overthrow your government? I'm waiting. I'm praying. I've been begging. I'm serious. No, I'm dead serious too. Like I don't think you understand. Like I have been making kill your kids at the age of 12. And you can't do it. I mean, they can't legally yet. Now, let me explain. So in 2023, the parliamentarian report came out where they were tossing around the idea of mature minors. Now, it's important to state. It's not legal right now. The Netherlands just did it. Canada is not legal to euthanized children. Now in the 2023, what did the Netherlands do? They just euthanize the child's between zero and 12 and they won't tell us how old, but it was terminally ill. They also euthanized children with autism. So it's like, no, shock. They euthanize kids with autism. The Europe stuff is wild. The Europe stuff is wild. They've dignitized over there. Right? You fly over there. It's beautiful. It's the whole thing. It's the reason my PR won't work with me. She knows a person who did that and she's like, it was beautiful. They went around Europe and then he was dying anyway. So then they ended the trip at Dignitas. I was like, and then there's why it's wife just flew home by himself. What? No, it's not. There's no dignity in that at all. No, there's no dignity in giving up. And people say, but Kelsey, they are running away in a bed. They are filled with drugs. Maybe there's some reason we suffer. We talked about this. I'm so glad you took before we get into suffering. Can I just make a very, very clear distinction about this? A doctor can avoid getting charged by just saying this. I was of the opinion, the person qualified. And Canada. That's it. That's it. So let's talk specifically, sorry, this obviously because it spins me up in it. Oh, welcome to my entire existence. Yeah. So I'm sorry to be overbearing. You're not. Well, I feel it. You're not overbearing at all. It spins me up in it. Oh, welcome to my entire existence. Yeah. So I'm sorry to be overbearing. You're not. Well, I feel it. You're not overbearing at all. Because all the key decisions in this are left up to the air quotes doctor, whatever that is. It feels like there's like an amazing amount of discretion for one person in this process, like whatever the so-called doctor thinks goes in terms. Or a nurse. It can be a nurse or a doctor. Yeah. Yep. Their sore doctor. So some person in a uniform just makes the decision without any oversight at all. Well they say they have oversight, right? Because can map is the oversight. And then they say that there's oversight because of the AMED committees. And then they say that there's oversight because the government does, you know, they do the inquiries and they say there's oversight because there's written safeguards. But you can beat safeguards with a few words. Okay. So give us examples of how it actually works. Specific examples. For like, do you want me to tell you stories of people? Yes. Okay. So Mrs. B. Mrs. B was, this is a story from the Ontario Corner Report. You can look it up online. Very clear. Mrs. B was an individual who was a lot older and her husband was suffering from caregiver syndrome. Okay. She was struggling. She was unable to look after herself and he was just exhausted. So we took her to the hospital. So there's nothing we can do. So they were going to go down the palliative care process. And because she was Catholic, I think she was Catholic or Christian, she said she was opposed to suicide. Originally, she had applied for me because she knew she was on her way out. So she applied for me. And because she didn't want to be a burden, right? We can only know, we can only infer that because somebody who is a Christian or a Catholic won't choose euthanasia. That I know of like not somebody who's a real believer. Christian. They won't. And so what happened? Or a religious Jew or a religious Muslim or religious anybody. It's prohibited by every religion. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I had a few Muslims blow themselves up in front of me. That's a different thing. But I, but I did not live personal experience here. So we're talking about the war. But anyway, I digress. So she decided in the last minute, she didn't want it. She said, no, I don't want it. But then she was euthanized the same day. That's in the Ontario Cornell report. It is written up. It is very public. Dr. Romana Coelo just talked about it on my show. Very republic. This is very public. So they just killed her against her will. Yeah. I mean, why not? Nobody's going to get it. No one's going to charge for it. Drs don't get charged for this. Ellen Weep has multiple criminal cases. Nothing. OK. Here's another one. So after Jordan Peterson, that clip has still to this day dying with dignity, sending out emails, trying to combat it. Like that's how much that made a difference when I was telling people how people actually died with the drugs. So what happened was, this is crazy. This is so crazy. OK. So we get a phone call. Alicia calls me. She's like, hey, this girl heard you on Jordan Peterson. She has a catagia. She was on benzos. And she has bipolar. And they want to get to Jordan. They want to talk to you and see if there's like something they can do because she's choosing euthanasia. She's choosing to be murdered. And her husband, her common love partner, is trying desperately to stop this. And she goes, I'm trying to find a lawyer to get involved here. And I said, when is this happening? She goes, she doctor shopped her way to Ellen Weep. She's not even from the province. She's flying in. So she was scheduled to be killed on a Sunday. Now, Ellen Weep qualified her on one Zoom call. Never looked at her medical records. Did not find out that she had bipolar cycling too. Did not understand she was in on medication at all. And then qualified her. And then she was on a plane out to British Columbia to be euthanized. Now, thankfully, we got a lawyer that got a judge involved and got the very first British Columbia court injunction and stopped it in the 11th hour. This, the only reason these two. What happened to the woman? I'm not allowed to talk about that publicly. She was not. She was she still alive. She was at the time. OK. So out of respect for the family, we don't, when they say that's enough, I stop. Yep. So there's tons of these cases. There was another guy on the island who made a plan for him and his wife. Maybe plan to have his wife mated. He was writing the obituaries. He was doing all of these things. It was so bad. And he was saying, like, he was telling people he was going to have both of them euthanized. She didn't want this. She didn't want anything to do with this. The RCMP had to step in and separate custody. So if you have a lot, I mean, it sounds like there are a lot of people in Canada who want to be killed. Well, I mean, obviously the country's a death wistery wouldn't have Mark Carney is your friend in the church. That's my, I also don't think he's our prime minister. I think that was like a fire bomb in. Like I don't believe in that at all. Yeah, no, I, but I'm saying your leadership suggests a death wish. So, but I'm just wondering if just because someone wants to kill himself doesn't mean that you should help him. And, but there's a lot of money. And don't you know about the Omega report? No. OK, so I'm going to preface this with this was a what if situation done by people at Western University. This was not happening. It was asking questions. OK, it's in the Omega death and dying journal. OK, it is just a report. And it details the financial component of made in a voluntary capacity in a non voluntary capacity, as well as in a categorized capacity meaning. What is what is a non voluntary capacity mean? Well, I mean, wouldn't Mrs. B kind of be non voluntary? Yeah. OK, that was she was killed within 24 hours, even though she said she didn't want it. That feels a little non voluntary to me. Yeah. OK, so what it was, it was just a, like they said, it was just I just have to keep saying this because they've come at me so hard. It was just a case that it was just a what if it was just a question. It was just a paper. It was nothing. But why does the paper state that they're looking at saving $1.273 trillion with these numbers? Then why is the mathematics? They've literally done the mathematics on X amount of people who want to commit suicide. So will euthanize them? The mentally ill, the veterans, the indigenous and the homeless and the addicts. Why are they all categories in there? And then what they said is this is the whatever. What paper breaks them out into those categories. This paper is wild. This paper is I talked about this paper on Jillian Michaels and her I watched her head physically explode. It went so viral that clip in real time. I've never seen I've never had anything like that. They literally dictate that between 2027 and 2047, the what if situation if this were to roll and continue to expand, which they have plans for, right? It doesn't stop at track one. Doesn't stop at track two. They're now targeting the mentally ill, starting in March of 2027. Now the Ahmed committee has just met and made a recommendation to the government that they hit the brakes on that as hard as possible because depression alone will qualify you to die. And so we're waiting for the final report to come out and it's supposed to be tabled here in the next, the government is supposed to say something here in the next week about it, whether they're going to push forward or not. But the thing is, is you have people with dying with dignity to these professors who just testified and stated, literally I'm not even kidding. These are like grown ass, six year old professors being like, well, you know, if somebody wants to die by suicide, they're going to do it anyway. So we should be able to euthanize them. I'm not even kidding. And I sat there and I went, what did she just say that they want to kill themselves? But we don't want them to kill themselves. So they should have a right for us to kill them. That's literally what she's doing. Does the Canadian government still fund suicide hot ones? As far as I am aware? So it is, I mean, that's the paradox you're describing. One hand, the government says you shouldn't kill yourself. But on the other hand, they set up all kinds of encouragement to kill you. Well, I mean, the encouragement says the complete collapse of everything around us, 24 seven food housing immigration, you name it. And then you have dying with dignity and Facebook ads. It's insane that meta even allows that it boggles my brain. I don't understand. I mean, but then you find out about all the other things. So I'm like, maybe, but they promote it. They promote it. The Simon's department story we were discussing. They promoted this. What's the Simon's department story? Simon's department story is like a kind of like, like it's a massive department story that sells clothing and home goods. And then what they did is they didn't add with a girl who was already sick, who applied for made because she couldn't get health care. Flat out. She just couldn't get help. And she qualified and she had a death date. And so they did this beautiful commercial. Let me just set the seam. It's on a beach. There's actual bubbles all around you. There's big cliffs. And then you have you have Simon's table, right? All their home goods. They sell, felt her loved ones around her talking about how she was going to go cross the rainbow bridge. How it's going to be beautiful and all these things. And at the end of the commercial, they put her death date. Simon's department story. Why would this Simon's department story, Simon's family or whoever did this? Yeah. Is there Simon's family? I thought sure. They're in Quebec. I mean, it could find out. Well, Quebec also has the highest rate in the world of medical murder. And they also have advanced requests. So like if I knew I was going to have Alzheimer's or dementia, I could apply now for a date later. And do you know what happens when that happens? Cases like over in Europe. There was a grandmother. I talked about this one all the time. It's actually the first story. I tell my book because it's so insane. This grandmother, she apparently wanted to, when she checked out, that's what she wanted. That was her request was I want to be, you know, euthanized, put down. And so she went to the doctor that day. Like this is documented. This is public. The Daily Mail covered it. Like it's public. And the doctor put a sedative in her coffee. Okay. And then when she kind of knocked out, she came two halfway through and said no, and started fighting. And then the doctor had the family hold her down while she finished. And then the doctor was not charged. Do you know the doctor's name? I don't, but it is public. And I will find it. I think I put it in the book. And the doctor was not charged with murder. No. Even though they held her down and killed her. No, she had the family members hold the grandmother down. But I'm the lunatic. Are there religiously, there's in Canada who are, I don't know. We're guys sitting sit down strikes to stop this or blockading, picketing the homes of the physicians who are murdering these people. No. As far as I am. Do you have religion in Canada? I don't think so anymore. We do. Yes, I mean, Mark Carney said Muslim values are Canadian values. Do you know know that? These are not Muslim values. I know there are a lot of Muslim suicide bombers, but Islam flatly prohibits suicide. Which is crazy to me, right? Because anytime I've been near somebody, they've tried to kill me with a vest and a child normally attached to it. So I have my own feelings about that. But in Canada, in terms of religion, no, we burn churches and we get away with it. We wear the Christians to... Well, here's what I've noticed, okay? And this is, and people are gonna say, well, that's really rich of you, Kelsey, because you're a podcaster and you can get away with whatever you want. That's they're saying to me is like, you don't know, because I'll lose my home in my job if I speak out about this. I've lost everything, speaking out about it. So, but where are the Christian leaders on this? I know a ton of people who, but they come from the pro-life movement. And what they do is there's a lot of people who come from the pro-life who mean well, who want to take this fight on. But the second they come at it from the pro-life, the rest of the civilian population shut off. The people who are pro-choice won't hear the made conversation because they attached it to pro-life. There's only one organ. Because Canada's that committed to abortion. Yes, they do a florida. That's your birth rate doing pretty well. It's terrible. So I had just had another child, just trying to kind of keep going here, but it's terrible. And that's why we're importing everyone to replace us, because 96% of the people that are being murdered by the doctors that are supposed to be there to help them are white. What? Get 96. Canada's not 96% white. It's a halfway. Right, but the over 100,000 people that have been murdered since 2016 are white. So that sounds what, I mean, that's so disproportionate. Yes, it is. If 96% of Canadians who got advanced college degrees were white, there would be a hearing about it immediately in parliament. They probably shut the school down. Oh, immediately. But I mean, you don't hear parliament stuff. But 96% of the people the state kills are white, but that's not genocide. No, it's not. Does anyone explain that number? So they break it down and they state that because these are individuals choosing this, it's not being pushed upon them. It doesn't work. And so I've sat down with my very black partner and then like explain this to me. What am I missing? Because this is not when I look at the data, why is it so white? Why is it not the new Indian immigrants or the new Pakistani immigrants? Is there any immigrants? Why is it not the black population? Why is it not the Japanese? Why is it like why? Why is it not Richmond, which is all Chinese? I don't hear about this. Why is it not that he goes, we don't build a culture around killing our people. We don't put our people in nursing homes and then just leads them to die. Grandma dies on the couch. Grandma yells in the corner and tells us stories about X, Y, and Z. We don't put people in nursing homes. How many times have you been in a nursing home and seen a whole bunch of immigrants? Or just forget the word immigrants. Black people, brown people, blue people. How often? You don't. You see white people. You see white people who've been left there to die. Yeah, no one in my foot we don't do nursing homes to my family. But I've been. And it's you're 100% right. It's all whites abandoned by their family. Exactly. And it's because people, people say, well, that's easy for you to say, Kelsey, because you could afford home care. Careful people say it's a fact. So that is the fact. And that's what I'm trying to get at is the facts or the facts. And so the government doesn't say anything about the fact that they've killed 100,000 people in 10 years and 96% of them are white. Oh, they're proud of this because they say it's the most progressive health care system in the world. I just wanted one laugh. I just wanted one. I got it. Well, you got one. Got it. Yes. But that's yes, because how, Tucker, how beautiful is it that you can have choice at the end? How beautiful is it? It's just funny that in a world where, you know, disparate impact is a real is a legal principle now. And you can look at any outcome divided by race. And if it doesn't, it's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. But if it doesn't match the distribution of the population, you can say its racism, except what is killing 100,000 people and 96% of them are white. That's just choice. It's a product of choice. America is 95%. Wait. That are being used and that are being that are using physician assisted suicide. It's different. So in Canada, there's two tracks, right? 99% of people use euthanasia which is the IV route I told you about where you divide yourself with the responsibility in a doctor murders you. The other 1% which very rarely happens, but is what is used in America is physician assisted, which is here's the poison tucker. You have to drink it. That's what's happening in America. And they're all white. Yeah. Ninety-five percent? That's basically, but here's the thing. Not every state is reporting your data. So you can thank compassionate choices for that and the Raven group. Have you heard of the Raven group? No. There is social engineering firm. That's worth $35 million. That funds people like the Bill Gates Foundation, the Obama Foundation. And I've gotten a hold of a lot of their documents and what they plan to do with America and it's terrifying. Okay. So the Raven, something called the Raven group. They're called the Raven group? Yep. R-A-B-E-N. R-A-B-E-N? Yep. And 33 to 35 million was their last financial statements. And they promote. So they are the social engineering group that has tied to compassionate choices. You're dying with dignity. It's called compassionate choices. Our more aggressive version is called the final exit network. They don't euthanize or do anything. They just teach you how to kill your loved ones with nitrous oxide in a bag over their head. What do you think the motive is here? I think there's multifaceted. I think Canada alone in 2021 by only doing euthanasia saved $86.9 million alone by not providing palliative care. That was just one year. Well over a billion dollars in savings now. And then if they continue rolling out, like I said, 1.273 trillion dollars is the university just guesstimate if they continue to roll. They're going to continue to roll. They are. Because even if the government comes forward and says we're going to stop made for mental illness for 2027, there's a court case going in Ontario right now that'll do the same thing that happened with the Carter case. And if she wins that case, then all Canadians will have access to euthanasia based on depression alone. So that will come with that includes seasonal depression. Absolutely. So that's like living in the Northern hemisphere in the wintertime. Oh, it's the worst. Yes. I'm trying so hard to get a visa to the same. So I live in Florida or Texas. It's just hot. So I'm not so sad. But that's the truth is March 2027, it's currently scheduled right now. The Amec committee has said hit the brakes. The government has not decided if they're going to. They're going to tell us in the next week. But people are all up in arms. Oh my God, we beat him. We beat him. We beat him. No. No, no, no, no, no. We beat the death cult. But that's not true because there is a court case challenging this already in Ontario. Girl name Claire, Bristle. She's an actress. This is the greatest role she'll ever pay in her life. She wants to die because she's depressed. And so dying with dignity is using her as a court case to try to do what they do with Carter would give money to dying with things. A scary amount of people. I assume family foundations. Oh, tons. They're totally listed too. There's Catholic ones on there. There's Jewish ones on there. There's some crazy names on there. See names, massive organizations, massive, massive organizations. And I think that's what's terrifying to me is you realize very quickly how much people just want to get rid of people. So they're going to save a substantial amount of money in health Canada because right now our system's broken. So they're going to look for any way to save money. So if you use an eyes as much as possible, you don't have to pay out pensions. You don't have to pay out palliative care. You don't have to pay out any of the CPP, any of the stuff that you've paid into EI, all of that. Canada, America and the Raven group is helping compassionate choices and final exit network to the exact same thing. Now currently right now you have 13 states in one jurisdiction who do track one. So just to reiterate, that's the terminally ill only can qualify, right? That's the sob story when you hear that's Kathy, you know, the governor of New York Kathy Hogle. She did it to get it legalized. She goes, well, my mother, she was dying and I wanted her to have a peaceful and that's the Gavin Newsom story. Well, my mother, even though he said in his book, it was the most traumatic thing and he hates her for making him be a part of that. He's still legalized it in a state because every way should have a right to choose. That's why Oregon and Vermont have crazy numbers. Oregon was first, but the thing about Oregon and Vermont is there's no residency requirement. So you could just go from. There are also the most secular states in the country, right along with Maine and California Sue, it's, they both do it as well. Right. Track one only. That's how it starts that right track one. But they're not secular because this is not a secular movement. It's a religion. It's a cult. It's a cult. So what I found out last year and people haven't said out loud because I think they're just afraid of being murdered as is an MI. The Raven group is a substantial organization. It is a social engineering organization and I have. You did non profit or I don't want to. I think it's a combination and they do work with nonprofits. So they work, they have a list, the BLM's, the, the, the, the, by-pocks that they have a list of who they work with, except compassionate choices is not on their website. It's not. But everybody else is, but they're not. So what they've done is they've illustrated in a YouTube video that I did a huge report on how they talked about how they're going to take the American population right now, 28% of the American population lives in states that do medical murder or give you the cup for track one. Currently, they said by 2028, we will have 50% of the American population living in states that do this and then they said the states they're targeting, even though there is not legislation on the table. So I have been privately and quietly working with some parts of the United States government to help point out their flaws and there's new bills like the Pachetta Bell and how they're going to try to start shoving this through veterans affairs as an option for veterans as a healthcare. So what their biggest thing is they're looking to do right now is they're looking to change the language around end of life. They're going to manipulate the language because currently as the Pachetta Bell because Clinton put it in states that no federal funding can go towards suicide, right? They was very clear and that's what that Pachetta bill is. Now what they're doing is they're trying to change the verbiage of all of the senators and all of your staff and everybody in America to say, oh, made is is end of life care. So then as soon as they're able to change the terminology, federal funding can be applied. Why the hell Tucker? Do I know that in Vancouver in my tiny house in studio? Why am I the one saying this when there is a disproportionate amount of the American government that wants to implement this in states? They're targeting Arizona. What is the population age there Tucker in Arizona of the whites? It's very old. Pretty old. What about Florida? Same. Right? Now you would think the governor in Florida would never allow this, but compassion and put compassionate choices and rape and group, even though there's no bill on the table, made a plan to start targeting all of the small areas in Florida. It's going to the churches that are going to the nursing homes to start going to the areas to start to slow drip into people so that they can go to their representative and then they can push them to put a bill on the table. That's their plan. And they've set it out loud. I've just uncovered it. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Do people in Canada say anything about this? So there are some 100,000 people in the country as small as Canada is a lot. It's an entire town. I was talking to Tamara Leach. She was the head of the checker protest and she's she's become a friend and really started to help support me because because my things are collapsing around me, people are really trying to just get the name out. And she goes, that's the size of my town. Yeah. That's more Canadian than died in World War II. That's insanity. But it does seem I gave one speech in Canada in the last several years and mentioned it and people just sort of stared blankly at me. They didn't know. They still don't know. So this is not something people talk about. No, it's not because like you said at the very beginning, how dare you judge? How dare you? My biggest thing in my DMs is either race comments about my husband or it is how dare you talk about somebody's end of life. It is their choice. It is their body. I said not when you use my taxpayer dollars. It's not. It's also not their choice. It's also not their choice. No, it's getting in your coursing people. And also I'm pretty sure doctors did not go to school to murder people unless they there's a few of them who are definitely psychopaths who enjoy it based on the amount of people they've murdered. I was speaking with your team and we were having a discussion about the Tim Hortons case. And the Tim Hortons case was Dr. James McLean out of Westmont family practice in London, Ontario, him and his wife work there. And he qualified a guy in front of a Tim Hortons. What does that mean? He did an assessment in front of Tim Hortons and decided. Tim Hortons is a fast food restaurant. Tim Hortons is a crumbling donut shop that has decided to replace all of its employees with cheap labor and now they're getting a backlash. But it used to be like the heart of our, it used to be like our, your Dunkin Donuts or like your Starbucks. Like Tim Hortons was like every farmer would go there at 5 a.m. and get donuts and coffee. I know I worked there for four years as a teenager. Like Tim Hortons was like Canada. Like we had a Tim Hortons and Afghanistan. Yeah. Yeah. And little sea cats. Tim Hortons and Canadian Tire. Yeah. Exactly. You're too big retail. That's right. So yeah, our mix all is in Walmart. Exactly. Tim Hortons is not like a medical facility. Not because you don't have to be qualified on a medical facility. Like I say to him before, Ellen, we qualified somebody on a Zoom call. So he meets the sky outside Tim Hortons and what happens? He qualified him, meaning he drove him to die. And they killed him. I'm not sure if it was him that killed him. I think it was. Um, but regardless of if it was him or not, the fact that he qualified him in front of Tim Hortons and then that same doctor is also still practicing euthanasia, even though he killed somebody twice because he didn't bring all of the drugs. And then the guy woke up halfway through the procedure, screaming, help me. And then he came back after he declared him dead and did it again in front of the family. And that's a very well documented case. It's very public. People can read it. I didn't just write about it. Yes, I did write about it on sub-sec, but others have documented it. But he didn't help him. He killed him. Yeah, he killed him. Because the perception is that when you are put under with the prop of all, you're flooded with so much prop of all that you just go to sleep. I don't know if you've ever had surgery. Um, you know, when you're getting put under and you kind of feel that like you're and then you're gone, that kind of feeling. Well, that's the drugs flooding. Now there's a ton of cases of people having surgery where they say I was, I couldn't move, but I could, I remember everything. Well, that's because there's that happens. Maybe not to everyone, but it happens. And it's prop of all would be the anesthesia. Correct. Short, short acting. Yep. Clears your body quick. But they flood you. So can map has, it's on the NIH's website. You can just type in made kits under NIH and it'll pop up the exact drug dosage is there. They for a long, long time used to say, we don't use a paralytic. We don't use a paralytic. And I'm like, it's right there. So we use a paralytic because otherwise you would hear the person's gargling and we've had people, we know people who have done the process in America who start throwing epileptic fics and they start vomiting aggressively because the fluid is flooding the body. You're poisoning the body to death. So the body starts to fight. So prop of all is the anesthesia. Is that what kills you? No, there's recronium as well. There's another one. What is that? It's a, I don't know if that's the nerve. I don't want to sound uneducated here, but there is a list of drugs that they use. And the reason I say I don't want to sound uneducated is because yes, they have a recommended drugs. That's not always what's used. The, the made kits, they're two different sets of drugs in those kits. Do, does your media ever write about this? Well, it's really funny to me. Like a hundred thousand people die and like there's no mention of it. They wrote about it after I wrote about it. So a friend of mine is, he's my mentor. He's been doing this for on Golly amount of time. His name is Alex Schadenberg. He runs the euthanasia prevention coalition. And he's like the only pro life religious dude that will like associate with me because I'm so aggressive. And so many people are like, she's too, she's too much about it. I was like, well, all too much about it. So it's so damn loud, you don't have a choice but to hear it. And so Alex has been mentoring me on all this and like we go over the numbers and stuff all the time. And he's like, he came to me and he's like, he does the math. He's the math guy. He like, I went through all the data. We hit a hundred thousand. I think he's like April. He gave me a date. And I was like, are we sure about that? He goes, yeah, I'm like, I'm going to sit. And then I use him as my reference point and then he gives me all of my links, my references. So I don't just like randomly come up with this stuff. I have the amount of whistle blowers I have, the amount of veterans which by the way in that Senate testimony that I spoke about the veterans suicide where they called me a liar. I stated I have over 20 veterans on record with affidavit who have proof that they have been offered it from veterans affairs even though they said they stopped. But then the government just called me a liar. And then we just moved on with the suicide study. Like so my point is is that there are people that are doing this work, but there's only a few of them that are willing to be public facing people like myself. Why? Why would it be considered embarrassing to say how, you know, slow down government stopped killing somebody of our own citizens. Like that seems like a baseline. I know it sounds like I'm jumping around here, but the harsh reality is is we're not talking about something small. We're not we're not talking about something that is cheap. We're talking about something that saves trillions of dollars that potentially has an organ component. I haven't been able to fully prove it yet, but I'm on my way. We're also talking about a government that is actively allowing this and promoting it as healthcare solution. And there are very few people that are willing to attach their face to it because like for example, I'm in a group chat with a bunch of people who do this work, doctors, whistle blowers, media outlet people. And there's like maybe myself and two others that will put their face to it. The rest of them won't. Why? Because they saw what started to happen to me when it got big and public really fast. I'm going to ask you about that before I do. Let me just clarify is I know abortion is often referred to as quote healthcare. Yes, it is. It's a lot and we have full term is of course you do. Well, I wouldn't. I'm not sure if it's a term you're telling us about it now. But you've but is killing in this program made program is that also referred to as quote healthcare? Yes. It's not healthcare if it's killing. That's what I've been trying to figure out. It feels like an oxymoron to me. Yeah, I call it eugenics and they get really mad about it, but it's the truth. It is eugenics. This is a. health care if it's killing. That's what I've been trying to figure out if it can oxymoron to me. I call it eugenics and they get really mad about it, but it's the truth. It is eugenics. This is a, this is a six society is what it is. This is what happens when a society views its people as nothing more than a number and a way to make money. Like I'm sure you've heard of this Canadians work for free for the government from January 1st to June 9th. That's how much taxes they take from us. So we are nothing more than a piggy bank for the world right now. We're donating, you know, giving away money laundering, billions of dollars to places right now. And we can't say anything about it. You crayon. We just gave another hundred million to Palestine the other week. Still trying to figure out where the hell that's going. But my point is is that Canada sick, we don't view our population as people. We view them as a dollar. We view them as a machine. And Mark Carney has done everything he can to make sure that that machine continues to grow. And you guys didn't put a banker in charge, did you? We didn't know we did not. Oh, but somehow a banker wound up in charge. It's like somehow, you know, it's really funny to me because a lot of people will be like, why don't you run for politics? I said, do you think they're going to vote for the little lady that yells? No. They're not going to vote for that. I'm still shocked they even keep Daniel Smith in waiting for that to see how long that lasts because eventually she's going to say something. They're like, oh, Daniel can't be there anymore. She's pushing too hard. I don't think she's going to push too hard. I don't think she is either. No. The cushy seat. So I am not a big fan of either sides of my government right now. I've never been a fan. I grew up as a very classic liberal. Like I remember when like going to war was like a bad thing. And I remember when we only did certain things where we allowed gun rights, when we allowed freedom of speech. Like it this was pretty traditional. And then when I went to war, Harper was in charge. And I was like, tell me about you. And he goes, we're going to give you money for guns. And I was like, sold, I'm going overseas. I want money for guns. It sound great to me. And then I started looking and leaning more into the conservative side of things. Most doctors I feel like they wanted to be doctors since they've been little. Otherwise, why would you go to school for 10 years? Why would you put yourself in that much debt? Why would you do the rotations? Like why? It's because I feel deep down in my soul that doctors and nurses come from a good place. And they are been sold. They were, they were sold a lie. And now we are turning doctors and nurses who wanted to heal people desperately wanted to help people whether it was a personal family member they couldn't help or somebody they saw on the street they wanted to save or they just had that knowing I'm going to be a surgeon. I'm going to fix kids brains. I'm going to do this. And then we've now said to them, hey, you're actually a murderer. And you're going to do this. And if you don't, there's going to be repercussions. Do you think that's why medical schools force so many medical students to commit abortion? So they're sort of. Or do you have made man? It's like what MS 13 does. That's a great, that's a great point. I've never thought deeply about it. So I don't know that I want to like comment hard on that. But I could see how that could be as I want to say I don't give them that I should. You're a more charitable person than I, but I see a lot of doctors, not all. I know great doctors. I don't know a ton of great doctors. I know a great doctor, but whatever. Yeah. I know a few great ones. I know one. But, but I'm sure they're out there. Yeah. But I see a lot of people who clearly don't care about their patients at all who are utterly not just amoral, but immoral pushing death prescribing drugs, whose effects they don't even care to research. Right. I see them doing so much harm. I see them as a lot of them as really evil, including the people who are murdering Canadians. I guess I need to change my heart and be more charitable. Oh, you don't. No, you don't. No, you're right. I think what has happened for me is I'm so gassed lit on a daily basis that I'm too harsh on people. And I will say a lot of the doctors who have whistle blown to me are Christians. Yeah. I know that they're Christian doctors. But the Christian doctors are the ones that are coming to me being like, I need you to push harder on this hospital specifically and look in this department. Why don't they stand up themselves? They lose their jobs. So what? I think so. What? I think the difference between you and I, I've done that a few times. Who cares? I know. But you know, I think people are more afraid. We talked about this. Who's your job? Yeah. Come on now. But no, but that's the trick. That that's the answer. People are dying. Yeah. I mean, so they think that I'm so people have always viewed me since I since I started becoming public in like 2015 and like doing all the stuff and being on the shows. They're like, you're just going to say stuff. You don't even think about the repercussions. And I was like, well, because the repercussions are not big enough for me to shut my mouth. What is big enough is the idea that we're euthanizing people and my children are growing up in a country that if they're depressed, there's a chance they can walk into an ER without me and be murdered without me. And there's not a damn thing I can do about it. And it almost happened to my friends child as well because she's autistic and it was in Alberta. And he fought tooth and nail to keep her alive and she is still alive. But he is multiple hundreds of dollars. What happened? She applied on her own because she was an adult, even though she was high-functioning autistic and lived at home and was in the care of his of her parents. She got qualified. And no one told her parents. No, they found out last minute and they were able to get a court injunction. And it's WV and MV. It's a very public case. I can't say their actual names. But MV is still alive and WV is a friend of mine and he's also a veteran and he they spent all their money. Everything they have fighting fought them. Oh, um, health Canada. So the Canadian healthcare system actually went to court fighting the parents so they could kill this person? Yeah, because they're not. And there was a gag order so he couldn't talk about it. But what's a gag order? He wasn't allowed to talk to the media. Why not? Because they said that it was an ongoing case. And because she was qualified and they were holding it up, it was, it could affect the outcome. So the government somehow can't find the money to like give you a knee replacement or build you a wheelchair ramp, but they can pay lawyers to fight parents so they can kill the parents' autistic daughter. Yeah, Rick, now we're on it. So when people say how can you live in a country like that? Not one thing I've ever heard about Iran is worse than that. It's bad. It's bad. It's really, really bad. It's I cope with it because if I don't, I won't see my son. And I love my son more than I love air. Yeah, well, of course. And I do hope one day that I can leave to Canadians feel like they're living in dystopia. Yes. Do they talk about it? Yes, quietly. Because now there's hate speech laws where if I say something out loud or I tweet something, we have the new the new stuff that's in the UK with the 12,000 arrests every year for me. That's now in Canada. And the CRTC is like banning shows like mine, like Bill C11 is just collapsing shows like mine. I'm not the only one. There's so many political podcasters like me, like I do three to five episodes a week and people are just being people are just losing everything. And it's they're on the ground. And the fact that we're misinformation and we're harmful to society. Is the US government helping at all? I have, I'll admit it. I have begged and pleaded everyone I know in the US government for help. I bet they've done nothing. Absolutely nothing. I have one one senators team that I should tell them that there's like Hamas there or. Oh, but there is though. But there is. But there is. But there is. But we have like the Muslim brotherhood in the calisthenies and the Bushnoy gang and the cartel. Like we have all that I live all around it. But that doesn't get touched. You know, like my my soccer, like that took me a long time. It was a cop who one cop that knew me from something. It was like, I'm going to go to bat for this. This is not okay. He pushed meta to get data for me because I couldn't prove anything without meta. And now that guy's going to jail. But I mean, that doesn't stop the people that that want to kill me. That don't tell me they want to kill me first. Do you know what I mean? And I can't even carry a knife. I can't carry anything with me to protect myself or my family. I can't tell. I can't carry a knife in Canada. No. Unless you're a Sikh. So whites can't carry knives in Canada. No, you have to say it's a box cutter. Like I had a really cool knife. Montana knife company. But Sikhs can't carry knives. Yeah, they have that it's called a kirpan. Yeah. That's what Henry at Henry at no walk. I think we're killed with. Yeah, a kirpan. And so they can carry those. It's totally fine. They're actually talking about making them allowed on on airplanes. It's insane. There's just like whites can't do a whites cannot like I have like I was saying. So Montana knife, you have a lot of race specific laws in Canada. Currently yeah, not laws, but they're just like for example, a good one. A good one is this. Did you ever hear about the the residential schools, the mass graves? Of course. You know, they've never found any right. No, they didn't exist. And it was on the basis of that why they burned all those churches. Correct. And so my son still has to go to school and they still try to make them do the land acknowledgements and wear the orange shirt. And I told this principal that is bullshit. He will not be participating. And if you have a problem, you can let me know. But I also told the principal when he was in kindergarten and he came home with a book called Jacob's New Dress that I was going to burn it. But you know, that's what happens when you the government pays programs like so g sexual orientation and gender identification and Alberta, British Columbia and Ontario schools to come in at $1,700 a day to teach your kid in kindergarten. How to use a condom. So I live in a dystopia. I think there's sex in Canada anyway. Is there? Well, I mean, it depends on who you're with. Right. Maybe if you're with it. But it's like, I think in general, it's limited. Oh, I'm sure it's a crime. I'm sure it's a crime on some level enjoying. It's the crime. That is the crime. Happens to the crime. You're nail in it. I'm sorry. Sorry. Sorry. You know, but here's the thing. This is why you have to make light of this. Otherwise, it is so dark. It is so heavy. And that's what people have said to me. How do you like how? How do you do this? And I say because I think I fully disassociated from the idea of like what the punishment will be for me when I go back home after this. Like the fact that I just brought up the fact that the residential schools is like completely lunacy. There's a professor being like going through the human rights tribunals being charged and literally is looking at jail time and the $750,000 fine. Like the stuff I'm saying about made and medical murder and the stuff that Alex Chatterberg is saying, Alicia Duncan is saying like and the people who have been offered it like Kala Pollock, like Roger Foley, like my friends. We're all lunatics though, right? We're the bad people. We're the ones that have such and have their show shut downs, their loser mortgages that were the ones while these other people get to go around and beg and plead for money to kill your loved one. And then somehow look at me and say, I'm the psychopath because I don't want to watch someone murder someone and then like brag about it. It was the most beautiful thing I've ever girl, go get help, which the other thing, you know what a cop shoots someone, right? They on the job shooting and then they have to go to a psychiatrist and they have to get cleared. Some of these doctors are doing four and five a day and they never have to see a psychiatrist or psychologist. We never check on them. We never ask them, how's this affecting them? Furthermore, we never sit with the families and go, how are you feeling? And I can tell you how their feelings have been in enough documentaries with these families to go, they're not okay. Alicia Duncan has PTSD from witnessing and being a part of this from literally going to pick up her mother's body at the morgue and seeing where her mother cut her wrists the day before and then the day after they shoved the IV into her arm to make her. So I'm sorry. I'm so sick and tired of this empathetic bullshit compassionate speech when all it is is, hey, I'm going to tell you what you're feeling is wrong and now you're going to watch your loved one be murdered and don't tell me it's just grandma because tell me about Keanu. Tell me about Kala Pollock. Tell me about Roger Foley. These are people my age that you're telling that we should just give up and let the doctor murder you as healthcare and then let your family member watch and then your family member if they're feeling sick about it or wrong, they're wrong. Those feelings are wrong. That's wrong. How dare you have a feeling about watching someone murder your loved one while you listen to them. Gas because their lungs fill with fluid and you drown to death and like Dr. Joel Zivet said it is a kin to death by drowning or death by waterboarding. So why is it that the United States government slapped people for doing that in Abu grave or doing it in Guantanamo, but we can do it to Canadian citizens. We never did anything this grotesque to have a grade for all the crimes that the US military committed up a grade. But they waterboard it right. Yeah, they did. Cool. But that's what I'm saying. this is akin to waterboarding. But to killing someone in front of his family, it's like an Aztec religious ritual. Oh, it's nuts. And then to also know that what's happening to their lungs as you're hearing that gargling is actually their lungs filling with fluid as they drown to death in their own fluid, but they can't say anything because they're paralyzed. But we don't even paralyze lethal injection people. We don't. We don't do that. So that's why they closed the curtain. But in Canada, we want it to look peaceful. That's why we use a paralytic. It was so peaceful. Why would we use a paralytic? Why? Why? But the whole idea that, I mean, birth and death are tough. They always have been the suffering. They're the book. Well, they're the book ends. They are. And that is by design. It's not something that we came up with. We didn't come up with life. We didn't create the world. We didn't create our own lives. And we're not in charge of our deaths. Right. Or anyone else's. Sorry. Because we're not God. But the idea, the core assumption is that they're something immoral about suffering on the way out. Yeah. And we used to think this about birth. I mean, when I was born in the 60s, there were a lot of women who were basically just like dope it up for birth because the idea was any suffering and childbirth is bad. It's just inherently immoral because all suffering is immoral, which is insane. But they because of enlightened liberal women actually who said, wait a second, there's some virtue to this. Maybe there's a reason there's suffering. It was women who made that case against male doctors and said, no, no, no, it's not always great to anesthetize a woman during birth because maybe there's a purpose to that suffering. Bless those women for saying it because it's true. Why is it same not true about death? We don't view birth and death as the beautiful experiences that they are. And I know God, I know how woo, I'm going to get it for that. But why, why would you get it for that? Because what I'm saying, how insane would someone have to be to scold you for saying that? So anyway, I was discussing it with someone and the argument was, well, what about ALS? What about ALS? What does somebody else ALS and they want to choose to end their life? Shouldn't they have the right? And I think as hard as it is to say this, you know, there are people who are developing things for individuals like people who have ALS that can still have what are they called like pieces of tech in their brain that allows them to communicate for them. Like we know that like neural length is a great invention. We've seen that with ALS that people have, they've been working with patients with ALS to design this like protocol with them. And so the idea of euthanizing or medically murdering people who have Alzheimer's or dementia because they're not maybe fully with it at that time. It doesn't mean that their soul's not in there. It doesn't mean that they're not people. And then they say, well, but Kelsey, they're suffering and they're in a nursing home and they're by themselves and they're, you know, there's rotting away. Okay. So does that mean that we give up on them? Do we throw them away? Like, does it mean that all suffering is bad and pointless? That's, I mean, there's no sense that suffering can be redemptive that there's any value in it at all. And yet the lived experience of every awake human is that there is a lot of value in suffering. There isn't a mess. That's just a fact. And there is an immense amount of I don't like to suffer by the way. I'm not Russian. Like, I'm not into suffering. I'm serious. I'm from California. Like, I'm against suffering. However, how can you live a life and not notice that suffering is where all the learning happens and the growing happens. That's real. And I think what's really interesting is you have a lot of veterans who speak about it from that way. Like, that's really where our mentality comes or like, suffering is good. To suck is to good. To learn. You need to be compressed. That's why like they say, like, you know, pressure is a privilege. It's what I teach my athletes. Pressure is a privilege. You going out there, getting to do snap after snap after snap after snap, that is a privilege. It may hurt and may suck. It may make you feel sick. But we will hone the emotions. We will teach you how to use them. We will create something beautiful with it. And you will be as great as you want to be. It is no different on the end of your life. You'll get to teach your children, your loved ones, your grandchildren, how to suffer your way through things so that day when life gets hard and it gets thrown at them. They won't go. I'm going to quit. They will go, you know, what I saw a grandpa fight through that. And he told me, you know what, I'm on my way out. But it hurts. But I know at the end of this, I'm going to meet my, oh my gosh, I got, oh, I'm going to meet my creator. And I know that I'm going to go out with actual dignity, not this false hood that has been propagated by the left media and these women who hate their lives and seem to just want to just harm people left, right and center for their own who God knows what. But to suffer is to learn is to grow is to be a good person and to literally experience everything that you were supposed to that God gave you, the good, the bad, the ugly, the painful, the all of it. And for us to sit there and numb people out of it, for us to sit there and say that we have the right to walk into somebody who's already vulnerable, who's already struggling, who's already terrified of death. The truest form of compassion and dignity is to hold their hand as they go and watch them leave. So they are never alone. I will spend the rest of my life dedicated to not only shutting it down, rolling it back, making it illegal, I will find a way financially, I do not care how. And then by the time I'm done all of that, all of those names, whether alive or not, I will put their asses on trial. Your murderers, your killers, and that's it. Nothing more to it. That's simple. You're killing people as healthcare and I'm not okay with it. Amen. Well, I'm certainly rooting for you. And thank you for this saddest segment I've done a long time. So suck. Kelsey shared. Thank you very much. Thank you for having me.