The joke and experience. You know, Jackie Gleason supposedly had an encounter with Nixon. The Nixon and Gleason were buddies and they were drinking and yeah, yeah, it's a famous story that's disputed, but apparently let's go with it though. Yeah, let's go with it. Gleason apparently had said that Jackie Gleason and him were drinking and Nixon was like, you know what I'm saying? Fuckin' UFO? No way! Yeah, and he flew him to see wreckage and they had frozen biological entities and they got a chance to see these things that they had frozen. What? Yeah. What? Yeah. So that must have been like, early 70s. Yeah, something like that. Yeah, yeah. And Jackie Gleason wound up having a house built in the shape of a UFO afterwards. No. Yeah. Yeah. That was for sale. I think I got a decade ago. See if you can find that house. In LA or something? No, it's in upstate New York. But the house looks like a fucking UFO. No. He had a UFO house built. Yeah, Jackie Gleason apparently was obsessed with UFOs after the fact. No. So this is Jack. That must have been UFO and start upstate New York spaceship house. No. Yeah. That picture makes it look bigger. Okay, that's serious. Yeah, that's beautiful. That's beautiful. That's two different buildings. No. He has more than one. More than one. More than one. More than one. Yeah, look at that. The other one. Wild. That's amazing. Yeah. So Jackie Gleason became a UFO freak. Man, I'm going to do that after this. That's a pretty cool looking house. Yeah, it's pretty dope. Oh my god. I wonder if it's still for sale. That's an interest to the mothership. Woo. I'm going to talk to my wife about this one. Yeah. Yeah. That's just serious. Well, now you have this sigma spear. So there's a lot of UFO stuff on this sigma spear. So maybe this should be reserved for taking out the aliens. And they come. I want to take them out. Well, they attack you. They attack you. If they attack. If they attack. If they do attack, I think they could render you useless almost instantaneously. But then too, they're kind of like, why wouldn't they just sit back and watch? I think they're passed right by. If I had a guess. If I had a guess. I mean, just a while as of speculations. I would guess that every civilization reaches a point of technological proficiency when they're also dealing with these territorial warring tribes where they have the ability to literally destroy the earth. And that if this is a natural course of progression for intelligent beings, they get to this point. There's a transition where it gets very dangerous. And if I was from another planet and I was monitoring this, I would be there to make sure that they don't launch. Okay. And that's the theme of the mothership comedy club is that the rooms are called fat man and little boy. And the reason why the rooms are called fat man and little boy is because that is a specific moment in UFO folklore when the aliens start arriving. After the detonation of those bombs, that's when you start seeing this massive uptick in sightings. Really? Yes. And interactions with fighter pilots and these different military bases that have nuclear programs where the bases get shut down and all the power goes off. Yeah. That's wild. Yeah. It's heavy stuff because if you think that they are watching, that would make the most sense that they see that we have nuclear power, we have the ability to blow ourselves up and we detonate two bombs. And then they're like, okay, let's fucking, let's go modern these. Let's go make sure they take that. That's what it's going to affect. It's a little universe. One country right now has them. Let's fucking specifically concentrate on them. And then they have sightings in the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union has the capabilities. No. Yeah, there's a ton of documented sightings and these encounters that happen. So we'll see. And there's not really anything. Very little. Very little. Well, I'm sure they've probably been visiting us. If they do visit us, I would imagine they've been visiting us forever. Like, look, they've got engines. Look, they've got guns. Look, they've got this. It would be fascinating to watch. Look at these territorial apes with nuclear weapons. That's the time to watch. Right now, they're probably just sitting back and having that popcorn. And being like, oh, man. Well, that's an interesting now. We're getting closer and closer to our fucking inevitable demise. That's when the sightings are ramped up to the point where the Pentagon has to start talking about. And they are. In front of Congress. Yeah. I mean, that's wild. Yeah. But it won't pay attention. No, no, it's just like, let's go back to TikTok and Instagram. Well, I mean, they kind of pay attention, but there's nothing that you could fucking put your fork into. Right. You know, it's like what is it? Like, why are they telling us about this? That's also there's a lot of cynicism when it comes like, why is the government telling us about UFOs? Like an extraction, you mean? But what is it? Like what are they telling us because they really have this information and they want to slowly leak it out because this is an inevitable contact moment. And they want to prepare civilization or is it just horseshit? Is it just they're distracting us? And this is how they, you know, institute this drone program where they have this, you know, antigravity device and they can move in same rates of speed. I don't know. I mean, it's just guesswork. That's crazy. Yeah. That's crazy. You could hear from directly from these guys who've actually seen it and experienced it. Yeah. I'm talking to them for a little bit. I've talked to quite a few now. Quite a few that have seen these things and have these experiences. But the Bobbels R1 is uniquely compelling, uniquely compelling because Bobbels without a doubt, a brilliant guy. And he was a legitimate propulsion expert who it's been proven. He worked at Los Alamos Labs and they tried to hide that. They tried to lie about that and say that he wasn't what he was on the employee roster. He has an intimate knowledge of the facilities. They took them. George Knapp took them on a tour of Los Alamos. He knew where everything was. He knew the people there. They knew him. It's wild shit, man. Because if he's telling the truth, he says it's not one that they've recovered, but multiple. And that one of them they think is really old and they got it from an archaeological dig. They think that they recovered this thing in the ground. That's movie stuff. And you see that movie? And we all watch it movies and think it's science fiction, but there's a lot of science fiction that has come to fruition. Some reans to go into the moon to also a space travel in general flight. Just flying. Sure. All of it. Everywhere just like a buck Rogers. No big deal.