Nason knows that Ellen Burger is going is cooperating or is planning on cooperating hasn't done anything yet But he's planning on cooperating and he's gonna give up He's gonna get up. Are ya and several other people Nason feels really pissed off about that. There's a lot of other stuff, you know Ellen Burger's kind of at this point. He's just kind of a jerk to everybody. He's he's always he's entitled min issues He's a short man complex the whole thing. Yeah, so He goes so Mason ends up going to this club where we're seen he's dancing with his girly comes up He's like that motherfucker. I'm gonna fucking beat his ass He's I'm gonna fucking kill this motherfucker and he's like brome with my girl. What are you doing? He's like we'll talk about it later. We'll talk about it later He's like fuck this motherfucker. So he leaves so he walks in Ellen Burger's dead. He's laying in the middle of the of the bedroom one of the bedrooms dead He says he says neck was twisted in a way that he said as now as soon as I saw it It was like he's on very unnatural the way. So I was like immediately I knew oh my god He's dead. He's like I ran I tried to fucking wake him up. Are you okay? Yeah, he's like it, but it immediately. I realized he's dead. Yeah, so He immediately makes start he immediately calls farceon First thing first thing calls farceon because he's got a dead body his best friend is dead in his meth lab I can't call the police Hit right I have a life sentence in meth. Yeah Right here nothing mentioned the money and everything else. Can't call the police. That's not it's not an option. No, so He ends up calling so he calls he calls farceon Farceon Apparently he said he said it sounded like he already knew what was going on come to find out later of course Nathan had Had he said Nathan says they got into an art a fight This is one of many versions. Nathan has said by the way so they got into a fight and He ended up breaking his neck He said but it was probably broken. He said, but he's strangle him. Yeah, snap his neck. He's neck He probably got me an eye lot snapped his neck. Whatever was he killed him so Pete doesn't know what to do So yeah, we've got phone records of all of these guys calling each other back and forth back and forth right after they found Ellenberg dead right we got Arias page you have the records of them calling calling farceon Call them farceon calling Barrero where Barrero calls do they have a direct line to Barrero? Oh, yeah, you can call it peace called directly called the the task force. Oh God, okay, I'm talking for like five minutes ten minutes So so if Barrero's like, well, I've never spoken to that guy I fucking time last two weeks. He didn't talk to you for 30 so we have phone records right after you found your best friend Fucking crystal meth dealer dead. You call it FBI agent right after that. Yeah, records of that. Yeah. Yeah This is these are the records Yeah, Elin see Arias page or farceon's page or Barrero's pager But if you keep going Barrero's office at B&E right here. That's these right here. Okay, and they have the duration. This was 12 minutes 22 minutes Anyway, okay, so this goes on and on because the only reason the reason this is important is that Basically when the homicide started to get investigated and there's a link to the actual agents These guys say tell the homicide detective. Oh, we haven't talked to him in months It's been four or five months. We haven't talked to him since we saw him in Vegas or wherever. Yeah Yeah, no, no, there's shit. I got phone records. Well, there's keep mine too later You're gonna realize everybody blames Racine first they all say he shot him. He shot Ellen Burger Ellen Burger was never shot everybody Even when they eventually get the guy and they're all the documents say shot shot all the guys were saying you know He shot they're from the body. So how would they know well because when nays and pleads guilty? Yeah, he says I choked him to death Why would you say that? Nathan said he choked Nathan says he personally choked into death. Remember we know he broke his neck right? We know we choked him so ultimately though I mean even though everybody points at Racine went ultimately nays and finally says yes, he yes I killed him they say okay Well, would you shoot him with where's the body? He goes no, I didn't shoot him. I choked him to death same thing Racine has been saying the whole time It wasn't shot was choked today well the only reason I keep harping on it is because Later the government's like it's it's all bullshit. No, no, they're not dirty agents. No, that's right All bullshit. That's not true Okay, there's a lot of paperwork that we had other People were says other was a lot of guys walking out of jail a lot of cases getting busted a lot of you know And why is Pete telling everybody this guy ripped me off and stole all my fucking My girl bank account So at some point he starts dealing with another guy named Lance Estes Okay, all right, and who is Lance Estes? He's a drug dealer out of San Francisco. Okay, so you know Estes is a It works out all the time. He's a big guy good looking I they're all fucking good looking guys. They're all driving portions and for our is it's ridiculous The amount of money. I mean it they're superstars. They're all rock stars. They're all working out of it's like what would you do if you were making a $100,000 a month that had nothing to do and Drugs and women Be a maniac. Yeah, so these guys are mainly let alone you're in your early 20s Right so these guys are maniac so he explains what what ends up happening is Lance Estes is dealing with recini and He ends up getting busted he and his best friend get busted. You know, they get they get busted by the By the local Task Force when they get busted they've heard about You know, they've heard about you know, they know recini. They've heard about this dirty agent So they contact him and Pete says to him to look he can get rid of your case for $100,000 So Lance is cocky and you know Estes is cocky and he's like, you know, I'll give you 50,000 up front But I want to meet this motherfucker, you know, he's a fucking tough guy So they go and they meet and he meets them and and Farcey meets farceo and and bur arrows across the street It's never confirmed that bur arrows across the street, but we know from several different different reports that there was a guy There was an FBI there was an it's there was someone across the street. We assume it's bur arrow. Yeah, so he ends up telling him He ends up Pulling a gun on Estes because that's he kind of gets in his face and he pulls out his badge and sticks of gun in his face He says motherfucker. He says I'll put a bullet in you right now I'll put this piece on you as you see my partner over there. He'll say he saw the whole thing You pulled it on me and I fucking killed you now back your fucking ass up. So he's like oh So he realizes okay, he's definitely an agent got this guy over here. He's got this. He's got the badge. He's I'm done Right this guy's for real so they set up a time they give him 50 they meet at a hotel or A motive they meet in a motel give him $50,000 They he gets a room here. He gets a room here. They meet here. They come down. They give the thing It's a whole fucking spy thing right so So they they give him 50 grand and these are reports of the guys talking about how Lance told lancer Estes told him that he had given $50,000 in cash to Racine and that the money was a down payment and was going to blah blah So this is him telling him one of his buddies I gave Racine gave the money to down payment to get my case quashed Okay, so we're good. I just pay 50 grand down. We're gonna get it taken care of What he doesn't realize is that the guy he's telling which is his best friend is Already gone to the authorities and said I know we're supposed to be working with you But my buddy's still selling drugs and he's now dealing with that dirty FBI agent He's now double crossed him. Yeah so Now the authorities are like whoa you double crosses But you're in bed with an FBI or some FBI agent. You just gave 50 grand to so that helps So so did he get his case squashed? Did he end up paying him the full hundred grand and getting that whole thing to care of he does give him a hundred grand But it ends up happening is I mentioned that Lance with this. Yeah, yeah, this is this is his girlfriend by the way So this is Lance this is Lance Estes girlfriend, which is Monica trail, okay, and she tells a grand jury later You mentioned that Lance had met with this supposed at FBI agent or whatever to get him off and he was Convinced by credentials and she says by credentials Did he get a bat did he see a badge and she says yes all badge? Okay, boom Give him the money got the money. There's a dispute with Estes I'm gonna I'll try and start rap trying to get really start cutting through it. Yeah There's a dispute with Estes, okay between farceona Estes Estes basically tries to back out It get it filters down to Barrero and Farsion that Estes has told somebody and They know he's dealing with it. He just gave somebody 50 grand for a dirty agent. So fuck so they say the deals off they get a huge argument Receini puts it back together. He says, okay now it's another hundred thousand dollars So give him 50 he's like, okay, so I think he gives him another 50 and then he's he's going to give him the last 50 He's so there's a huge dispute where they have a meeting and Receini's at the meeting Harrison's at the meeting Farsion shows up Farsion said Harrison saying let's just kill this guy Farsion said talking talking about who let's just kill him talking about Estes He's saying let's just kill him because he's now talking about testifying against Farsion and Barrero so he basically says let's just kill him and Pete's or Receini's trying to talk him out of it. He goes to Farsion Farsion says Okay, kill him if he doesn't bring the money kill him But don't kill him in San Francisco because he lives in San Francisco kill him here because Harrison's talking about going to San Francisco go into his house killing him and killing his girlfriend if she's Receini's saying because her scene is like what if his girlfriend's there? He's well, she else died too He's like nah nah and Farsion goes no Bring him up bring him up here if he doesn't have the money kill him because if he doesn't bring the cash kill him. Okay fine No problem so He flies up He shows up he flies from down from San Francisco to LA. Yeah from San Francisco to LA. They're all gonna meet He's supposed to bring the money. He says he's got the money Pete thinks he's got the money. We're seeing things He's got the money. We're seeing he's got the money. We're seeing he's got the money. Everything's gonna be okay He's gonna give him the money. It's good. He gets there They pick him up Wayne picks them up they walk inside Everything seems like it's gonna be okay. He walks into the kitchen Wayne pulls a pistol out and shoots him in the back of the head boom Estee's dead. Estee's is dead eventually Pete ends up getting busted. He gets arrested for something stupid and Before they can get him out of jail before Farsion and Barrera can get him out of jail. He gets ID and agent Alapa flies in from Hawaii and tries to interview him and so she tries to interview him and he said recini said states You know to the agent Alapa that he had nothing to say to her He wasn't gonna speak to the government. You know he wanted He was certain that Farsion was gonna take care of it was 100% sure keep mind. They show up first your smart and your guilty and You're looking at a lot of time you better cooperate. You're not beating this in trial Yeah, not with this these kind of numbers not with these kinds of people not with this amount of people Everybody around him is getting busted. Yeah, he's been indicted in multiple jurisdictions. You're just done You better expect to fuck any of their die in prison or come out when you're in your sixties. Yeah, so or you cooperate He tells him he tells her basically kiss my ass. I'm good because he knows He's gonna get a drop he's got all them guys boys are gonna get me out. They always do a hundred ran I'm sitting on millions and yeah, I'm good. I'm good Well, hey, so a lot of time goes by kick rocks lady. Yeah, some time goes by and He's getting phone calls from Reza. He's getting calls from Aria He's talking to guys on the phone. I don't know if it's Aria He was talking to was it resident he's talking to people on the phone that people are answering his phone calls and everybody's telling him hang tight They're working on it. They're working on it. We'll eventually he comes to the conclusion after a few months. Yeah Nobody's working on it. Nobody's working on it. Yeah His he gets a new attorney comes in that he tells the attorney He tells the attorney what's going on, but so he's like just hold it off I'm gonna get this whole thing quash the new attorneys like are you fucking crazy? Yeah Wait, man, you got dirty agents. He's gonna let me go tell the US attorney's like, no, no They're gonna get this whole thing quash. I mean they've got me knocked out of out of jail. They've had me released a couple of times now I'm good. They have my buddy or like oh, I mean, I'm good They're like you're fucking crazy. Well weeks and weeks and weeks and months go by fuck and he starts to realize all fuck I'm done. Yeah, so He says so finally he comes to the conclusion Okay, I got a real problem here. Nobody is answering his phone anymore by the way They they stop answering his phone so when everybody stops answering your phone he gets a little desperate. Yeah So he gets a little flipped out and he's like fuck he realizes he's done People other guys are getting busted guys are coming in the prison In there so he says Okay, fuck it and he contacts his attorney. He says Okay, I'll cooperate. Yeah, I'll I can cooperate against some dirty FBI agents Well, they come in and they say Now we're not one on issue complete to a life sentence and that's it He said and then we'll we'll talk about he's like oh, you're crazy What happens is it filters down through all the US attorneys and everything to Barrero and Farsho and and Farsho and finds out Barrero find out that he's talking about cooperating against dirty law enforcement So Farsho and calls everybody together He calls you know the guys that I'm trying not to use too many of you. It calls everybody Everybody meet you on me calls this guy calls that got so whoa He calls everybody together and they all meet Harrison they all meet everybody involved Nason even Nason who killed Ellen Burger killed Ellen Burger Harrison killed Estes Nason killed Ellen Burger calls everybody together. Oh the whole crew Family powwow right This is John Alonso Talking about how well wait, you know what it's it better. It's better like this because Because this is the one Okay, he meets it as girlfriend's house right his girlfriend's name is a Dallis Melendez So everybody meets there she's in her bedroom while these guys are all me and there's several meetings But there's one meeting particular she talks about where she talks about how everybody got together She also she knows everybody except for this one guy named John something another friend of Rousini's in LA She says he's from he's from He's from Beverly Hills. Well Pete says it's got to be Aria So only guy he knew that was a friend that lived in that area that so he's like he probably came in and just said his name is John He's but it's he's assuming that's Aria. So right LA near Beverly Hills You know, all right, so and this is Alonso So she's got she names all these guys and she can hear them discussing Rousini She hears them talking about Rousini So they're talking about like well, how do you think Rousini killed these guys? Keep in mind the two guys Actually killed them are in the room. So she's not quite hearing she's hearing bits and pieces Well when they leave there by the way one of the people that shows up at all Jesus is first shown first shown shows up He has this little meeting and in the meeting This is exhibit of 50 by the end of that meeting everybody has agreed that That Rousini Committed the murders. He killed both guys. So far shown goes in and says There are homicide detectives investigating there wanting to talk to people They're gonna be talking to you guys. They're gonna find you. They're gonna talk to you when they do You just need to tell them Rousini you know, I'm telling this you necessarily Saw it but Rousini or you heard or whatever we need to point to Rousini He's right now trying to get us fucked up. We get fucked up by guarantee you you guys are all getting life sentences Yeah, keep my they still think he's an FBI agent So we're telling you right now Rousini shot him that's what happened. He shot him. He helped the spade dispose of the body He shot him dispose of the body. That's what you're gonna go with. They said, okay cool Everybody says okay, so immediately when these guys get interviewed They immediately all start saying That Keep my feet didn't have a gun. Yeah, he said I'm there. I'm there. He goes. He's I think he's I had a gun one time He's like you know, he's like he's not a gun guy Right is at that level dealing with those guys. You don't really bring guns. Yeah, you're when you show it with 50 kilos of ice or something You don't bring a gun because you're just in that much more trouble. You're probably already dead It's and you're dealing with you don't if you don't deal with people that you need to bring gun right? So anyway this guy talks about how He heard he heard rumors that Pete killed him that Pete the guy owed him money So Pete killed him what kind of gun did Pete had did Pete have a gun? Yeah, yeah, Pete had a gun Pete had a nine millimeter blah blah blah Okay, so he talks about that. This is this is one guy. This is Alonzo says that Let's see this is This is so then Eventually, and I'm gonna fast forward this because Yeah, so this guy Odessa Melinda. She says again that Harrison said that he had he had dealt with the cleanup of the body She admits that he cleaned up and that but he says recini killed him Like why and at what point did they go to law enforcement and say that he killed these people? They didn't go there. They know that law enforcement showing up at some point Comercising them homicide detectives are leaving cards on your they come home one day They're sitting outside your house. They start getting picked up. They get mainly about sts Right about sts. They're elan burgers. You know no one no one knew how to have an alamurger Right well, they kind of know what they don't know No, but rumors they found the body of sts. So that's so this guy here says He says that elan burger. They called elan burger beetle by the way So he says you know beetle and beetles room. He says that he after that after you know Pete killed him. He saw the blood stains There's no blood stains. He was had his neck broken right. So there was a huge pool of blood from the gunshot wound that didn't actually happen So Okay, so all these guys start losing sardom failing polygraphs by the way Yeah, so stories falling apart right Harrison Harrison who shot Estes says that that you know that Pete did it Gunshot wound, you know in the head. This is a footnotes is that 70 87 and 70 talk about it So I mean see the thing is is that I like I could go fucking on and on and on anyway Ultimately nascent ends up filing some paperwork and in the paperwork Pete all to Pete gets the paperwork If to understand when you you know the cases are long so you learn things slowly people are talking to But as you can if I can read your paper it helps give inside in what happened in my case. So nascent eventually fouls paperwork where he explains He explains about getting paid $30,000 from Aria. He says for a drug transaction Pete says that's not possible because we were the ones who were supplying all the drugs. I don't know if he was telling drugs But whatever the other thing is he says that he was called to a meeting at Wayne Harris's girlfriend's house named Odalis Melendez and that there was a whole bunch of people there and that any names of them off You know John Alonso this guy Dean Zurich or something George Merzick Mark Farshion was there Wayne Harrison bunch of guys were there and that he says specifically Farshion said that He was cooperating he was a ungrateful bastard I think somewhere he they said is and that they they need to put the murders off on him and Nathan came there with like his two with three of his cousins He shows up with the three cousins So they're all there while this discussion's going on and Mark Farshion tells them that they have to put everything off on recini recini killed them recini shot him in the head blah blah blah tells them all the same thing that Melendez says same thing other guys say there was multiple meetings and Nason gets so upset about it He doesn't like the idea of frame remember he didn't like the cooperation thing either He didn't like elan burger was cooperating. Yeah, he doesn't like the fact that now these guys are saying We're gonna put it off on recini when he knows recini didn't do it right But they're saying look you too though that gives you off this guy's too honest He's the kind of guy that he's the opposite of shrinker. Yeah, he's the kind of guy He ends up doing 25 years for being so honest So by the way, this is when Robert Mueller comes into picture. Okay, so Mueller the There was something called there was a supreme prawn there was this guy that ends up There's a there's a whole thing about dirty agents in this office So Mueller comes in to kind of clean up the office They the the department of justice says look Mueller We're gonna send you over there to clean it up. So Mueller comes in he fires a bunch of people I mean while there's yeah, there's because there's multiple cases like this going on where there's dirty agents We're up a whole United States, but even in this air in his jurisdiction. Oh, okay There's in there in New York there and whitey bulger is happening at this time Okay, whitey bulgers Bribing an FBI agent. I think a agent Connolly or something like that So you know there's all this is this is happening in multiple jurisdictions in department of justice And this is during Mueller's reign the whole whitey bulger thing is during is that's also during that was all investigated by m by molar Mueller was the one of the assistant US attorneys or one of the he was he was in charge of the task force one of the task force That was investigating okay Bulger so he was involved in that but you know He's way up here. Yeah, he's happened to be one of the many guys in the chain I don't think he necessarily had anything okay super to do with it There were allegations, but you know, they're who knows right listen. I like and only solve one thing at a time So what what ends up happening is Deep this elephant once wounded at once spoonful at a time. So this guy Okay, so this is the document where Mueller comes in and they start asking for evidence so now they've arrested they've arrested Harrison they've arrested Wayne Harrison the guy who killed Estes and they've arrested Frank nason So nason's been arrested Harrison's been arrested. They are kind of joining forces and they're saying look they're going with what's called a It's called a public authority defense where and they say We thought we had authority to do what we were doing Initially give mine at this point they failed their polygraph exams Everybody's failed some of these guys failed like three of them Okay, if you go on the website you'll see I got one after another the story keeps changing change Well, so they're like no So and so Pete killed them. Okay, then it's okay. No Pete didn't kill him Harrison killed him I saw the blood no, I didn't see the blood no He killed them know this not just they keep changing change every time they fail Eventually they come clean there and basically as clean as they can Harrison killed them and But it was a recini who ordered it can't say the FBI We can't say the FBI ordered it because that would be a major fucking problem We've already been told so it's somebody you can you know Why would you say anybody ordered it? Well you have to say somebody because if if I'm Harrison and I say I killed them Well, why'd you kill him? All right, I can't really tell me to somebody told me to kill him Yeah, it's better for me to say that Danny told me to do it because then I get to Cooperate against Danny. Mm-hmm. So you don't really want me because I wouldn't have killed them on my own Danny did it. Oh, you got a card to play right so that's what happens is they all start pointing at recini so He is putting together a case so he goes to Racini give mine at this point they've now focused in on recini We've got all these people saying recini did it. They're all willing to testify We got like eight guys ready to say recini did it in some form or fashion We're talking about this guy saw blood this guy did this this guy did that this guy's got a gun Everybody's saying he did it Pete knows you screwed. They so bad it becomes a capital case They actually have a small like a little trial kind of thing they go to Washington Pete's attorneys go to Washington They have a little trial to decide in front of I think Janet Reno To try and fight or try and figure out can we kill Pete? If we find him guilty can we execute him? And they say so they they Pete's lawyers lose that and they say yeah Yeah, yeah if you can prove all this and he gets found guilty he's gonna be executed So now you're on death row you're one of the first people on death row the other people that were on death row at that time other than Recini it's recini it's the unibomber and it's Timothy McVeigh the Oklahoma City bomber Ted Kuzinski right Timothy McVeigh Pete recini I can do what they didn't even do that That's fun so so what What ends up happening is and keep mine he was all the evidence they explain is that Pete killed him he shot him with a gun You know, you know, what are the gun? Yeah, it's different if you can't win and said I He was a conspiracy you're saying you're telling these people I shot him. Yeah, and he loses he's gonna get executed So okay, so he comes back number of circumstances were okay, so what happens is molar at this point Pete played skillty They go to Pete and they say listen He's telling trying to get him to plead like to a life sentence, you know first and then they come back and finally they go back and forth The lawyers go back and forth and molar back and forth and what happens is Molar says look here's what we'll do the Pete knows all these motherfuckers are Test-rated testify against me. I didn't do this. Yeah, so I'm pissed so that whole code thing I'm right. It's out of my throat. Yeah, right. So Molar says listen. Here's what I want to do. Molar knows this dirty FBI agents involved But he comes in and says look here's what we'll do We have Pete we have recini plead guilty to 40 years and I'll allow him to cooperate against these other guys and we'll get his sentence cut Significantly molar says a molar says that to Pete's attorney. Oh takes a lot of convincing But Pete's like I don't have a chance. I don't have a prayer my parents come in. They're like look what do you do? The guy you know, wait come on these guys are guilty or not you're gonna be found guilty. Yeah doubt in any way You yeah, so Pete says okay goes to trial. He pleads guilty to two counts of Conspiracy to commit murder and the furtherance of a drug conspiracy. He goes 11 worth goes 11 worth a few months later Molar shows up with this guy burrows Bruce Burrows, right? So he shows up with it, which is the FBI he's over like the FBI It's like the top one of the top dogs of the FBI he's over the whole task force these guys are all working for him He knows them He they come in they meet with recini Molar says okay, these two guys are going to trial. I Need you to tell you said you're testifying and he goes okay. Okay. Yeah, I'll testify to testify He goes okay. Well, let's talk about this so they sit down and he says okay. So when did you uh Did you shoot the she said no, I didn't shoot him? So you didn't shoot him he's like okay, but you told me to shoot him that right and I tell him he's shooting him by We mean he goes You just pled guilty to conspiracy to commit he's like Guilty because you had like six or eight guys that were gonna say I pled guilty. Yeah, right It's like you don't think I'm gonna testify to that. Hey He's like well what happened? So he explains what happened? Well, there was this dirty FBI agent Molar's been hearing this yeah, you've seen how many people are saying it right? There's dirty FBI agent. There's this guy Ferrara, you know first young now Pete now knows The guy is not he's at this point Pete knows. Okay. Well first known is not an FBI agent. He's actually a An informant professional informant. So he says okay, I take this out. That's hurting me. So he says okay No problem so he goes okay He talks to him and he says okay. So what happened? He said I was paying him this pain. I'm that he's like what they're both taking notes Molars taken notes burrows is taking notes. Okay, so what happened? Okay, this this is like well When did you do this when you do so everything? He's telling them Pete's unraveling his entire case as Pete thinks he's helping to cooperate and tell molar what really happened He's actually destroying Molars Kate higher case as Pete thinks he's helping to cooperate and tell molar what really happened. He's actually destroying molars case. Yeah. Cause molar had a very simple case. He's all fucked up. These guys were informants. Pete didn't like that. He was afraid they were going to form on him. He told these guys to kill them. They both killed them. They got rid of the bodies. It's a pretty simple case. Yeah. Nothing to do with FBI agents. Right. Right. Molar don't want it to have anything to do with FBI agents. This guy's on the short list to become attorney general. Yeah. Okay. And keep so he's so he doesn't need this. He doesn't need this shit storm that this would stir up. This is another whitey bulger. This is another. Uh, um, um, shit. Why don't forget the other guy's name. Anyway, there's like a supreme chip wrong. This is another. This is another preacher prong. Right. This is another huge dirty agents. The whole thing blows up and his name is attached to it. He don't want that. I'm here to clean this place up. Yeah. So he says, okay. So they he goes through the whole thing and starts explaining the whole thing. This meeting takes place over three days. Molar actually leaves goes back comes back for two more days with burrows. They take notes, everything. Okay. He's telling him about dirty FBI agents. Tell him about the murder. Tell him about how it was ordered. Telling them that Mark Farshion is the one who said to do it. Yeah. Not to do it in San Francisco. Do it here. Don't let him find the body. Got the $50,000. Tell them everything. So devastated. Molar's case. Yeah. He then says to molar or molar than at the end of it. Molar says according to Pete, he shows him. Molar one Pete gives him. He's like, yeah, but these guys haven't talked to you in this long. Whatever. What do you mean? They say that haven't talked to you pulls out the fucking records and says, really? Cause I talked to him here. I talked to him. Pete has all the fucking phone record more phone records of all these phone calls between these guys, burrows, pager, Farshion's page or this day, this day, right? Molar. Really murders right after the murders way past the murders with you guys. They haven't talked to him forever. So goes through the whole thing and then it really unraveled everything. And it travels everything at some point. Molar asks shows them a picture of Arya and ask him about Arya. And he's like, that's Arya. Molar says, look, I'm bringing you back. I'm going to have you testify in front of the grand jury. We're going to indict these, uh, these dirty FBI agents. Going to get your sentence reduced. And he signs an agreement with people. He, he gives Pete an agreement and iron clad agreement that says he will reduce his sentence, which never happens. Never happens to no specific amount just says he's going to reduce it. Just says you're going to, you know, you can't tell what the judge is going. Like I can't tell you the judge is I can, I could tell you I'm going to put in the motion. I'm going to put in front of the judge, but I can still judge his decision to do six months. You could do six years. Right. We don't know. Basically they take all these notes and they created a 302, which is the official document, the official record for the FBI, which is supposed to be a, a clarification and condensed version of, of an interview. What's important? I just told you about dirty FBI agents. Told you about payoffs. Told you I did not order the murder of anybody or conspire to murder anybody. Yeah. They craft the 302. Then say a fucking thing about payoffs. Doesn't say anything about dirty FBI agents. Does anything about him denying anything? So with you and you read the 302, it basically talks about drug transactions and talks about a murder and it makes it sound almost like Pete might have been involved. Doesn't say he's like, he ordered it, but it's close. It makes it sound like he's part of it. Part of it. So what happens is Mueller prepares a document, goes into C. Mason and Harrison and he convinces them. And you know, I'm not going to go to the whole thing, but it's a whole thing where he comes, he basically goes in and says, look, I got a 302 here and gives him the 302 and tells them all he's going to fucking testify against you. He's going to say that he did order the murders. These guys know he didn't order the murders. Yeah. So now he's flipping it on you. You go to there and start talking about dirty FBI agents ordering murders. Brucey and he's going to say he ordered the murder. How is that going to look like you're lying? Yeah. And that's, you know, so that's what happens. So these guys end up taking a plea. They take a plea for 25 years of peace, knowing that that's that, because they're terrified that we're seen East goes, who that's Harrison and all those Harrison and Harrison and Nathan take a plea for 25 years for each murder. They both get 25 years because Mueller's telling them that we're seen he's going to testify against you and he is going to say straight up lie straight up, right? Some mothers just playing them. Yep. You're not a lad and he's prepared a document that basically support me. When he finally gets into plea guilty and he talks to nays and nays and says, I choked him. Why is he decided to say that all the sudden? Well, because he's pleading guilty anyway. He's like, I didn't shoot. Well, how did you kill him? Why am I killed him? How'd you kill him? I choked him down. Oh, shit. That line's up with fucking what we're saying. So now Mueller really knows we're seeing everything. We're just guys saying that he was the truth. These FBI agents are dirty. Right. Everything is needed in order the murder. Right. So, but they, they plead guilty. They get there 25 years based on Mueller's lie. Based on that. Yeah. So I got the document here where he says, we're seeing the act or sorry, where nays and actually says at the direction of recini, you know, that he killed him. Yeah. Recini's direction. And then very within a few months or something like that, he, Mueller gets appointed to or nominated to be the FBI director. And I only bring this up because I believe that Mueller shifted the blame from the FBI to recini, right? I believe he shifted that blame. I believe he covered up. I think he didn't start the conspiracy. Right. Mueller didn't start the conspiracy. The FBI, um, Burra, Blum, Burra and far show and started the conspiracy. They got the guy murdered. They ended up, they ended up starting getting everybody together to frame recini. They did that. But Mueller ran with the ball. It didn't turn around and do what he said. He was going to do. He didn't indict these guys. He just kept it going because it was in his best. Why do you think he really did that? Do you think it was somebody above him that was pressuring him? Or do you think that was all in this? I think it was him. I think he's just the personal career. When to look good, right? What a good answer. How bad is it going to look? How, look, I'm going about my job. The moment I start saying dirty FBI agents, it's a, people lose their job. Left and right. These guys are retiring left and right. All these guys that were involved in and bulge or case and, and, and, so, let me and all of these cases, it doesn't look, these guys are immediately, so it's going to be a domino effect. Right. Yeah. Okay. They're not being involved in that. I'm about to be named Attorney General. Right. Turns out he would have gotten, didn't have to say anything about your agents. These guys got 25 years. They did commit the murder. They got 25 years. This guy, Rossini, they're going to reduce his sentence. Who knows by how, you know, so he's cut, you know, I'm sure he justified it. They're just, he's a bad guys. Yeah. They're drug dealers. Fuck them. They're not a US attorney. Right. This is the top shelf guy. So here's what he does at his nomination, the nomination of Robert Mueller. I just love this quote. I just have to read this quote. Yeah. Read it to me. This is a quote. One of the, one of the senators says, do you believe there is a cultural, a culture problem within the bureau, the federal bureau? He says, I think it is, and that, so they're talking about all of these problems that Bureau has. So Mueller's answer is, I think it is absolutely unacceptable to try to cover up and not disclose something that needs to be disclosed. And more importantly, or as importantly, it's unacceptable to try to shift blame to someone else. Wow. Which is exactly what he just did. You just fucking did. Right. And when he, when he puts his kind of like their, his resume, like all the things I've done, his last case, this one, it was only homicide cases. He's ever worked on. And a death penalty case, probably the only death penalty case he worked on. He uses Rocini's case. He says, I hand old with others the prosecution of three individuals for the killing of two persons whom they believe were cooperating with the federal narcotics investigation. So he actually uses Pete's case as part of his resume, part of his resume. So after Mueller disappears, right, they assign a new guy. They see him this guy, David Hall. So David Hall. So Rocini puts in a motion immediately saying, Hey, it's been fucking months and months and molars, a guy to him. He's just turned FBI. Nobody's talking to me. What's going on? He puts an emotion to compel them to reduce the sentence. Why I'm done. So he says, so they, they respond by saying, so Hall's response to Rocini's, Hey, I have an agreement with these guys. Of course there's nothing in the file. And what he's saying is I have a guaranteed agreement. So Hall looked at that and said, we don't give guaranteed agreements. Right. So he's lying. He writes, he even puts at no time was the defendant promised any deal or reduct reduced sentence by the government officials interviewing him. Oh, he's got to be so pissed off when he reads. But he's got proof he has his copyright agreement. Pete fucking's like, what the fuck? Oh, that's hell. No. So he doesn't, he doesn't even file it. Nothing. He mails at straight to the judge. He mails at straight to the judge. The judge who just read that gets this from Mueller stating that, uh, the government is after you agree to cooperate. You know, uh, the government in turn agrees to file a motion under rule 35 for a federal rule of a criminal procedure setting forth the extent of and significance of your cooperation. Such a motion will be filed at the conclusion of your cooperation. He's done. He's done. Um, you understand that the government's motion will set forth extended. So it goes on. So it's a guarantee. Yeah. He doesn't say substantial, you know, will consider. No, no. So he sends this to the judge and the judge is like, oh, hell, no, bring him back. So he'd bring him back Wilson Leon, which is another one. Keep on, these guys got five attorneys working on his shit. Yeah. He's got like him. Yeah. Like maybe his parents like leverage their house and get him one attorney. So how are you, how are you doing that? How are you fighting that? Okay. So I'm at this. I'm a day of helping him at all or no. No, I'm at a is in a round then. Okay. This is this way back in 2000 and like, this is 2010. Okay. So he ends up, they come back and they say, they come back and they say, yeah, we don't have any file. We don't have any records. We don't have any notes. All the notes were purged and this is, that's what it says here. It says, uh, uh, basically this guy is, it's a declaration saying that, uh, had no other documents or records related to the case that they have everything. That's it. This is, this is a declaration. This is, this is them telling the government of the court, Hey, nothing else to give them. Fuck them. Sit. Okay. Fine. So then there's a, then they go. So then Bruce Burroughs, remember Burroughs, went and took the note. The guy who actually was taking the notes, Burroughs comes and so they investigate have Burroughs come back. So he comes back and this is just to clarify that these notes are, are when Burroughs and Mueller went to the penitentiary for three days to meet with recini. Yes. Right. Right. Now, molars notes, we never find they're gone. Molars pretty sharp. Sure. I mean, we don't keep around evidence that can be. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, so this, so keep in mind, so, um, they talk to Burroughs. This is, this is his transcript. Right. So Burroughs, uh, Bruce Burroughs gets on the thing. They say, uh, records be clear. This is a reference to the three, uh, the three meetings with Mr. Mueller, blah, blah, blah, blah. Uh, he would, uh, then they asked basically what's he in, did, did corruption, uh, at all, uh, come up with recini. He says no. Did he ever mention anything about corruption? Yeah. I never say anything about corruption. No corruption. No corruption. Did he ever, did he ever display, uh, disclaim any, uh, expressly, disclaim any involvement in, uh, Ellen Berger's murder? No. Did he ever expressly, uh, disclaim involvement in, um, you know, in SD's murder? No. Okay. So did he ever in any way disclaim, there was a concocted conspiracy to frame him? No. Never who's saying this. This is Burroughs is saying he took all these notes and you're saying he never mentioned a conspiracy. No. Pete's like the fuck. Yeah. What the fuck? Um, were you able to confirm allegations of corruption? No. You know why? Because they never looked into it. Yeah. So if I say this guy's corrupt and I got five people that will say they were there when he brought them, the money. You got to go talk to them. You can check the records from the hotel. You can check everything. If you're a molar, you don't follow that up. Right. You don't want to. And there's paper trail. I got my murders. I, I, I, everything, I'm not following leads that point to the FBI coming in being involved. I can't follow that. Oh, no. I mean, we don't even look into that. Right. Um, so they start talking about the, so this is Pete's lawyer, starts talking about the 302 that was created and how it's not quite accurate and is it exact and well, how did you create it? Because, you know, I'm not sure my client says it's not accurate. And he says, yeah, I did. He said, did you take notes? He goes, yeah, I took notes. I do. Oh, do you have, you know where the notes are? He said, did molar take notes? I don't know if molar took notes. Okay. So you did take me. Yeah. Yeah. I believe I did. Okay. Do you have the notes? I do not. Uh, where are they now? They should be in the file. Which file? The FBI file. Your honor. If there are notes. This guy, Vermollin, which is Pete, uh, recini's lawyer says, whoa, your honor, if there's notes in the file, we need to see those notes. Yeah. We've asked for the notes. Oh, okay. So guess what? They go and they look in the FBI file. And they're the fucking. They find the notes that they've already said or were not there. Yeah. Not there. Been purged. There's no records. There's no, bam, here's your fucking notes. This is, this is, sorry. This is funny. This is good. You as a journey saying this is after they find the notes. Pete said when he brought the notes in and laid them down and they started going over the notes. And I was like, well, what do you say? He goes, Pete goes, you know what's funny about that? I write this in the book where he says, he says, you know, the funny thing is he goes, he'd done everything he was supposed to do. Like he filed the right motions. He'd set all the right things. He'd done all the right things. He was, but when he saw the notes, it was the first time I could tell he believed me. Yeah. He's used good attorney. He was, but he was going to the motion. This when he looked at the notes, he was like, fuck. Yeah. He couldn't believe it. Yeah. Right. Because you know, you assume that the guys lying to you. Right. So anyway, this is one of the US attorneys telling the judge, our files, our internal files were purged years ago. There's nothing else. So that's why they can't find the, so the three or two is not synonymous with the notes. It's, it's vastly different. Right. And he says, uh, so they left out all the corruption and all the stuff. Leave out everything. Everything. So what ends up happening is she says, okay, we're going to let you talk to Mueller. We're going to bring Mueller back. Make sure they don't find the body and here it says that they said, says, not to kill him in San Francisco. Okay. So what is that from? This is from the notes. This is boroughs notes. Okay. This is boroughs notes when they're talking to him. He's talking to him. Right. Now keep in mind, he's got a bunch of notes, but these are the ones that he leaves out all these things. He leaves out of the three or two. The three or three number mentions anything about corruption, 50,000 are pay off or anything. The hotel, nothing. Keep mind to multiple people are there. All he's got to do is go talk to these people. People were there. Mueller don't go. No, not sure. She didn't talk to them. Can't have, we can't be generating. Can't be. These notes are here. These notes are here. So it's done. They got them. They got them dead to rights pretty much. Well, do they? Because you would think you would think declaration of the finite recini submits. So recini here explains what he told Mueller in this whole thing. He ends up taking and he's on a screen, everything. They talk to him. He's only only got two hours. So they go through the whole thing. And you can read this. This is all on the website. And this is like right after 9 11. Right. It's no, it's a while out. This is a while later. Like this happens in about 10 years. It's a 2011 now. That's how I make it a Mustang. Okay. Keep my Mueller's been constantly putting this off. Yeah. You know, I've meetings with the right house. So finally they say we'll do a conference. We'll they do a conference. It's only going to be two hours. So okay. They ask basically. Yeah. Let's let's try to summarize that. Okay. Summarize the whole thing is that they start asking him questions. Did they talk about this? Did they talk about this? So this is the one that I love. So he's expecting him to say, you know, he's like, he's like, he's like, I'm expecting him to say that I just what happened? Yeah. Just say what you talk about. You're like, I'm clean. He has no choice. Did Mr. Christina ever flat out deny he was involved in the murder of Ellen Berger or X or or S. He's did you ever deny it? No to the contrary. He implicated himself substantially in both of those murders. What about the notes? Oh, I'm just Mueller. Oh, yeah. Mueller doesn't know they found the note. Oh, okay. That's what I'm saying right here. Cause they ask him, did you review this? No, did you review this? No, we sent you this. Did you know? No, no. Did you he's like, all I looked at was the 302. Yeah. Because he knows because he helped probably help craft the three of it. Right. Of course. Yeah. So then they start going through and if you read it on the thing that I, you know, in the book, if you read it on the website, which I mean, I know we're trying to wrap up. So he ends up saying, um, he says, Oh, received downplayed his role substantially. He did this. He did that. He then they start saying, so he, it starts to become obvious as they're asking the questions about corruption or where you're involved in this, where you're looking at this, we're looking at this. He starts to realize something's, you know, you start to realize something's up. Yeah. It's got to know something. So it's like, uh, then he starts immediately saying, they start asking about corruption law enforcement investigation. Did you look into this? Did you, did you know who this person was? Did you know who this person was? So they start asking about Harrison and Nathan, right? And recini preparing to test, preparing him to testify. They start asking about all these different things and one of the things they start asking is about the, uh, about he's like, why would you co see him? Well, we wanted to make sure that we were going to prosecute the right person. Right. You, you did. Right. So, so what he told you was completely contradictory to that. So he says, uh, did you review all the, all of the notes? He's like, no. Well, how about the law enforcement reports? Did you review those law enforcement reports? I reviewed the 302. Uh, did you talk to Agent Burrows or anyone under this and he says, not that I recall? No, I said, yeah, I'm going to talk to anybody. Right. He's in Washington. These guys aren't called. You can't call the FBI director. It doesn't matter who the fuck you are. Yeah. That's either president. The, and nobody thinks he's anything's wrong. A lot of these guys are just going about their normal day. Right. Right. They don't realize this guy's going to get on a stand and say all this fucked up shit. So, uh, when you went to talk to recini, you know, do recall, you know, Farsio, Barrera or Blum and, uh, and about the investigation, he says, uh, I'm not certain. See what I'm saying now he's done? I'm not certain. It's been too long. I can't remember. Can't recall. He starts doing all that shit. I can't recall. I can't recall. Uh, what about Farsio and what about this? The case, not that I'm, I'm not saying, you know, so he starts fumbling and fumbling and fumbling. My favorite part is when he starts to kind of get him into a jam. He says I don't recall. Like, yeah, oh, he says a hundred. I don't recall at this present time. I do not recall what I was thinking or in my mind at the time. He's like, do you remember reading this where they were saying it was about corruption? They were talking about, they were focusing in on corruption. And this and this, he says, uh, do you recall at this point having read that or nice that I don't recall, but I can tell you I adamantly agree, uh, disagree. Mueller kind of basically, you know, snaps, you know, a police officer did not pull the trigger or kill. And he cuts him off. He's like, I'm not, I'm not saying he did. He pulls out the handwritten notes and they start going over the handwritten notes. He starts pulling the lawyer, the lawyer. Yeah. Recini's lawyer. Recini's lawyer. Yeah. And he starts to show him the note shows him the Mueller. And then he just fucking turns into, listen, I don't remember nothing. I don't remember. He feels so. I'll clean the fifth. Did you discuss this, you know, one, two, three, four, call. I could have, then it becomes I could have. I don't have, uh, I don't recall today. If it's in Bruce's 302, we did. Right. It keeps going back to the three O. Does that looks good? Because you know, of course, you can't say for there. Yeah, they cross it. And we know, we know that that's safe. Right. Yep. Perfect. Right. That's all I read. Yep. So he starts talking about testimony. He's that you, if you read the whole thing, everything that we've seen, he said, was correct. And he's, he's really, really trying to back out of the whole thing. And so it just becomes a whole bunch of, I don't recall. I don't know. Well, what about this note? What about this? He's like, I don't know what was in Bruce's mind. When he wrote that, I don't recall. What did you do after Rossini told you all this? Did you launch any investigation at all? You went to live in Worth and the guy just told you that the FBI officer is the one that basically, you know, officer or agent, whatever. Yeah. They conspired to help commit this mortar or that they leaked the information. They could, did you look into that at all? And he's like, well, we may have. It's possible. We could have him because he knows. It doesn't look good if I didn't follow that up. Yeah. Well, we already know Burrow said in his transcript, we didn't look into any of that. Because he's saying that didn't even happen. He's saying now we know it happened. Did you look into it? And he's like, what we could have maybe possibly with there may have been a separate investigation. No, no, we're talking about this investigation. I don't recall. I don't know. It's probably, it's very probable. It occurred. So they go on and on. I mean, it just, bro, it just, it goes on and on. In the end, he just it reverts to him just saying, I don't recall. I don't recall. I don't recall. No, I don't recall. I don't recall. And if you read the whole thing and I know we can't read the whole thing, I know it's ridiculous. It's, it's, you know, it ain't good. Yeah. And this is, this is a condensed version. Keep in mind, this is 136 pages, almost all Mueller saying. I don't recall. I don't recall. Unless you say something bad about an FBI agent, then he says that is absolutely untrue. Yeah. Meanwhile, there's notes from his meeting with Pete that basically say, basically contradict everything that he's saying. Everything he's saying, we've got, they've got notes that say, yeah, exactly. There were, there were, there were payoffs, there was murders. Far soon saying we're knocked a murder. I'm here and make sure they don't find the body. Everybody didn't even look at your hand here. That didn't even look in there. And this is where, so after the two hours is up, then what happened? Like what happens after, after they, after this proceeding is over, he gets resentenced. The judge knocks it down to like, he goes from like 40 years to like 36, the 35 years. So it's like 45 off. Like five off? Five nothing. So he, Pete appeals it. He gets again, again, he appeals it. They say the appellate court says, you're, we're going to let you talk to this guy. We're going to let you bring Mueller back untamed. Oh, that's one of the things they went like, you can't limit them. Yeah. So his attorney basically, there's a new attorney's like, look, they, they calls up, they call up the, uh, Wilson Leon. What is this like a third attorney? Yeah. Yeah. So they call, they call up the use of attorney and they say, look, we're bringing Mueller back. He is, and we're on the keep them on the fucking stand a couple days now. Really dig in hard to the guys like, all right, listen, calm down. Let's, let's work this out. Let's work this out. So they end up, they end up eventually, they end up, um, realizing that this is it. We're done. We're going to bring Mueller back. They've got the notes. So the US attorney comes back and Pete said he was really irritated because he's like, I really wanted Mueller to get back on the stand. But they, they basically they file a stipulation. The government concedes that what Mueller said was inaccurate. And you know, they don't say lie. Yeah. He materially misrepresented the facts of the cat, you know, that kind of of double shit. So basically that what he said was, was inconsistent with the notes, um, inconsistent with what actually happened. Uh, and it talks about, so they concede a whole bunch of stuff. And they agree that everything that Pete said that he denied, he denied it. He denied that he had done all the, uh, that he conspired to do any of anything to kill anybody that he talked about. They, they basically concede to everything that actually happened. They bring Pete back again and put him in front of the court. Again, they once again, the US attorneys come in. They basically miss, they basically misrepresent what actually happened. And they could try and confuse the issues. And they say it's all Pete's fault because he was a leader, organize there blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. It's all him. It's all him. And he gets sentenced again. I think this time it drops to 34 years. They're not a year off. I think they give him 34 years. I think, you know, the two guys that committed the murders, eight, Thanksgiving with their families. Yeah. Right. Pete had a holiday meal in the fucking chow hall. Right. His mother came to see him. You know what I mean? Yeah. I mean, your mother drives an hour and a half, two hours to come see you. It's bullshit. Um, and then all of them guys know it. They can do it. Right. And here's the thing. And, and so the people that actually, the FBI agents and the informant and the people that actually, that actually, you know, committed to the whole, the whole murder and the frame up. These guys are, these guys are at home with their families. Yeah. That it doesn't, it doesn't make sense. And, you know, and Mueller getting on the stand and saying some bullshit. You know, if you read the book, I, you know, it clarified really well where he's just complete. It's just bullshit. You didn't know the notes existed. He's rated a fucking Barry Worsini. He could have caught him fucking loose. He could have said this man did an amazing job. You need to cut it. He could have right then said he, you got to cut its sentence. It's a great, he really helped us. He did this. He did that. And he could have pushed it instead. He did the opposite. Keep him in fucking prison. You know, in the back of the book, I say, I want to say I say he's being released. And it's October, I think it's October, 2025. Okay. Not 24. Might be 24. I'll have to check. Okay. Might be 24. So yeah, October, 2024. Man. What? I mean, that's for this. I mean, and he's already done 20 something years. Yeah, that damn. Someone that's right. That's that's fucked. You know, his mom comes to see him like every two weeks, just like my mom used to come and we used to see each other. Oh, I see. Pete, Pete's a piece of 50. He's 50. It was exactly my age. Wow. So yeah. So I mean, that's it's definitely, you know, and here's the whole thing. Don't even believe me. Just look at the evidence. Read the book. Look at the evidence. You don't have to believe me. I'm just some scumbag. I mean, I have no problem with you. Oh, I don't fucking believe it. Great. Don't believe me. Yeah. Read the book. The fact you're there. It's not even a big book. Yeah. It's an abridgment of a larger book. It's like, it's like 110 pages. It's a joke. There's footnotes. They all correlate with the exhibits. So that's that's that's that's where my end. Keep in mind, things could go bad for me. I could get violated. May for all I know they may come after me. We were talking about getting killed. Yeah. So yeah. So anyway, don't come after us, please. Yeah.