The Gerogan experience. Now, the great pyramid of Jesus probably the most stunning of all these ancient structures. And the stones are immense, and some of them were cut from a quarry that's hundreds of miles away. How do you think they did that? Well, some of them, the granite in the Great Pyramid, comes from more than 500 miles to the south. If you look at the famous Kings Chamber, it's walls and it's roof. The ceiling of the Kings Chamber are all made with gigantic granite blocks. Stunning detail. Stunning detail. Those blocks on the Kings Chamber, weigh 70 tons each. Now, Egyptologists will tell you that, oh, they could move heavy blocks because they put them on wet sand and they pushed them along on wet sand. Well, maybe if you're just at ground level that will do, but when you're 350 feet above the ground as you are in the Kings Chamber, that won't do at all. I don't know how they did it. All I know is they did it. I don't think anybody knows how they did it. They lifted those stones, how they brought them up to that level. I think we're looking again at a lost technology and it was this ancient apocalypse 12,800 years ago that wiped that from the human memory banks almost completely not entirely completely because they were survivors, but removed most of it. Around the world will tell you, sea level rise. It creates a powerful high energy zone. Anything that was existing on those flooded coastlines has just been pounded to hell. I mean, talk about it, Ravel. Well, yeah, I mean, it's going to be a lot more energetic than now. I mean, imagine you're sea level rising at three or four times, at least faster than we've seen rise in the last century. And within their juxtaposed are these episodes of very rapid sea level rise. So you're talking about a very energetic, intertidal zone. And anything that's there, short of large, megolithic blocks is going to be utterly obliterated by the time the processes is through. And I think that this is one of the things that, you know, the archeologists and the prehistoricians, people are looking at that have failed to take into account the severity of these events we're talking about because the question always says, where are the artifacts? Where's the pottery? Where is the evidence that this civilization existed? And I have two responses to that. One, you don't realize the extent of the total remodeling of this planetary surface that took place. Because I mean, we could get into some of the stuff here. I have tons of images where I think maybe we'll get a chance to pull up a couple of really awesome drone footage here before we're done. But once you get into wrap your head around it, you go really, you know, it's like imagine that you drop an atomic bomb on a city. And it completely obliterates it. And then a short while later you drop another one on the same place. What's going to be left? And then 10,000 years, 20,000 years goes by, what are you going to find? What are you going to look for? You know, it's going to be just rubble. It gets reincorporated just into the geological stratum and it's going to be very difficult to differentiate for example, from what's called a conglomerate rock, which is basically we have just a huge jumble of broken rock cemented together. Right? Now within there, there could be all kinds of stuff that's not even recognized as being artificial in the sense that humans had anything to do with it. The other thing is, is when we talk about these ancient technologies, if we're only looking for a mere reflection of ourselves, we could overlook it completely because there is, I think there's evidence that exists now. I mean, modern, some modern researchers whose work has been buried or suppressed, I think we're getting very close to rediscovering some of the things that our ancient ancestors were up to. And maybe this would be worth a whole showing itself. We could dive into this and I don't want to get into that today. But what kind of technologies are you talking about? Well, I just, I shouldn't really get into it. Get into it. Get into it, Randall. We got to get into it. Okay. Well, we've opened the door, sir. Okay. Well, okay. The passing of the HDMI cable. The passing. The passing. The passing. The second moment. Well, there are people out there now who have been working on trying to rediscover that. And again, I don't want to digress too much into this now because I would really rather be able to give a whole treatment of it. I'm not sure if it's a little bit from this, but there are people who've been working on these things for, for decades now, basically in secret, in secret. And I've had the privilege of talking to some of these people over the last six or seven years. And right now as we're speaking, there's a, there's a group of people who are basically going to open source a whole lot of stuff in the next three months. So it can never get suppressed again. And that's why I'd like to come back and talk and we'll deal with. I'd love to have you come back and talk about it. But we got to talk about it a little bit now. Oh, okay. Well, there's a laboratory right now in the mall that's been building prototypes using these technological principles, which are based on implosion rather than explosion. And the inspiration for this. And Tesla Tesla's ideas are part of it. I think you might. Tesla's ideas are very much a part of it. So is, I don't think you ever Victor Schauberger did the work with water and discovered. Yeah. Look, Jamie, could you look up Victor. Oh, I have the, I have the cable now, don't I? Take it back. Let me, let me pull something up here. And I think the key thing is we're looking at technologies that are not the same. as ours. And that's partly why archaeologists can't see them because they're looking for us in the past. And they're not open to the possibility that there are a whole other kinds of technology that could be used. Right. I always go back to the ancient Egyptian traditions that speak of priests chanting as these huge blocks were lifted into the air. Were they using some kind of sound effect, some kind of, some kind of use of sound that was able to manipulate matter. We know that sound can manipulate the sound of a sound. But they're lifting these blocks. It's again and again, it appears in ancient Egyptian traditions. The notion that we could lift huge blocks with sound seems absurd to archaeologist and yet it's there in the traditions of the Egyptologists. And what Randall's talking about now is people who are working on a whole alternative path of technology. And maybe that's a rediscovery of the kind of technologies that we used by a loss civilization. I think that's what's important about what you're saying is that we have this very limited idea of technology based on what we've experienced. Yeah. But if you had anatomically similar human beings that live for thousands and thousands of years. Stuff just keeps on the know there. If you think about the amount of progress that we've achieved as modern humans, just in the last few hundred years, if you go back 400 years to now, it's a stunning amount of achievements. Absolutely stunning. And if you have a completely different path of technology, one that's not utilizing internal combustion engines and cranes and the like that we experience. Leverage, mechanical advantage, everything that our tech is based around. Something that's insanely advanced, tens of thousands of years of a different path. Yeah. And that's maybe what we're looking at. And that may begin to explain these, these otherwise inexplicable monuments that have survived. Jamie, do I need? There we go. This is the work of Nikola Tesla. And he was again, this is way too much for us to get in today. That's why we need to devote a whole session. Okay. But this is, this was the inspiration. You know, his work was suppressed. A lot of his patents were taken sealed up by the US government for whatever reason. I don't know. But this is some of the stuff that's now being developed using his ideas plus some of the others. This is the man I've been talking to for the last seven years. Malcolm Bendall? Yes. And again, I don't want to get into it today, but like here's an example of what they're doing. This is a generator that has no moving parts. It's all based on geometry. Pure geometry. And the, and here's the basic idea is I think I understand it at this point. Residence frequencies. Everything vibrates. Have you ever like if we had an electric razor, we plugged it in, turned it on, set it on this table. It's going to move around, isn't it? Have you seen that? Yeah. That's the beginning of the concept because it's vibrating. Everything vibrates at a frequency. And if you know that frequency, you can control things. And I think that's the basic idea of what we're looking at here. And it's all based upon the ancient numbers. And they're developing technologies right now and they have been. I was recently contacted and given to go ahead that I could talk. I've been sitting on this for seven years without talking about it because they asked me not to talk about it. Until they had their patents in place and their licensing. That's all happened since last summer. So we're now free to talk about it. So that's what I'm saying. I think it would be a good idea to get me back on here. We can look at it. I'm going to lay this on Graham so he can look at it too. Because I really want to get Graham's feedback on this. I mean, wouldn't it be fair to say that there's an element of a rediscovery of a lot of technology from the past? I think it would be fair to say that. Yes. And so through somehow through this technology they're able to move stones or cut stones or all the above. All the above. And even transport them. What is all this? Well, this is the model. And this is diagramming all the frequencies of the elements. And what their vibrational frequencies are and the numbers that measure those frequencies. And they're all the numbers we get from looking at these ancient traditions that recur over and over and over again. That I've been talking about in my sacred geometry classes for decades without knowing what the final result was going to be. So this this inventor who's working with this small group contacted me. And this is what he told me. He said, you built the foundation. He said, you laid the foundation with your work on ancient geometry. And I built the house on top of it. That's what he said. So for seven years he's been supplying me with all the information, I've copied of all the patents. I have videos of the testing of the prototypes. And Mazda, the car manufacturer in Japan is getting ready to do a $25 million testing of some of these prototypes that they believe they can retrofit internal combustion engines with. And there's over 100 that've developed over 100 patents on some of this stuff. And it's amazing. And we'll be the fuel. Well, plasma is. Plasma is as it says here are donut or toroidal shaped clusters of net protons or net electrons that once captured and placed into a a toroidal orbit are capable of absorbing, storing and releasing enormous amounts of energy within their self generated and structured electromagnetic containment field. Plasma is in effect function as an atomic battery that can be self charging due to its ability to convert matter to available clean energy. So it's a lot to get into. And I think it would take us kind of off off what we're here to talk about. But today, at least what's promising is that there is some at least research or understanding. And it's actually quite mature at this point. And in order to avoid the kinds of fate that they fell, Tesla and Reich, Robert Oppenheimer, Victor Schauberger and so many others that were working in these fields, all kind of converging on the same insight. It's been conducted in secret. The laboratory has been that they've been developing this is in them all dive so that it's been immune from government interference. And now I think it's about ready to go the next. And what is the motivation of the suppressing of this information? I think in case of Tesla wasn't it military, the fear of military applications? I also think that there are huge corporations that have very large investments in a particular path of technology, which is ours. And for somebody to come up with a whole new path of technology, very threatening to them. And much better from their point of view to suppress it, or if they can't suppress it to kind of buy it and hide it. And keep things on the track that they're on how. I would say that's the motive. And maybe for people that are curious about this, and maybe even skeptical, consider the massive change that nuclear power provided us. Whereas before the 1940s, this was unheard of, this even the concept of it. And all sudden now we have nuclear power, nuclear weapons, the most profound power known to man currently. God help us. It's a power for use by adults, but unfortunately it's the link with children who are leading our world right now. The leaders of our planet, the politicians out there, they just complete usholes. I can't think of any of them who I feel any respect for whatsoever. And it's they who are in charge of this frightening, terrifying technology. We just aren't mature enough as a civilization to manage technology like that. You have to get that level of maturity.