This episode of the Joe Rogan Experience is one of the podcasts that we recorded while we recording the sci-fi show, Joe Rogan questions everything. A lot of people have listened to those shows and they've said, Hey man, I like your show, but the fucking fake podcasts are killing me. They actually weren't fake. The way we did the show was we did everything that we do during a normal podcast and chlorine, and then we just talked about the subject at hand and of course a lot of times the subjects went on crazy tangents like any other podcasts that we do. But they were all recorded just like a regular podcast and then we had the sci-fi people or the people at Arthur Smith, the production company that made the show, edit down portions of it and insert those. So there were some things that we said that sort of busy work, like things that we had to say, like Duncan, I'm going to send you to go check that kind of stuff. There was just stuff that we had to do for the show, but other than that the majority of it was just regular podcast talk and I promised you guys that I would release it and thanks to the generosity of sci-fi, they have allowed us to do so. So we're going to put all these podcasts out of how many of them are the Jamie? 10 or 11. So there's like 10 or 11. They range between two hours plus for this first one, just short ones are probably like an hour, some long ones. But this is the first one and this one is brought to you by Ting. So if you go to rogan.ting.com, you can find out what Ting is all about. Ting is an excellent cell phone service company that uses the Sprint backbone. And Sprint, of course, is one of the biggest cell phone providers in the world and in the country. So you don't have to worry about getting a crappy cell phone signal along with saving money, but what Ting does is they have it set up so that you only pay for what you use. If you go to rogan.ting.com, there's a sign that says 98% of people would save money with Ting. That's because we do mobile differently and they really do. It's not bullshit. If you don't use, if you like say if you have one plan and then you use less than that plan, they will credit you the difference on your next bill. Who the fuck does that? Nobody. Nobody does that. Ting does that. Twenty one dollars is the average monthly bill per device for Ting customers. That's fucking nuts. Four hundred and forty dollars is the average annual savings per device for a business with eleven to twenty employees. I mean Ting is badass and they have great phones. They have the HTC one, which is one. The one my friend at Google gave me that I've been playing with. I love it. It's a great phone. It's really cool. The devices they have are all top of the line Android phones. They have, you know, these all these beautiful Android devices like the Samsung Galaxy S4 S3 fucking HTC One. They have the HTC One black. If you're looking sexy and you need your phone to be black and mysterious or the HTC One Red. If you're flamboyant, you're just a wild child. You can't be held back. They have the Motorola Moto X, which is a badass device. I've been really interested in that phone. There's all these new phones that they're coming out with, these Android phones and they're coming out with them in a much more rapid pace than a lot of the other providers like Apple. You know, Apple with their five S, you silly bitches. Give me a big screen. You folks. Come on. Seriously? Give me a big screen. I know Ting was going to have the iPhone for a while. They have it anymore. Smart phones, let's say. They have the HTC 8XT, which is a Windows phone. I have not fucked with Windows phones, but I have a friend who loves them. I don't trust him. I think he might be one of those dudes. Some of those people, not saying there's anything wrong with Windows phones, I'm sure they are badass. But there are people that I think you know them. We all know them, that when they have something, they want other people to get it. Like I had a friend and he had this old piece of shit, weird fucking stuff. This was a long time ago. It was like, I think it was a Sony cell phone. I had a, like a little pencil that came with it, a stylus, and he would write on it and he would recognize his handwriting. And it sucked. I mean, it barely recognized it. And it had all these really wonky, shitty apps that would crash on you. But he was just ranting and raving about how great it was. Then I saw the motherfucker three months later with an iPhone. I was like, bitch, what are you trying to do? You fucking tried to sell me on the same shit that you're on. It's like people that are on Sprint, they want you to be on Sprint. People are on AT&T, like you need any. But people who are on Ting or on Ting, because they're saving money, son. They're saving themselves some shackles. And they're trying to set up a cell phone company that does it ethically, that gives you great service, doesn't give you any contracts. You can cancel any time you want. And as I said, if you don't use all of your minutes, they will knock you down to the lower rate and they will credit you. Ting is a mobile service that makes sense. It's a no bullshit mobile service company. They use Sprint, credit on you services, no add on charges, no mysterious line items for your bill. You ever get a bill and you're like, what is this fucking service fee? All that creepy shit that big companies do to try to extract money from you. Ting's not about that, son. Go to rogan.ting.com and save $25 off of any device or service. So go there, check it out. And I guarantee you, you will enjoy it. It is an excellent company. We give them a full recommendation. Brian has been using Ting for quite a while. And one of the things he noticed is when he went out of town, he went to Canada, used Ting internationally. He said, he did shit, load of money compared to our friends who used other less scrupulous services. So go there, check out all the bad ass cell phones. Like I said, I'd like the Galaxy S4. You can get the S4 purple if you're a big prince fan. Or you can get the Galaxy Note 2 titanium. JESUS, they're too crazy. These phones. Go there, rogan.ting.com. And now with a big thank you to the sci-fi network, I really enjoyed working with them. And I really appreciate the fact that they're allowing us to release these podcasts. They were very cool. It was very cool to put the show on and to slam it together so quickly under a short notice. So thank you to them and thank you to everybody over at Arthur Smith as well. Thanks to Frank and Michael and Todd and all the cool folks that we worked with. So with that, without any further ado, this is one of many of the sci-fi podcasts for the Jovian Experience. Big Kiss You All. The Jovian Experience. Join my day, Jovian podcast, my night, all day. This episode of the Jovian Experience podcast is not real. We're pretending that it's real. The only pretend, carefully, properly. Joe, you should go to Canada. I heard there's a hum there. Get the fuck out of here. So over here. Hey, cut. That was perfect. Okay. So there's a lot of people to believe that the government not only is capable of manipulating the weather, but does manipulate the weather. And we know that they've done certain things like we know that people can make it rain and not just at a strip club. But people can make it rain by spraying certain chemicals into the clouds or seeding clouds, crowd seeding. They have actually done that in the United Arab Emirates. They've made it rain 50 times last year. So they do it basically once a week. But this is, this is ever just dangerous. Like the chemicals that come with the rain are poisonous. I don't know. I don't know. Well, it's weird chemicals. You sprayed out of an Arab jet. I don't think it's weird. Let's see it clouds. It is weird. It's a, you never in human history. Is anyone flown over a desert and sprayed chemicals into a cloud? Okay. Let's find out. Is cloud seeding harmful? That's what a lot of people want to know, don't control. And when studying the efficacy and consequences of cloud seeding experience, the experimenters tend to be biased towards saying cloud seeding with silver iodide enhances precipitation without negative consequences. However, much of the literature substantiates that not only does cloud seeding fail to achieve the desired effect, it also yields harmful consequences. Also look up that guy who ate silver iodide. If you ever see that. I've got to turn purple. Yeah, the blueberry man. Yeah. What happened there? You eat silver. These people eat silver out of some that they think it increases their longevity or their virility. And it makes them turn smurf blue forever. Hmm. So this is one take on it. And there's other takes on it. That's the problem with the internet, right? Is that if you really wanted to, you could find a bunch of people that agree with you and just hand those circles. It's the beauty of the internet. And it's the problem of the internet. The fact that there's so much information out there. But if you choose to, you could filter it down and get it to a point where you're not really listening to anybody other than people that support your point of view. I don't need the internet to help me figure out if I want to stand under a cloud pouring silver iodide crystallized rain. And into my yard, like if someone gave you a choice, do you want to stand in a rain shower of pure clean, a lion water? Or would you like to stand in a silver iodide rain shower and enjoy those relaxing silver particles spilling into your skin? Well, here's the other side of it. They can also prevent it from raining. We know China did that during the Olympics. And other than preventing rain for the Olympics, it says here in this article on space-explores.com, whatever. It says here in this article that other than preventing rain for the Olympics, China is spending 60 to $90 million a year on cloud-seeding to provide enough water for its enormous population. To clear away smog from heavily polluted areas. So that's their way of dealing with smog. Hey, do you think we should like put mufflers on our cars now? Let's just make it rain. Just wash it. Oh, yeah. Just push it down into the ground. So if your iodide water good, it's really good for pollution. China is going to give China's going to birth the Godzilla. They're fucking around. We can't say that. Yeah, you can. We'll be put out. No, I think that's a powerful weapon though, man. It really is. If you wanted to attack a country and you could make rain stop, then you would have full power over that country. If you could control their weather, you definitely would win. And then the question is, if you could do that, how do you know you can do that? Well, you have to try it. And how did you try it? Did you try it just during the Olympics? Or did you know about it beforehand? Have you been using it on countries? Have you been aiming it in places? Like how do you do it? Do you have to, is it very specific? Or can it be, can you misfire? And is it people can get caught and drive by accidental cloud seedings? Where would rain in a place where you didn't want it to rain? That doesn't even make sense. Drive by accidental cloud seedings, ricochet, stray clouds. Get man, get a bus, stray cloud. That would be a great time. I'm going to get hit by. You made it rain on my family. I'm not even a crib. Now besides the chem trail issue, which we've met with a bunch of people so far on this chem trail issue, and there's certainly some possibilities that the government at one point time has sprayed something from a plane, for sure. But the idea of this constant spraying in the skies, the idea of this constant spraying in the skies seems to be much more ignorance than anything else. I agree, yeah. And not just ignorance, but like on purpose, like being willfully ignorant, like not looking at any of the things that refute the things you're saying, scientifically, people with no agenda, instead looking only at the things that support it, with, you know, confirmation boxes, like pure and simple. And there's people that make entire documentaries. This guy that I met with, this guy, Michael Murphy, he's got these two documentaries. What in the world are they spraying and why in the world are they spraying? And he refuses to look at anything that points to the fact that what he's measuring, when he's measuring like aluminum, he's saying, well, if you look, we found aluminum in this water, what he's measuring is dirt. And dirt is rich in aluminum. I mean, it's real simple stuff. Right. So that in saying that this is a part of some nefarious plan and some secret thing that he's uncovered, he's being a ridiculous person. Also, I like to think about the specifics of the person flying the plane that it's apparently dropping the poison onto their, like, who are these mysterious pilots? Do they have breakfast with their family? Do they sit down and chat about, oh, yeah, I'm going to spray aluminum dichloride over New York, honey? And the other thing is, it's so non-specific. I mean, everyone down there is the enemy. Everyone down there is to be experimented with, including billionaires, bankers, politicians, they're all getting sprayed on, everybody really. What kind of asshole would do that? That's the real question. And not only that, what a shit result. Like it barely does anything. I mean, stop and think about it all this spring. Imagine if you had something where you can spray this guy, completely cover this guy in this spray, this chemical spray. And what does it do to the people down there? It makes prints freak out. It makes prints freak out. Almost worth it. Have you seen it? We got to pull that up. Pull up prints talks about chemtrails. This is very important, actually. It's a YouTube video. prints talks to Dick Gregory about chemtrails. It's hilarious. It's hilariously awesome. And it highlights a lot of people's ignorance about this issue. Like they haven't even looked into what creates these clouds. And this was a paper that was published by the United States military in the 1940s. And they didn't call them contrails back then. They called them persistent condensation trails. And they were trying to determine that these clouds they were making with propellers, by the way. These clouds, whether or not they were dangerous. And the same conditions were always discussed. It's always like super hazy. And it's at a point just before clouds are created. Like a point in the condensation of the atmosphere where it's almost cloudy. It's just kind of hazy. And when they cut through with the plane, it creates artificial clouds. And when people say they're spraying clouds, no, they're actually making clouds by driving through it with a plane. I mean, it's really simple stuff. Yeah, I've never really bought into that stuff. But I have had somebody explain to me how they're putting poison into the air. Someone explained that to me while smoking a cigarette while taking big puffs on a cigarette. They're poisoning as the deadly chemicals in the air, man. They just want to control the population. Yeah. I've seen people talk about saving the environment while they drive a priest and throw a cigarette out the window. Yeah, it's ridiculous. I don't honestly, I don't understand what makes those things up in the air. I think they're pretty like I've had the crisscrossing patterns and clouds. They're nice to look at on a picnic, but I don't think they're poison. And why is it that they keep appearing near airports? That's crazy. Why would they spray near the airport? Because that way they could do it right under our noses, man. The big slide is a lot that you don't even have to tell. Right. Everybody tells it for you. PS, the government could probably release free packs of cigarettes that say on them, these make you depressed. And people would just bought willingly buy them. You don't have to secretly dump chemicals on Americans. We're gulping them down every day. We love chemicals. Sitting in front of a 7-11 and watch those pigs come flapping out of there with their big gulps. And they're pasty glistening sugar lips and fried hot dogs. You don't have to poison America. The idea that you have to actively and secretly poison Americans is insane. It's ridiculous. So I think we both agree on that they obviously know how to manipulate weather. And they obviously have manipulated weather before. And by they, meaning everyone but us. I don't think you've done any manipulation. So let's just include the whole rest of the population. Someone out there has figured out how to make it stop raining. And they've also figured out how to make it rain. And what I'm saying is how often does this go on? And is this a part of our everyday life that we have to concern ourselves with? And does it spray down harmful chemicals? Are those clouds the reason why people are finding aluminum in the soil? Well, it turns out no. Aluminum is one of the most common elements on earth. And you can find commensurate levels that they've been finding in these tests that they've done that prove chemtrails are real. You find those everywhere all over the country. The reason being, because fucking aluminum is everywhere. So that's something we know we don't have to worry about. So we've got that put aside. So A, planes create clouds automatically proven. B, aluminum exists in the atmosphere all the time. Prove it. Doesn't mean that they haven't sprayed things from the sky. It doesn't mean that they're not capable of altering the weather. We know they are, right? Sure. But then also isn't there always toxins coming off of airplanes no matter what? Jeff, you will just have fire. Yeah. And it sprays. By the way, that's one of the biggest factors in global warming is jets. Giant tubes filled with flammable dead dinosaurs that you're flying over the sky. Right. And that's spraying. That's the real spraying. The real spraying is burning jet fuel above your face, stupid. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. That's the poison. They really are spraying us. Every time you fly to the Bahamas, you're chipping in. That's right. Every time you fly, you're fat kids to Disneyland. You're incinerating like 19 acres of rainforest. I don't think it's that much, but I feel you're a lot of different ways. And I said that. Now, the other aspect of manipulating weather that's fascinating is harp. And I think harp stands for high altitude active rural research. Let's find out one of those. I don't know. H-A-R-P. Just so we know. It stands for, oh, I spelled it totally wrong. I spelled it H-H-A-R, which is the Hebrew home for the aged in Riverdale. Okay. Not the same thing. That's what I said. Don't go there and yell at those people for control in the weather. You are shallotarily people are making it rain. They don't even know what you're talking about. And they will hit you. Okay. High frequency active, a rural research program. Yeah. And this is a fascinating thing because what this is the official use of harp is that they send these radio waves up into the ionosphere and they can manipulate it and by manipulating it, it can aid in communication. They could shut down communication and they could possibly make it so that they can send radio signals and receive radio signals from very far away. What's the ionosphere? The ionosphere. That's a good question. We should get the official explanation without me going into my pseudoscience. Okay. Here we go. It's the layer of the Earth's atmosphere that contains a high concentration of ions and free electrons and is able to reflect radio. So that's the ionosphere. So it makes sense that they would have these this gigantic radio array, antenna array and that they're sending these charged particles up into the ionosphere and that what they're trying to do is manipulate it so that they can use their radios more effectively. However, the conspiracy theory and the conspiracy harp has been blamed for a variety of different events, including numerous natural disasters. This is not me. Some people think they can cause earthquake. Some people attribute it to something called sky quakes. Have you ever heard of a sky quake? No. Listen to this. Okay. We're going to play this for you. This is an audio of a sky quake. And let's play. Let's play the one from Alan, Texas. This is a bunch of people that are standing outside and they hear this. And the freaky thing they say is that when they hear these things that you can't pinpoint where they're coming from, they're just coming from the sky. And in order to have something that's loud that doesn't dissipate with distance, you're dealing with some incredible amount of energy. And the big if is that if this isn't a hoax, right? You get some dickheads in college that think it's cute to just stand around and go, what's that sound? What is that? Yeah. And then they go on their computer and add in some sound effects. Yeah. Just slow down a trumpet and put it in your picnic video and suddenly you've got a 15 billion hits on you too. Exactly. And again, it's one of those things. It's like what exactly are we listening to. But this is sounds cool. I didn't know this is called sky quakes, but I have heard of this. And what I really like is the Judeo Christian explanation for what this is because in the book of revelations, they talk about how the horsemen of the apocalypse blow these trumpets. And that's how you know it's the end of days. So this is really feeding into the apocalyptic Christian theory that we're at the end of the world. And these are the sounds that you hear before the great plagues come rolling through the land. That's what a lot of Christians think. Did you ever see Kevin Smith's movie, Red State? Yes, I did. Amazing movie. And remember the end when they played the trumpets and that's what got the crazy evangelable. I didn't make it to the end. Oh, I was drunk. I fell asleep. I was drunk. I fell asleep. It's where the second look. Now we also have some recordings of what harp actually sounds like in operation. And this is equally freaky. That's not a good sound. That you never want to hear that. Never want to be out on your porch with your dog throwing a stick. And you're like, what's that? What is harp? What do they have? Like demons yelling in microphones? I think it's the garbage disposal of the universe. That's what it sounds like. It sounds like a garbage disposal in space. No, this sounds like interstellar locusts descending on the... When you really stop and think about the fact that there's something on earth that shoots energy up into the sky and makes that noise. Yeah. And then above us, what is it shooting into? The ionosphere where there's like thousands of satellites and space junk flying in and just... Ahhh! Shoo, shoo, shoo! No thanks. No thanks, turn. We're creeps. We're a creepy species. Can you imagine if chimpanzees were blasting the ionosphere with devil screeches? We'd kill them. We would fight them out with two days. There'd be no more chimps. If we found a chimps with a bow and arrow, we'd shoot it right in the head. You'd have to. You'd have to. Yeah. What's interesting about this... Are you trying to like robin hood and make a ton of money? We had this guy on the show that I interviewed. His name is Woody Norris. He's this genius inventor, a true bona fide genius. He's responsible for over 80 patents. He is an audio expert and he listened to the sounds and reviewed the amount of power this thing puts out. And he believes that this array of antennas absolutely could be responsible for those sounds. And he thinks that it could be responsible for manipulating, whether it can... You could have a lot of what you would call off label uses. And that maybe it was initially created to heat up the ionosphere so that they could send radio signals. But along the way, they might have figured out, holy shit, we can make trumpets blow in the sky over Iran. You know how freaky it would be? You know, you get an email from the president. Good luck, fuckface. We're going to war. And then he can't... Yes. You know it's common and you hear trumpets in the sky. Just that alone. It's like listen, listen, we'd be thinking we'd been very hasty. The nuclear, who needs nuclear power, my friend? Please stop the trumpet, stop. The ion has problems with it. We don't want that in this world. No, you know what, man. I think that for whatever reason it's part of the government's job to every day come up with new ways to kill people. And someone who looks at tornadoes when tornadoes hit and thinks, wow, that would make a great weapon. If I could figure out a way to do that, I'd have the ultimate weapon because the problem with nuclear bombs aside from the fact that they like kill hundreds of thousands of innocent people is they irradiate where they hit. So you end up not being able to move into that area as a good conqueror would want to because everything's full of radiation, everything's like Chernobyl. So, you know, and with bio weapons, it's the same thing. Well that was the hydrogen bombs. That was the idea about hydrogen bomb. Was that you could kill everyone there but leave the structures. Yeah. Can you imagine the pitch meeting or somebody's like pitching that? I've innovated something great. We can leave the structures and kill all the people. Great, Jim. But with this idea, it's sort of like an in-between thing which is that not only could you send in tornadoes or earthquakes to wipe out populations, but also you could do it anonymously. No one would even know who is doing the attack. You would just think you were having some bad geological luck for a few years until everything's flattened. And then the UN comes in and it's like, look, we're going to help you rebuild. And then the next thing you know, you've been infiltrated by the Empire, taken over and you don't even know it. It's the ultimate weapon. So it makes a lot of sense that a government or an empire would want to investigate this stuff. Absolutely. And if this was a possibility that would certainly explore and look into it, the real question is, have they ever used it? And that's the beauty of this thing being sort of an anonymous thing. If you really can create a storm, how would you know that someone created a storm or whether or not it's just a storm? You send a nuclear bomb. There's an obvious footprint. There's a room. We know where it came from. We know a human created it. They connect the dots. They find out. It's not like throwing a snowball in a car and running behind a bush. When you throw a nuclear bomb, you get caught. Yeah, he has. Everybody knows you're an asshole. You don't need Columba to solve that one. So the question is, do you think that they've done it already? That's the real question. The question is not, can they manipulate the weather? It's been proven. Can they manipulate it with harp? We don't know. But if they could, have they already? Yeah, I think so. Yeah, sure. If they could. If they could. They've definitely done it. Do you think that they could do it with harp? I think harp is creepy. I never heard those sounds before, but I've seen that array of antenna. And they're spooky looking. And also I heard that security harp is like area 51 level security. And I've also heard that they're very, very secretive about what's going on over there. So I wouldn't surprise me if I had something to do with controlling the weather. That doesn't surprise me at all. I don't know. I would hate to break up with someone who worked at harp. Just rain over your house for a year straight. It's just always cloudy in your neighborhood. Well, let's listen to what some experts say. Because Stanford University professor, I'm Ron Innon, said to popular science that weather control conspiracy theories were completely informed. And he explained that there's absolutely nothing that we can do to disturb the earth's weather systems. And even though the power that harp radiates is very large, it's minuscule compared with the power of a lightning flash. And there are 50 to 100 lightning flashes every second. Harps intensity is very small. But he could just be a shill. Who knows? He could be working for the man. Who knows, man. I got it. I got it. I was there in Stanford teaching all those liberals. He's a lot more credible than some hipster in a fedoro with a beard. The acting of out tornadoes. Are you a hipster, officially? I don't know. But I mean, I think I could be called one. I get judged. I get judged like that. But again, who knows, man? I just think that the government has explored and governments of the world have explored how to kill people in almost every possible way. From coming up with weaponized smallpox to using nuclear bombs. So why wouldn't they explore something like the weather? It makes 100% absolute sense. And you know what else? For sure. This umron in none is not hanging out at harp. Okay. He's not going up there. He's not talking to those scientists. He's not absolutely clearly informed as to what they're capable of. And there's one thing that really smart people love to do. And that they love to dismiss things that they believe are silly. Or things that don't agree with what they've stated. Yep. And so a lot of these. and that they love to dismiss things that they believe are silly or things that don't agree with what they've stated. Yep. And so a lot of these guys that are saying this like computer scientist David Naiditch who characterized harp as a magnet for conspiracy theorists and says that harp attracts their attention because its purpose seems deeply mysterious to the scientifically uninformed. He says that. But when you talk to geniuses and experts in sound and in power output and they talk about the capabilities of a system like harp, they're like you're talking about something that's being run by DARPA. Right. Yeah, that's let's pull up what does DARPA stand for because I think it's not me evil. It's definitely something evil. The defense advanced research projects agency defense. I mean maybe that means defense as in they need to charge up the ionosphere descent radio signals or maybe it means that a sound robot in the sky is going to eat your babies. Absolutely. And have you seen the other crap DARPA spit out of their health activities? Those robots that you can kick and they don't fall over? Yeah, deadly galloping dogs weird springing attack frogs death drones like of course they're trying to manipulate their own Twitter though. Oh, they're gonna follow them right now. Bam. The official Twitter account for the defense advanced research projects agency follow they have 50,000 followers. Sure. Wow. How many you have? 75. Yeah, you have more than DARPA. That's that. Suck it DARPA. Yeah, that's what I said. Fuck off DARPA. No, I love you DARPA. I'd like to come work there. I'm going to Alaska in a couple of weeks to do stand up. I want to visit. Do you think they'll just let me in? Yes. No. No, it's like one of the most secure places on the planet. I bet they let you in. That's one of the saddest things when you run into like any of these people that you've villainized and you're always like, yeah, come on in and check this thing out. We've got yeah, we're just trying to make radio waves work better. Yeah. Then you leave and they laugh. They turn back into reptiles. That fuck it. I got his phone too. Let's follow home kills dog. Oh, he dug out of a heart attack. You know, man. Yeah, you know, yeah, I don't I don't know. I didn't so there's some things I've learned today. I didn't know that harp was run by DARPA. I had no idea that there was any connection there because that I said that. But let's make sure that that's correct. Harp run by DARPA. I think it's true. High frequency. And the defense. Yep. Okay. Yeah. That's pretty weird because DARPA is a notorious creator of things that are without question going to destroy our civilization. They just gleefully whip up death machines without any concern for what's going to happen 50 years from now. Sort of. Or maybe they just make good defensive stuff to keep the defense defensive. Oh, yeah, defensive department of defense. Yeah. What's it about Duncan? Keeping a safe. It's about the defense. You know, it's not about offense. You know, being offensive. You know what made me feel really safe. A galloping robotic dog can chase me over. And they may not have cannons on it. A galloping rope dog that's half made of C4 that makes its way into your building and then makes a volcano. Guys, it explodes. I felt so scared. I used to be so nervous. I'd walk around with fear inside of me until those packs of wild galloping cyborg dogs made solar powered dogs. And by the way, they could be solar powered in LA and just run all day. Never rains here. They can be autonomous too. Or they're just controlled by 18 year olds and trailers outside of Vegas with with Xbox controllers. Yeah. I'll messed up on government speed. Look at the speed and they give those those drone operators. They make sure they're hopped up on the good stuff. If you want speed, talk to a drone operator. They've got the good stuff. They don't need big gulps. They don't even drink water. They just have a pace to the Chuan. They don't they don't take in any moisture. A moisture disrupts the effects of the electrolyte imbalance that meth provides. Because I think DARPA invented the internet. I thought I would go. Did. I think DARPA did invent the internet. Just going to create a rope. I think you're right too. Eeee. Involve in the creation of the internet, the history of the internet. Formal group with DARPA. A group within DARPA. Huh, brief history of the internet. 1973. Yeah. Wow. Here's what's interesting. DARPA is also linked to the creation of the internet, which is fascinating. In 1973, the US Defense Advanced Research Project Agency, or DARPA, initiated a research program to investigate techniques and technologies for interlinking packet networks of various kinds. The objective was to develop communication protocols, which would allow network computers to communicate transparently across multiple linked packet networks. So it was created by DARPA, the very thing that will bring down the empire. Yes. Was created by it. Well, see, that's what happens to all mad scientists, is their creation turns against them. So true, Frankenstein. Yeah. It's killed by Frankenstein. It's an inevitability. It is. Isn't it? Yeah. So this thing that, so they unleashed the internet, who knows what else they've unleashed? Or they're going to unleash? Well, you know what else the internet did? If foreign people about mushrooms. Right. Maybe that can help them. But DARPA needs mushrooms. That's what they need. Imagine the kind of shit that you could create if you had the technology and the resources of DARPA, but it was all people on mushrooms. It'd be a beautiful world. It'd be amazing. Think of what Burning Man would look like if DARPA took it over for two years. They would kill all the people begging for sandwiches. That'd be the first thing. Take them outside. Oh, we know how to do it, them. Like, they didn't even care. Even if they're on mushrooms, they're just still just shoot hippies. What's up? You just knew you did that. Come on, guys. Stop crying. No, that brother was a loser. Your brother had dirty feet. Come on. Come on, we shot him. What's the big thing? I got more mushrooms. Who wants to sing? Who wants to get in the drum circle? No, they just create drones that shoot poison DARPA to anything that smells like pajoule. There's some hot girls that smell like pajoule. There's a lot of hot girls, but Julie. Some girls, they wear like a little oil. Just a gentle, like, a little durry oil. I love that sweet smell of pajoule and body oil. The sweet smell of pajoule and bumper stickers. I like the sweet smell of pajoule because there's usually good acid around. Now, here's the other thing. Here's the other thing that people think harp is responsible for. There's a thing in Windsor. It's called the Windsor Hum. And these poor people that live in this town that's across the river from Zug Island, which is near Detroit. And these poor people that live in Windsor, they say that their house is rattle, their windows rattle, and sometimes it's 24 hours a day. That's how they all describe it. And no one can seem to locate the source of it. Some people say that it's coming from Zug Island. And some people say that even though you can't hear it near Zug Island, it gets more powerful the further away you get. And they describe it as like a tsunami effect. They're like a tsunami, like it starts in one place, and then builds up powers, it moves along. Well, if you talk to anybody who knows anything about sound, they say that's not how sound works. But they seem to describe it that way. They seem to describe it as a sound that's coming from a place where they can't quite pinpoint where it is. They want to say it's coming towards Zug Island. But some folks say that as you get closer to Zug Island, it actually is less noisy than it is when you're further away from it. It's a really weird thing. And it's not one person complaining about this. You're talking about an entire town of people. We talked to several people. Not one of them was like, what are you talking about? Does anybody live on Zug Island? No. No, Zug Island is gross. We went to visit Zug Island. Sounds great with such a beautiful name. Who would think that it would be gross? Zug Island stinks. It smells like pollution. You could buy a house across the river from Zug Island for 500 bucks. That's how bad it is. So what you're saying is there's this low resonant hum emerging from a place called Zug Island. What Zug Island is for, it's across from Detroit. It's part of Detroit. And they make steel there. And they have these giant piles of raw materials and these furnaces. And we talked to a guy named Gregory Fournier who worked there in the 1960s. And he said it was always disgusting. And it was always dangerous. And it was always environmental hazards. This is really, really polluted. The river around there is one of the 10 most polluted places in the United States. And yet people are fishing there and pulling fish out left and right over there. It's really kind of scary stuff. But he said that what they're doing there, what they've always been doing there is manufacturing steel. And he believes that that sound is just a part of the process, the process of creating and making steel. Sure. That makes sense. It does make sense. What doesn't make sense though is the sound itself. When you bring the sound to sound experts and you say is it possible that this sound was recorded six miles, five miles? Is it possible this sound was recorded, X amount of miles away from a source and was this loud in a person's house? And they say no way. We met a guy in Windsor named Gary Gross and Gary recorded some sounds that he says are the Windsor home. All right. Listen to this. We're going to play it for you. Now imagine being in your house and there's something you hear like this and he is miles away from Zung Island. I mean it sounds like you're outside a nightclub. It sounds like high powered bass speakers inside a building. Except there's nothing near him. He's just in his house and everyone in his neighborhood feels it as well. So you're not talking about something that's like a car that has giant speakers. It's right outside your door and that's why you hear this. What you're talking about is something that somehow or another is making these people's houses vibrate like this from miles away. We don't know of any kind of sound that can do something like that. What is Woody's last name? Woody. No, we know. When we played this sound for Woody Norris who is an acoustical expert, an engineer, brilliant genius, he said there's no way the industrial process could make this sound. He said that the amount of power that would be required to make a sound like this that would travel that far and not dissipate in the environment is incredible. Yeah. Now is this something that has been documented? Yes. The sound has been documented by the people that live in the town. It's been documented by the politicians that try to get the explanations for the citizens. If this is a sound that is emanating from Zag Island, it would have to be insanely loud on Zag Island. What people are saying though is that when you're around it, when you're in the river, it's not that loud. It's when you get further away that it's doing things like this, that it's vibrating people's windows, vibrating their houses, there's no known explanation for this. When I talk to this guy who's an audio expert, he says that in order to create a power output like that, you're talking about an insane amount of power. Sure. Yeah. No, that's a really, really intense sound and it'd be a bummer to have to deal with listening to that because that is a depressing sound. Like in my neighborhood when that sound starts, you're not sleeping that night because someone's having some idiot party until 4 a.m. It sounds like a party. It sounds like bass speakers. It sounds like... But that would be like your neighbor. You would have to be really close for that to be affected and you like that. I'm just saying if you, that is a weapon, if you were experimenting with weird forms of weaponry and you could blast that sound over someone that you were fighting or someone that you wanted to disrupt, that would do it because that is not a pleasant sound. Right, but I don't think that that's what anybody's claiming. I think what they're claiming is that this is a side effect of the use of this technology and that most likely what Zug Island is is some sort of a repeater and that these people are experiencing this sound outside of the island because of heart. How close is the top? It's very far from harp but what they're saying is that Zug Island could be a repeater station and the other thing about harp is that harp, although it's really far away, the whole purpose of the magnetizing the ionosphere or rather charging the ionosphere, shooting these waves into the ionosphere is so that they can transmit long distances. So what the conspiracy theorists believe is that Zug Island is some sort of a repeater station. So these people who live in Windsor across the river from Zug Island are getting this crazy sound echo thing going on that's rattling their buildings, no one can explain it, shaking their windows. I mean these people have really freaked out and again it's not like a couple people we're talking to. Is this always happening? It happens quite often and it's dissipated apparently and that's where the heart proponents believe that what's happening is that they've realized that they're making the sound now so they've turned down the power output. I don't buy it man, I think if you're dealing with like this super advanced DARPA project that can shoot out things into the ionosphere they're not going to be like hey let's turn Zug Island outside of Detroit into a base speaker so that everyone can freak out. No that's not what they're saying. They're not saying that they're doing it on purpose. What they're saying is that this is a side effect what they're trying to accomplish. I don't think anyone is saying that those sky quakes are something they're doing on purpose. What they're doing is they're doing some sort of experiments and in doing those experiments one of the side effects is this very strange sound phenomena. I think we're going to go there and see and investigate and talk to some of these people and find out if this holds up but it's a very interesting possibility and these sounds are very unique and you know very ominous and weird. Yeah they're definitely weird. I just I wonder about the DARPA connection but if you go there and actually hear the sound I'll be more likely to believe it. It's the kind of thing where if I knew someone who'd actually heard the sound themselves then I don't know. This seems like it seems so easy to fake. It seems so easy to drop these kinds of things into sound files. Totally. I totally agree. The thing is though the compelling thing is that all these folks it's well documented that these people have been complaining. In fact when I went through customs the guy asked me what are you here for and I said I'm here to listen to some hum and he goes oh the winds are hum like he goes oh I go what is that? He goes it's probably something going on in Zag Island like right away. Wow. This is the cop that works at the border tells you. Did you hear it? No we didn't hear it but we heard a lot of industrial noise. When it didn't sound anything like that. Well we heard it was like a lot of clanging and trucks moving and stuff like that. Is there any tracking going on around there? No. No that stuff is mostly done on Canada. This is what they're doing there is they're just creating steel and they're mixing the raw elements to create steel and their furnaces and there's a lot of industrial stuff going on there and it's very high security. But the high security can easily be explained in that that steel and creating all that steel is very important to the industrial output of the United States. If you were looking for a place to disrupt our economy or to mess up an area that would be something that would do a lot of steel. Yeah I didn't know that you just mentioned that. You didn't say there is a high security area. I think that's really weird. If this is just supposed to be some toxified industrial island I think there is something suspicious about there being. The combination of a mass amount of security around a polluted island and some bizarre godzilla noise rising up out of the nothingness that does seem to indicate that there's more going on there than just making steel. You're right it's very possible. However it's also very possible that what you're dealing with is high security because they're creating steel there. It's incredibly dangerous. They're working with volatile materials. They're also probably doing a lot of environmental damage that they wouldn't want people to investigate or people to shine cameras and expose all this. It stinks there. When you go there the water is like greasy with whatever the hell they're leaking into it. The guy that we were with was telling us that it floats green. There's like this glowing green shit that you see in the water. So it's not healthy. It's definitely stinks. It's definitely bad. We were thinking while we were there like we're breathing this in. This is like we're taking in fumes. Yeah Detroit is a crazy placement. When I went and performed at Mark Ridley's comedy castle. Awesome spot. The guy who drove me there, he told me that he used to buy eight balls and go camping. Like who does cocaine camping? Kid rock. Yeah, I don't think he could blame Detroit or Zag Island on that. But I feel ya. Yeah Detroit is the worst person in the world to be a book. That's the worst place in the world to be a book. There's 47% illiteracy rate. They call it the first American ruin. Yeah. Because there's so many at parts of it that are just gone. Dude, across from Zag Island you can get a house in Detroit for $500. We saw them. They were telling us about it and we saw it. Amazing. It's incredible. And you don't want that house. Well no, it's got toxic mold and it's next to the moaning of bath a mat. The smell. The smell is horrible. The smell in the air is it's really a shame. It's a shame. I know you need steel. I know that they need it. But first of all to do it right there in a highly populated area like Detroit and to do that kind of damage to the environment, it's just sad. It seems archaic. It seems like some shit that they should have figured out how to do better a long time ago. And it kind of makes sense that if you're disrupting the environment at that level in some place then there's going to be unexplained side effects like some odd noise. I don't think that is the case. So this is the thing. I don't know whether or not the noise and the industrial output are connected. It makes sense. When you look at the sound and the sound is coming from this spot and you look at the spot and there's a lot of machines moving. There's a lot of digging in the ground. There's a lot of making steel. Ocoms razor would dictate the sound is probably coming from there. But if these people were to be believed, these people that are talking about this sound and the rattling of the house is it's too much power. It's too much power. It's too far away and it's too strange. It doesn't seem to make sense. And what it could be is that we're connecting these two events together. But they're not connected. And that all those Zug Island is a place where they make the sound, where they're creating a rather, all those Zug Island is a place where they make steel. That this noise is not emanating from Zug Island. But in fact, it's coming from the sky itself, from harp. It's just that people are assuming that Zug Island has something to do with it because Zug Island's gross. So that it's just a coincidence. Super creepy. This creepy. That sound, if that sound is real, is very creepy. Yeah. It's horrible. But you have a good point too, is that we didn't hear that sound. And unless, even if it was like someone you really know, how do you know whether or not they're really recording that sound or whether they're getting wacky and getting on their computer and creating it and saying, I'm going to freak everybody out. And I'm going to bring some more cause or more people to this cause, more eyes and ears to this plight that we're suffering here. When really it's just normal industrial noise that people are complaining. Yeah, you got to go there and see. And if there's the side, if you hear the sound, which I bet you won't, then it'll be interesting. Why do you bet? I won't, man. Maybe I will. Because I don't think, I think the sound of Zug Island is the sound of people's neurons frying as they smoke Detroit level, crystal meth in the basements of their $500 times. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. That's the sound of your brain rotting inside your skull, bouncing back and forth off the bony walls. There it is. You imagine though, if you were in your house and you're hearing this, it would be the most annoying thing ever. And these people say that it could be 24 hours a day. And sometimes they'll get up in the middle of the night to pee and then they'll hear that sound and they'll never get back to bed. They also said that for some reason it seems to correspond with the rain. They said when it's stormy and rainy, sometimes there's that sound. That is where the heart people come in. Because they think that that's not a coincidence. They think that the rain itself might be rain that was created by harp. And that that's why these people are saying that whenever rains and your thunder, that's when the sound is more prominent. Wow, that's crazy. That's crazy. A symptom of weather being controlled by harp is low resonance sound, sky quakes. But that makes sense. The sound, think of that. It's raining out. You hear this sound. And you know that big brother is fucking with the sky and making it rain above your shitty $500 house. It's leaking. And you're like, is it bad enough that I'm here breathing in toxic farts and living in the $500 house? You guys got to shake my three remaining windows with your stupid sound. All I want to do is smoke my mask in peace. There's a physicist named Brooks Agnew who says that he can demonstrate the effects of harp in a box that he's built. And he creates artificial clouds is like one of those misters. You know how you buy like a bonsai tree at the mall and they have like the fog that's flowing out of it. Those are beautiful, aren't they? Well that stuff is very similar to clouds. That vapor, that water vapor. This stuff they puff out of clubs. Yes, no, that's that's a smoke. That's the shit that Michael Braverman likes. He likes to put that when we're doing promos, a foggy lex to fill the air with that shit. You know, I love you buddy. No, it's actually it's vapor. It's water vapor. But this guy claims that he has this device that can create the same sort of effect by charging the particles that are inside of this box that he built. He can actually prove the effects of harp. Well he's saying that there is a correlation between the e-cigarette smoke in his box and actual clouds. Well, what clouds are is vapor. It's moisture and it's in a condensed sort of a, well I should probably actually have a technical explanation because I just ventured into bullshit. I do that all the time. I'll tell myself doing it but I pulled back. I'll tell you what a cloud is and I'll never, I have no idea what cloud is. it is a visible mass of liquid droplets or frozen crystals made of water or various chemicals suspended in the atmosphere above the surface of a planetary body. Okay. So now you know, so it is clouds. With this guy's creating is essentially the same thing as clouds. He's using moisture and he's using this machine that does something and it creates it's e-cigarettes. e-cigarettes are an ionizer that creates water vapor that has nicotine infused into the vapor. Just like Steven Dorf's awesome commercials. Now hey guys, come on guys. Let's take back our freedom. So this is saying that if this is like if a giant Steven Dorf were breathing e-cigarette cigarette smoke over America, it would be cloud. And if you had a machine, you could zap that, the clouds and make a tornado that takes Steven Dorf away like the house and the Wizard of Oz where it lands on the witch. Yes. Just like that. And then Dorf would finally have done something amazing for the world. The best thing they did since the internet. The Steven Dorf was awesome and blade. Okay. So you need a step. I step. Blade one is the best blade ever. Steven Dorf was the bad guy and he's amazing. He's amazing. Great. So shut it. I'm sorry Steven. Yeah, please apologies. He's too easy. Steven Dorf's making our clouds. Steven Dorf is the nickel back of actors. It's too easy to pick on him. It's not fair. It's rude. It's cheap and it's rude. This is the rape joke of actors. We need to stop. We need to stop. By the way, Steven Dorf happened to be flipping through channels right now and heard that he's going for his pistol. Yeah. Don't shoot me as long as you're going to shoot yourself. Steven is inevitable my friend. But murder, you don't want to murder truck. Please don't tell yourself Steven don't do it. You're going to be fine. So look, I don't, I think that it's an interesting thing. The box, I would wonder if the clouds in this box are identical to the clouds that are actually floating over land because I think like what you just, the definition, you just read it. Ice crystals, chemicals. This is just like ionized vapor. So I wonder if it's actually liquid droplets, it's a visible mass of liquid droplets or frozen crystal water. So it's close enough or various chemicals like there can be a toxic cloud too. That's not not water droplets. Chemicals can actually form toxic clouds. And he's saying that by shooting some form of electricity into this stuff. This is what he says. So we're going to say, we're not going to say we've already seen so we're going to change shirts and we're going to go right into this because this guy's an idiot. Awesome. So I go to visit this physicist named Brooks Agnew and Brooks Agnew has a box that he's got this artificial clouds that he's created with this Mr. machine. And he believes that he has this machine that can discipline the clouds. So we go and do the experiments. First of all, here's red flag number one. We walk in the door and his friend, there's a photo of an Indian man with white paint on his face. So I say, what's up with this dude? He said, he underwent an amazing transformation of his body 10 years ago. And now he no longer needs food or water. And I go, no, he didn't. And I just walk out of the room. I go, no, he didn't. He goes, you have to meet this guy. I go, no, I don't. No, I don't. I don't have to meet him and that guy eats. Stop. Get away from me. I knew right away we made a horrible mistake. And this is the dude he's partying with. OK? It's not the scientist, the scientist buddy. OK. So we go in there. Brooks has this machine and in this machine, he's got the clouds and he's like, now I'm going to turn it on. Yes. And so he turns it on. And we're seeing the clouds dissipate fairly rapidly. And we're like, hmm, this is interesting. The clouds have dissipated fairly rapidly. But then we notice his mother fuckers got a crack on the door. So the clouds are sneaking out of his door. OK. So now we tape over the cracks of the door. We turn it on again. Now it doesn't dissipate at all. It just sort of hovers there. But there's some weird funnels coming off of it. We're like, well, it does seem to have it effect. Well, then we open the door and touch it. And it's hot. So this stupid machine that he claims is changing the ionosphere and the tube and making the weather manipulate, it's just hot. It's just a big stupid hot electrical box. And when it gives off heat rises and it goes through this stupid fake clouds. So nothing. But here's what's crazy. Not only did this guy thought this, but that this guy thought this enough to build a machine and that he did this and said, this is so good, it needs to be on TV. Yeah. That's fun though. Going crazy is fun. I'd love to go that crazy. You know how fun that would be to be seriously constructing a weather machine in your house? That would be a blast. So he's enjoying life. And he somehow his weather machine summoned a TV crew. And you know what's really crazy? That's magic. He's a white guy. Whoa, who to thought? It's you never see white guys with these unfounded claims. It's really rare that you see a bunch of white guys in their late 40s, early 50s, possibly into their 60s. Post-divorce. Post-divorce just eaten alive by depression like wormwood. Yeah. Waking up and spitting out pieces of their teeth from grinding all night long and then going to work on your weather machine as their tears disrupt your experiment when you contemplate how your wife left you because you wouldn't stop talking about harp. And then you call your friend over the eterian who knows a dude who actually is an air eterian who just eats air. Doesn't have water, doesn't have food. That makes sense to you. This is the guy he's hanging out at your house. And he goes, what do you think? You want to help me put this together? I think you're on to some amazing work. I think you're doing amazing work. So they put together this stupid thing and it doesn't work. And you flew out to that. No, I drove. This was in luckily it was in California. But not only did we drive, but this is how stupid we are. stupid thing and it doesn't work and you flew out to that no I drove this was in Luckily was in California. Oh, but not only did we drive but this is how stupid we are The guy said there was a mistake with the experiment. We want he wants to do it again So he had them do it again So the camera crew went back a second time. I guess what happened the second time looking nothing What could nothing happen nothing happened nothing's gonna happen You knew nothing was gonna happen you wanted the camera back again Like you this guy probably has seen the secret like a thousand times and he thinks that if he really truly believes This is a weather machine that it becomes a weather machine or something by the way the next season of this show You are gonna be riddled with trolls who realize that you guys will come out to anything Too late What do you do just email the sci-fi channel in Joe Rogan shows up in your house if you've farted in a box? Dude, it's way too late for that. Did you see the photo that I tweeted yesterday of me with this stupid fucking apparatus on my head because some asshole claims that this stupid apparatus was going to Detect electricity that comes off of my eyeballs. Look at this. This this fucking got me to wear this This guy got me to wear this and inside this thing this goggle inside the goggle is like a sensor and the sensor reads the Electricity coming off your eyeballs so he's talking all these scientific terms and he's got a degree in Canada And so he tells me he tells me that this device Measures of the electricity coming off your eyeballs in that theoretically you could feel this electricity on the back of your head Scientifically explaining the psychic phenomenon that a lot of people believe in which is that people can tell when people are looking at the back of their head So this fuckhead gets me to put on this stupid thing I got glue all over my head lucky on bald because then I just have to clean my head if that was in my hair I'd be pissed Yeah, especially if had some beautiful like Joey Lawrence in the 90s hair just something flowing You know and then saw this gooey shit a boy can dream so anyway I got these goggles on and the goggles have a sensor in and he shows me that on this EKG so what it's called EEG. Can't you whatever it's called he shows EEG He shows me on this computer that the EEG set up is Reading all the the electrodes on my head But also reading the one that's in front of my eye and then it's a very similar signal Thus indicating that electricity is coming off of your eyeball like the evil eye in scientific form so So I say hmm So I look at his test and I go to do you ever try to just put it on your hand And I just put it on my hand and it's the same Thing this same signal and the only time it's not the same signal is when it's shaking because I'm going It's the same fucking signal You made me put glue on my head and I'm holding your wacky space goggles that you think can measure eyeball rays You fuck head look what you've done to me. I'm mad and I said to him I said how did you get again same thing? How did you get on TV with this? Yeah, how did how did this how is this not just a dumb idea that you fucked around with with your friends? But you got so far that you went to a producer and said well, this is what I can do And he went I like your moxie. I think this is gonna really happen I think this is gonna be an amazing segment once they show that you are correct and that you can shoot rays from your eyes And I can detect this this is gonna be fantastic stuff you could probably be on doctor eyes after this show wow But no, it's just another white dude with unfounded claims in its 50s and access to aluminum foil He had aluminum foil and head glue his anybody looked into the correlation between starting to like aluminum foil It's like hats that they make out of I mean, that's literally where tin foil hat theory came from somewhere along the lines So many fuck heads had tin foil hats on that people actually came up with that expression Like if you say that expression the tin foil hat brigade people know exactly what you're saying You don't have to say conspiracy theorist you say oh he's one of those tin foil hatware and motherfuckers and then The conversations over if you aren't using aluminum foil for cooking. There's a 15% chance you've gone insane What is what is it about aluminum and that's the shit that the camera show people look for too? It's yeah The camera show people they're always claiming they're spraying aluminum It's all the loo-in-one these guys You know what's crazy is the ground is mostly aluminum Goddamn aluminum out there apparently it's super cheap What's that Jamaica's a source of aluminum yeah, they pop well, it's apparently according to scientists It's one of the most common minerals known to man. Yeah, and it's also what you put in an apple if you've lost your pipe You can smoke weed from an apple and aluminum for aluminum foil pipes. Yeah, that's the foil though, buddy It's not the same thing. It's a mineral that's in the ground. You're talking nothing. It's a different crazy Foil isn't made of aluminum. Yes. It's made of aluminum. I don't want to talk about it too long. We're both going insane You can if it's aluminum foil just aluminum or does it have anything else? It's mixed into it and heated down It's kind of fascinating. You can make metal that you can just read here This is the downward slippery slope. Well, it's kind of cool aluminum foil is cool like you could take an apple and you can wrap that Apple up on it like you can take a piece of food and wrap it up And put it on your girlfriend turn her in an Android don't do that Just chicks are always gonna think that you really want an Android and then we're gonna make them insecure I do want to never make a girl do dress up, bro. Who says that? Just like I try to take away your favorite thing in life I There's something like saying never put salt on french fries. How far do you take dress up though? Do you take it all the way to furry? Like at a certain point time it's weird Like there's a certain amount of dress up in the society that we allow like you're allowed to wear a toupee Through the metal detector at the airport. Yes, but they will make you take off a fake beard If you have like a bitch if you walk through and you got like an Abraham Lincoln beer with a chin strap and they're looking at you Like look at this motherfucker with his you know like a little tie behind your head a big stupid fake beard They're like you have to take that off sir. Yeah, they'll allow you to wear a toupee If as long as it's like pin down somehow Oh once our kid finds out about that They know now. Yeah, it's over. This is certain amount of dress up to your allowed to do sure Right, so you are allowed to wear a ball gag, but you can't dress like a mascot You know, I'm not I'm not a guy saying any of it, but I'm saying you can't be a furry Me no anybody if you're a furry if you're like we're dressing up like a mascot Yes, open up the front hatch and having sex with each other you're fucking crazy Right if you're someone who likes to dress up like a girl likes to wear leather or she likes to tie her up Yeah, she's just a freak yeah, okay, but if she wants to dress like bugs bunny and she wants you to come in her face That's crazy. That's a friend What is what is the fuck is the furry thing with the mascot? I don't know that is that is really creepy in the furry stuff I can kind of understand but like it's when people are like Putting like holes into their e-or stuffed animals and fucking them. Oh, yeah, it's weird. Yeah, that gets really weird Like a flesh light in the giant Barney the dinosaur. Yeah Thank you so much for tuning in to Joe Rogan questions everything we're gonna make contact commercial Well, this is gonna be released as a podcast, too. That's what we're doing We're taking an audio form in this and we're gonna put it out as a podcast. Perfect So it's there's nothing will be lost here. Oh, that's exciting. Yeah TV was advanced enough to recognize that no one's being offended anymore by anything Yeah, right at a certain point in time They have to well they have to accept that when podcasts start having the same exact commercials and they're pretty close Is television does then they're gonna have to accept that? Yes, that's right. Yeah, and I I can't wait for that to come on the other hand You know, I just heard Al magical actually Did this interviewer they asked him what his least favorite song was and he said that mac almost song about thrift shops And he said the reason is like it's like having to explain to your daughter What Jizzing is or what you know what I mean like when your kids listen to it or like there's apparently a song in the mac L'more song about pissing on a what says it? Who's the rapper who pissed on the 15 year old? I have no idea I tell you our Kelly there's apparently some reference to our Kelly in the song and Magical's pointing out how like it puts you know, we are placed when your kid is asking who our Kelly is and why they're talking about him pissing His bad or well why that's ridiculous why is he playing that kind of music around his fucking kids his kids love it kids listen to this How well are his kids? I don't know Well, they're young if they're under 15 they're young that's rude Well, I think kids can get to this music. It's not like you're playing it for them It's like they find it they find it online. Yeah Like like my your dad's porn like it's not like your dad's like come here. Look at this pussy It's like you found the porn right so kids find that's a pro I mean I think it's point What I have to do is trip club with with with thrift shops. Would that have to do with thrift shops? What do you mean? That's the name of the song name of the songs thrift shop? It's just he made the point he made that I thought was interesting. It's like yeah, I guess if I had kids It would put me in a weird predicament if I'm always having to explain to them Like adult concepts because I have to either decide between lying to them or like telling them the truth And that's a weird place to get into with a kid and that now in 2013 that's not really necessary anymore because by the time a kid gets to be 13 years old They've seen it all. Yes, that's true. I mean remember how much shit you saw that your parents had no idea Like did you ever see any like faces of death stuff? Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure. Yeah, I mean we saw a lot of shit that You know one ever saw yeah, but we never saw us well yeah, right, but we never saw I mean the stuff that kids are seeing now It's just we were the first generation see we were the first people with VCR's see our family like our parents Did not grow up with VCR's right So when they grew up you either saw something on TV or you didn't and you didn't get to see it again If you don't the only time you saw it again as if they played it again And they never played anything again They played a few movies like every now and then they would say King Kong is gonna be on again You know when you'd wait for it. You have to watch it as it was happening Yeah, right so our generation was the first generation that had tapes And we would get something and stick it in something and press play Yes, when we wanted so we were the first people to take that next level information thing And what did we do with it? Faces of death? Barnyard Betty like some of the shirt most fucked up heinous things ever like within a few years of making VHS tapes They had a whole series of faces of death and that's when the UFC came out Yeah, all these different things like the early UFC's were like that Like a lot of people thought that what what you were watching wasn't a martial art They thought what you're watching was just like some faces of death type thing like oh my god We're watching cage fighting. This is crazy. It became a martial art But your beginning was like more of a freak show than anything. Yep, but the kids today That's a joke the kids today like a beheading. What is that? That's nothing. I heard that far in yard Betty I heard for teenagers anal sex is second base Like they are fucking each other in the asshole before they're having vaginal sex no, yeah That's like a night of making out you probably end up sticking your cock and a girl's ass No That's what I'm getting this and what first on a chat rumor This is when it whenever someone says to me that teenage kids whenever someone says to me teenage kids are having more anal sex than ever Yeah, I always say Why you even research and teenage kids and angels anal sex? Google search For the last five years that didn't pop up once And kids and anal sex only if we had this conversation teenagers and anal sex those are kids if you Google search anal sex teen right now You will get more results than moon landing I Think they mean like 18 and 19 You're suggesting but that's not what you mean when you're talking about kids You know talking about porn you're talking about kids having sex. Here's a real shocker 14 high school let me just send a bolt of terror through the country kids are fucking in high school guys No, I did you people are not ready for this you should slowly work this in yeah You shouldn't just say hey guess what your kids are fucking what if someone's been into Nile What if they just been into Nile just humming Christian songs as they walk around the house Thinking the kids at school just learning me while she's just someone's balls deep in her ass and a dumpster right now Yeah, they're hiding behind a cardboard box. She's getting fucked so hard. She's using telekinetics to like lift cars And that's how the winds are home is filling the sky eyes a roll by her head She's squirting Is watch yeah, well That happens man kids are fucking my mom bought me a box of condoms when I was in the 10th grade She gave me a box of condoms because she knew I was gonna be fucking she's like just wear these condoms She'd seen my girlfriend. Wow. She knew your girlfriend was a dirty girl not just dirty But like how binary like swampy like she was like that you have to wear condoms Oh my no, it's swampy. That was your first girlfriend. Holy shit. Oh my god God albino and swap that sounds like a Steven Lynch movie David. David Lynch Steven Lynch is a singer That is a David Lynch movie a translucent skin blue veins extra long clitoris you don't know whether you say something or not Deal with this it's just it's not quite a finger, but I mean it's definitely a finger that's been bitten off like a nub It's a nub I wouldn't say it's a finger. It's like a finger that lost a bar fight What do you talk about the length of a girl's clitoris like what do you say immediately after you get done fucking her to your friends? It depends on how big it is if it's totally normal it never comes up Yeah, I you know, I've never discussed the length of my life's my wife's clitoris you should totally normal I'll tell you right now. It's not special about it. It's a regular vagina. It looks great It's awesome. It's a great. It's a good design. You don't need to fuck with it. It doesn't need pinstripes but the The crazy ones the ones that are weird. Yeah, it's like what is that like why is it there's an evolutionary advantage for looking like a moose with a gunshot hole in it? What is it about? About some of them that vary so widely But at least with a woman like it doesn't I don't think they vary so much and Well, I guess they do vary in size, but it doesn't have any like social stigma attached to it Like in fact of a girl has a very small and welcoming tight little area. Yes, that's probably better than a big crazy loose thing So it works the opposite for them that it does for us for us. It's all right As evolution advantage to have a large penis. I see what you're saying Rasputin looking we looked at Rasputin yesterday. We're looking at it. Oh, yeah, I've seen Rasputin's cock Jarr I heard a story that Rasputin was at a bar and Selling people that he was Rasputin and they're like whatever you're not Rasputin. He's like I'll show you I'm fucking Rasputin and he like pulls his giant tree trunk cock out. Okay, you're Your Rasputin. It's in a jar. It's 11 inches soft. It's a big jar, too It's like that would not fit in a regular man a size. You got a Costco jar Yeah, you would have to get a Costco jelly bean jar to have a special cock jar It's just for Cox yeah, but his cock was like that is a that cock is a bad thing like and it didn't that cock is a Death hammer like that's a thing that you can even still now It's how ever many hundreds years. It's been in that jar You can still feel evil coming off of it. Maybe you can feel evil. I feel a bunch of player haters chopped off a giant guy dick Wait, he's just a regular do with a big dick sling and dick. Sure given out bubble gum having a great time in Russia Which by the way sucks? It's freezing cold everyone's an asshole They they're all get their ass kicked by the Mongols and they never recovered So they're up there freezing their dicks off and one guy comes along Just swinging a monster hog and having a good old time and he hypnotizes all the girls in the area with his dick and his Willy ways and he winds up being a superstar amongst all these women including the zarina The the zar's wife he was given the fucking king of the land's wife the dick That's true fuck. Yeah, son. Yeah, he was hanging around all those chicks He's one of those dudes like this voice here. He's hanging around you. He's fucking you Here's a thing you can't cheat with Rasputin because like if you're in bed with your wife and you look down Irvajina and it looks like a sinkhole You like you fucks rescue you asshole Your If a giant is would look like craters after experiencing that that this is like it's a cock the size of the I like to break it you but regular vaginas have babies go through them which are much bigger than a cock And they snap like they snap right back If your wife gave birth the next day When you be able to tell dude yes, but Rasputin's dick was not nine pounds I did babies are nine pounds dude. The ginas are crazy organs. They stretch out and pop out a baby Snap back shut like a clam. They don't snap back shut like a clam It's a slow snap back. No, they stitch up stitch up any tearing. They snap like a Slow congealing right how do you know? I know I've been through it three times trust me my wife's vagina's excellent They stitch that shit up. This is some tearing and I think when they when they stitch it up They have that Benny Hill music plan Because they know that you're gonna do it again you just gonna get pregnant again blow it out one more time Damn It is weird though on nature didn't didn't build in the It's weird that that's that there's a tear. It's funny that it's what it's not built so that it just pops the baby out without They're being damaged or pain well. That's how chimps do it. You ever see chimp's give birth now Pull up see if you can see chimp giving birth see we got a video online the way chimp's give birth is they just reach in and pull it out And that's it and they're done. Yeah, they just reach in Pull the baby out put it down clean it off a little bit and they don't come out helpless either Mean obviously they need their mother, but they're not like us right we come out like incredibly helpless for a long time We can't even walk we can't do shit. We can't even control our own heads. We just fall forward We're our heads are so big that we have to be born like way earlier in the process than other animals Right and our minds are so complex that the gestation process takes a long time here What she's look at this that's the baby? She leans back like she's in an old school Tracy Lord's movie. Yep, and she just grabs a hold of hair on the baby And she's just squeezing it out It doesn't seem like she's any pain at all and she's she just squeezing on her very casual her vagina and The baby heads are slowly popping out She's just trying to figure out when to get a grip on it and the males coming over to check it out Yeah, there's no doctors not a sanitary environment a Terrible mural not a Filipino lady to be seen Try going through a hospital and not seeing a Filipino good luck. I don't know why but that is true They just make awesome nurses they're drawn hospitals like And she's like sitting there while this baby's coming out of her body. It just the the evolutionary process is so strange and When you see like a life coming out of a life It's one of the weirdest things you get over it. I've seen it several times now, you know twice in person and It's a trip man. It's really a trip. It's interesting how the I'm assuming that's her mate But I don't know like the other ones like me. I'm sure watching he's concerned. It's in sure She's most likely a whore and she probably fucked every champion the whole group But she's just trying to look at this Wow She's she's just been it over and he's checking it out now She's like what do you think? Yeah? Yeah, she's like what do you think is it ready and he's just Yeah, wow, and she's like it's so weird like that'll get now. She's squeezing them out. There we go This is crazy plop That needs to be an animated gift file like the moment the baby comes out and the puddle that it creates and the Male is The percentage she's eating the percentage they eat the percentage right away. I've heard that you should do that. That is a fucking trip That is such a trip. What's really true sweet. They're both licking a little chat What's really a trip is that chimpanzees are some sort of a distant relative of us and at one point in time our ancient ancient ancestors are probably very similar to this And it's something happened and we kept going and we went from that to this Well that that seems a lot a lot sweeter and more natural than Doing it some sterile room people wearing weird clothes. Well, that's not sterile I mean, that's not natural. That was in a zoo dude. That was on a slab of concrete How how natural is it for a champion to give birth on concrete? Absolutely right. I don't know why it's kind of fucked up about the baby coming out in that hard surface like if they were in the jungle The jungle soft. Yeah, it's like when we're in Seattle looking for Bigfoot the set the ground. Yeah It's very soft like you could shit out of kid there with no problem easy If you were about the father's odd in the source family, do you know about this? What? Father's odd in the source family the source family I get it's a cult I can't remember if it's Manson or father's odd But in these cults, you know the women of course they give birth after they get impregnated right and this guy As I recall I'm trying to think of it's Manson. I got my cult leaders mixed up. I can't remember which one Father's odd but in but in one of these look up father's odd umbilical cord that classic search We NSA is knocking on my door as we speak please Hmm no, it's just this documentary where it's The point is that a woman gave birth and I can remember its Manson or father's odd But one of them chewed the umbilical cord off like bit it bit through it That's probably father's odd because I never heard that story. Yeah, it's father's odd because you hear about it with Manson It was father's odd but it kind of makes sense, you know now looking at that video of that chimpanzee Giving birth on the floor that zoo like seeing that animal how alien that is to you or I But not that much. I mean it is alien. It's an animal But it's kind of human-like in a lot of ways aware intelligent paying attention what's going on You know and the two arms and two legs thing. Yeah, it's so similar It's so strange and it's so strange to think that Somewhere in the past that's if you believe in evolution What you shouldn't which you shouldn't but that's somewhere in the past allegedly we were something like that Sure, and then we were all sort of Developing along a similar line and one of us became you and I one of us became a homo sapium became a human being But there's other ones there's the homo fluorensis that little hobbit man in the island of Flores There's neanderthal notice how I said tall because I'm very educated not thaw no, that's the old way I'm current. Yeah, thank you. Oh, I judge a man by the way If you say Neanderthal you're kind of an asshole. I'm an asshole. Yeah, that's ridiculous That's how Anderson Cooper says Neanderthal you're right. God damn it. I'm gay Neanderthal Southern well with that Neanderthal Sounds better. Whatever the fuck it is the island of Flores man It's a three-foot tall hobbit man really fast and anything that until a few few years ago They thought was just horseshit they really had no idea that 10,000 plus years ago There was this little tiny man running around right and running around at the same time there was grown humans like you and I like or rather our size Even though we're both short the The question has always been are there others and the question has always been if there were others where the fuck were they behind? I think right there's an aisle well They didn't find out about gorillas into the early 1900s But the di- that's sort of a disingenuous thing to say though because the world of 1900s doesn't even remotely Resemble the world that we see today because the world that we see today We pretty much have a good account of what's alive in almost every place Absolutely, we might have missed a few spots like there's some weird shit like every now and then they'll find like a weird frog and New Guinea Yeah, or a deer in Vietnam. It's been hiding in the jungle and they're like well but where people are not willing to go is with another intelligent animal you could say you found a previously unknown deer in Vietnam Which did happen recently? Sure a couple years ago in fact big animal like a size of a white-tailed deer completely different Species they weren't aware of before but it lives in the jungle and you go well I could kind of see that happening. Yes, but the idea of an intelligent thing That's where people won't budge the idea of an intelligent ape-like human-like thing Another branch on the evolutionary chain of lower hominids to human being another branch Yeah, it's interesting how in the news when you hear about they discovered a new lizard in the Amazon It's like oh whatever who cares. I'll think about that for four seconds. It's not interesting at all I don't even want to look at a picture of it right But if they came out and said we found an intelligent ape-like being living in its own Civilization in the depths of the rainforest that would make news forever. Yeah, so change the world. Yeah So it is interesting that we do it's not a surprise any other species that gets discovered out in a great vast wilderness that still exists But for whatever reason we immediately disregard the idea that there could be another form of super advanced Primate out there somewhere and they found primates very recently. It felt they found this little pigmy primate It's a little tiny little monkey thing. It's really small though, so we don't really give a shit about it It's like so what you found a tiny monkey, but if you found a seven foot tall monkey they would go ho Lee shit What is that? But didn't they just find something akin to that like didn't you? What did you call it's called the Shit it's some very rare carnivorous ape. Yes pull up a Image of the Bondo ape you can see one that got shot and you can see this animal And this is an animal that up until I think 1996 they didn't have any photos of it. There's a wildlife photographer from Switzerland named Carl R. Maughan and Carl R. Maughan went to That's a really old picture, right? Isn't that a picture from like the early 1900s? I Think that is I think that was a picture where it was a huge chimpanzee and they didn't know why that that that chimp was was so big That's the one that got shot now. This is a chimpanzee. That's way larger The other TV doesn't work. Yeah, it's off. Okay, for a reason. Yeah, okay That you can see that thing. Yeah, but yeah, I'll just look at it man No, you don't have to look at it. You can see that thing behind you just look at it Look at that thing. I'm not looking for happy. That's like you don't want to stumble onto that thing They shot it, but that's that it looks like a gorilla. It doesn't look like a chimpanzee It looks like a gorilla and it's called the Bondo ape and up until the 1990s this thing was just uh It was a myth it was a ledge right and it's an enormous chimpanzee and the locals in the Congo They they say there's two types of chimps There's the tree beaters and the lion killers and the tree beaters are these smaller chimps that swing from tree to tree The lion killers are these Bondo apes that are giant chimps that sleep on the ground like gorillas They're not scared of anything. They sleep on the ground. They don't have to hide in the trees Like to this day the reason why people have their master bedroom on the top floor Is the whole the whole chimpanzee idea you get to the highest branches where you're the most protected and that's where you rest That's crazy. I never knew that but yeah, you're absolutely right. What the penthouse The idea you get to the highest branches where you're the most protected and that's where you rest that's crazy I never knew that but yeah, you're absolutely right. What the pin house It's at the top of the building. That's the best part of the building. Why the leopards can't get there. Wow Yeah, that's crazy That is crazy. So ridiculous. Well these animals that are so big that they're not even scared They don't go to the top of the trees probably branches would break because they're probably several hundred pounds I mean these they're not like a small chimpanzee. I mean that they're like three plus maybe even four All right So you dealing with an enormous chimpanzee that occasionally will walk upright There's a camera trap photo of one. So you can pull that up the Carl R. M. On camera trap chimpanzee You can see this thing walking upright and there's six feet tall. It's enormous So you're talking about a chimp that's four inches taller than me And it's huge just gigantic muscles probably as strong as all like a thousand pound man Yeah, and they got a video of one eating a fucking leopard and here's the important note in relation to saucequatch They just found the thing 1990 you have a six foot chimp that walks upright wandering around in the in the In nature and no one's discovered it until just now no one's gotten proof of it till just now Yeah, look at this thing. This is the picture of it walking It's walking upright. That's a shit resolution. It's hard to see in that photo But that thing is walking hunched over and upright and it's six feet tall. Those are devil chimp's their heads look like skulls Look at their heads. They're enormous. Well, they have a crest on their head like a gorilla They're the only other chimp hands the only other Primate besides gorillas that have a crest on their head like that So they thought initially before they ran DNA test on them They thought initially that they were a hybrid between a gorilla and a chimpanzee But now it appears it is just a subset of this chimp's hands species. Yeah, so to me that that is one of the Things that exist in the world that make me think it's possible that there's a Yeti or a Sasquatch because How could you not discover something that's that size that that is that Unique why wouldn't if something like that can hide from modern society for so long after the invention of cameras After the invention of helicopters then why couldn't there be something like a Sasquatch or a Yeti or something like that still out there? Yeah, they found the gorilla like we said in the early 1900s They didn't find this for almost a hundred years after that And we know that chimpanzees are intelligent But we also know that they're not nearly as intelligent as people I don't know if that thing was hiding from people or it was just in a place that was so remote and so hard to get to The Congo is enormous. I mean, it's really impossible for us to wrap our heads around it. It's like almost as wide as the United States is It's huge. I think is that correct? Google that please It's enormous It's it's many many many many millions of square miles And so the it's not without outside the realm of possibility that this almost impenetrable Jungle can hold a bunch of different animals in it But the difference being this animal looks like another animal that we already knew about that's why it's not that crazy Right Bigfoot is a totally new thing, you know, you're saying there's an animal that no one's ever found Look at the size of that. That's the Congo cheese luis Right top to bottom. It's almost the same height as as the United States. It's huge That's giant and that's all jungle so The um the idea that this is a Bigfoot though That's where it gets real squirrely because you're talking about a totally undiscovered primate That lives around people and gets real close to people but never when they have their cameras out never a picture that is a Picture like what you just showed me at the Bondo wave never a picture or video where you it's indisputable It's it's very similar to UFOs or ghost or any other thing like that. It's every picture is Easily discounted or at least we're not quite good enough right Not quite good enough yeah every photo is like man that might be a Sasquatch I don't know it's hard to tell Hmm Not a single camera trap do you know me camera traps are out there now? Hunters use them they set them up on trails and they put these things out there and what they do is they take a photo Either they have two ways of doing it either they take a photo every three or four seconds or five seconds or whatever You set it for or they they act on motion So when they see something walking front of them a flash will go off and they take a photo So they will it'll either be night vision the work at night or they work on a flash system Sure none of these things. Okay. Let me call it a Sasquatch. I advocate here. Please. Okay. So You've you actually pointed out this these tigers that were on some other island that on an island that like Evolved in some it's lions actually See Africa relentless enemies national geographic Special okay, so I point that only because we've seen cases where evolution Wrapped rapidly it doesn't happen over the course of you know hundreds of thousands of years sometimes it seems to happen in a really fast way and There would be an evolutionary Advantage for a being like a Sasquatch to avoid humans in fact There's an evolutionary advantage to any creature avoiding humans because we like to eat things We love eating things or turning them into our slaves So there's an evolutionary advantage to staying the hell away from us so in that way If a Primate somehow evolved in the same way we did and we've made super computers and robots and space shuttles If for whatever reason something similar does want to a different direction Which is a direction of being closer to nature or tied into the earth part of that evolution would be Avoiding the crazy bald monkeys they eat you They enslave you they will have sex with you if they can Stay away from them So in that way it could make sense that a super advanced primate would be able to smell a human scent on a device like that And they just stay stay away from it. They avoid it like why couldn't there be some new Reclusive primate animals run away from me all the time It's possible It is possible and if when you say it like that you bring up a lot of awesome points I mean if you were gonna be a primate that was super intelligent and Figured out how to live in the woods the smartest thing to do would be don't let people know about you ever stay away and I mean The real question is how smart are these things now if you talk to the the the the Let's let's give a broad spectrum of wackiness and you talked to the further the UFO hunters the wackiest of wacky think they're people they think that they are the spiritual beings that are very human-like informed like they think they have a human face is just a very dark face and that They're just covered in hair and they're a type of wild human that lives in the woods. Okay. I mean there's there's some really There's a lot of variation in what they believe that they're capable of sure but ultimately they're talking about a Giant bipedal ape that no one's taking a picture of sure it gets a little sketchy Well, no, I mean again to place off the watch advocate if you look at a monkey jump Like whenever you see a monkey run up a tree Just a monkey if you watch how graceful and powerful those things are and you consider you ever being able to do that In a million years you see how much more advanced in certain ways just a chimpanzee is yeah So imagine if something had an equivalent form of advancement when it came to being Able to camouflage themselves or to hide You know, maybe these things are just so good at hiding that maybe the part of evolution that made chimpanzees able to climb a tree in Five seconds and humans able to build a Chrysler Maybe that part of evolution made these beings able to hide in a super Scilled way they can cover their tracks. They can hide in the shadows. Why not? It would be a great Advancement for a being to be able to hide in the in a I'm lost not sure. You're right Yeah, you're right. You're right. You're absolutely right a great advancement for being to be able to hide that way I'll say it would be a great advancement for being to be able to hide that way. Yeah, you pull up a video Bear runs up tree startles hunter. You know that video This is a pretty famous video these guys bow hunting and while they're bow hunting this bear just decides to make a break for it and runs up the tree Not that weird and you know bears climb trees. I think we both know but did you have any fucking idea how fast they can do it I I'm this bear gets 20 feet up that tree in a matter of seconds. All right like this And all of a sudden he's up there looking eye to eye with this hunter exactly I just want you to see just to put it in perspective Let's look at it just to just to get a peek at it. Watch this. So here's the guy The bear come close to him. I don't know if this is the same one. Did you check this one with sideways? I was trying to get something fast Let's see Where would you mean it sideways? No, they want to pull up the video with sideways. Oh really? Yeah pull up Let me see what the other video looked like Let me say oh It's sideways. Yeah, that's the right video But it's it stays sideways the whole time. I didn't even bother to look go go go further up He might figure out the fuck he's doing wrong. Yeah, he does Do do do now get a little further up and here's a bear now watch this watch this watch this bear move Okay, give us some volume. Okay. The bear is already up Give us some volume and take it to right when the bear makes a run for it So the dude is up in this tree stand he puts this food out and the way you You hunt for bears in a lot of places It's not legally California this way, but a lot of places they let you use bait and by bait Usually mean donuts they take Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, they take donuts or something sweet and they put them in a barrel So that this bear will go to that barrel and then while he's looking for his food That's when he kill him. It's really kind of doo-shay. That doesn't look fun at all. It's kind of doo-shay But if you watch this bear run look at this check this out look he makes a bolt for it and then just put it up Watch this The guy Obviously fucked with his camera here. What is that this is wrong? You can show it watch wrong with this video Is this a bad video? Why we're not seeing this? Okay figure it out figure it out. I get it. Something wrong with the video There's here's the point is that this bear Runs up this tree the way you could run straight Like he literally runs straight up the tree. It's it's pretty fucking insane This is not the same video. You can stop now But that here is the here's the essence of the thing When you look at the chimpanzee and you look at a human what are some of the similarities? Well the similarities are both Have figured out how to use tools in a rudimentary way chimpanzees use sticks to get termites out of the ground humans use cars to get to their jobs so Why why is it and why isn't it why isn't it? Why isn't there the possibility? Then another Primate instead of evolving the ability to use tools or instead of just evolving that ability They used they evolved the ability to camouflage themselves because in nature if you're hunter What's a better skill than to be able to hide? There's almost no better skill in nature? chameleons are Almost every creature that is a predator Their skin has adapted to their surroundings in a way that makes them blend in so that they could be a more powerful and efficient predator In that way why wouldn't a primate not just evolve a skin color or hair color that makes them blending with their environment But the ability to hide in a true super advanced way. Okay, so I'm gonna play devil's advocate Please this is not necessarily what I believe but if there was really an animal like this There would be something now all you have is like the theater Roosevelt wrote about it in a story Yeah, you know about his time in the woods, but when it when a dude gets killed by a wild man Who know who knows what really happened right in the 19 whatever the fuck it was back when Teddy was running around? The reality of life today is that if you're dealing with a very populated area Everyone has a fucking camera on their phone sure and if everyone has a camera on their phone And no one is getting a photo of this thing how many human beings are traveling through the areas where these things live? And not one person gets a picture and now here's the other problem It's iconic It's an archetype. It's a thing that people go to right away I think it's very similar to the gray alien with the big eyes. Yes, I think if you are not sure what you're seeing Your mind will create this thing and one of the reasons That I say this is because I read a lot about hunting accidents And one of the things that has happened in hunting accidents is that people who are experienced hunters Who know that in order to bag a deer you have to capitalize on a very Split moment a very small windowing time where you got to capitalize on that in order to get the kill Well people have shot people accidentally and sworn up and down. They saw a deer They swore up and down that they saw a deer and when you're talking about Bigfoot and you're talking about Bigfoot sightings You're talking about first of all. It's not a mystery. It's not like you're talking about Find a rumple still skin or something else you're talking about something that people have repeated the same stories over and over and over Yes You're talking about something that we have a reference to in our heads And when you see something you might see just a whisper of something you don't know what the fuck you saw You saw something through the trees and it's dark out there anyway But it's a canopy of leaves and it's never sunny out. It's always rainy and cloudy So what are you really seeing? Sure But by the time a week goes by or a month goes by or maybe even an hour Maybe it takes you three hours to walk to your car and you're an idiot And you convince yourself in those three hours that you saw its face and it looked at you and it read your mind You might be so pumped up with adrenaline and fear and and and who knows just longing for In a life with excitement where you're not wandering through the woods looking for fucking shadows Also half the people in the forest are high at any time Please stop nobody goes into the forest. We can only base that grateful that we can only base that on our own personal experience And with you and I was 100% so it's 100% of the people in the woods are high because that's all we have We should have got those Bigfoot guys high. That's why we fucked up They were just drunk. We should have got them high. We're not big different results. I Really mean it though I'm saying that people go into the woods and they get high Yes, if you're right if you're gonna take mushrooms What what do people always say go take them in the nature? Take them in the forest So in that way I would say that a lot of the observers who are experiencing These a lot of the people in the woods or maybe under the influence of in top of intoxicants But you don't need to be right if I'm a kid out in the woods I could hear anything You can see things dragons big foot Elves Because think of the woods. There's no light trees or shifting around it would be very easy to project Anything and you know that there's a real danger What was that noise? There was a real danger. There's a real danger. There's mountain lions. There's bears. There's wolves The woods contain real things that will kill you and forget about poison as spiders and snakes There's mountain lions bears and wolves and woods. There's a Real fear. So it's a really highly charged environment also what you mentioned earlier how people prefer to have rooms on the top floor of a building or a house Examples like that show how embedded into our species is the trauma of having to deal with predators in the wild The wildness that we evolved in. Yeah, so it makes sense that somehow inside of our neurology is imprinted the remnants of the these predatory forces the kind of Combined racial memory of all the things that used to hunt us and eat us and when we went when we go in the woods even today Maybe our brains still Are on alert or on guard for these things that used to terrorize our ancestors and people who see bigfoot are really just seeing a Projection of this thing out in the nature. It could be that it also could be a reaction to being In the wilderness itself which is mostly being experienced by people who aren't native to the wilderness When they're having these experiences even if they're like like normal campers they camp on every weekend They don't live there every day. They they live there in short bursts and then they run back to civilization So in living in that environment there must be some Thinking where you you wonder what it would be like to survive out here One would it be like to survive out here without nature could an intelligent being do it maybe he's out there Maybe my wood brother is out there right now My my a monkey wood brother who's just as smart as me But chooses to not engage and remain on the outskirts of society Eating off the land with its intelligent mind hiding from people Yeah, it's possible But it's not that likely It's not likely that's what sucks, but why is it so sexy? Why is it such a sexy idea? Why is the idea of seeing Bigfoot one of the most exciting things if you said to me? Joe would you rather be able to fly without a plane anywhere you wanted in the world for 30 whole days or Go hiking and actually meet Bigfoot. I would say I'll take Bigfoot I'll take Bigfoot over 30 days of awesomeness. What is every great dream? You're flying you're flying in every great dream Then you land on a girl once I'm sex with you. That's what every great dream is. Okay This is I'm telling you that if you gave me 30 days of that I would say no I would rather meet Bigfoot because I've got some questions. I want to know if it's real Well, you know if you meet it then what do you have to say? That's why I'm well, you know a Bigfoot He's gonna say why didn't you fly? Look at me. I'm covered in fleas. I live out here in shitland flown around for 30 days I didn't talk to some Harry failed monkey Hiding from its tinier smaller far smarter brethren Pig flying pick flying yeah, they would get mad. They like dude. I don't even have a phone. Okay There's no fucking stores out here. I killed elk with my face. I've been drinking my own piss for the last thousand years They never have to worry about running out of water, but they've never found a water collection device So that would mean they would have to live near streams. Yeah, well, you know, there's a lot look There's clearly a lot of problems with the big one here. Well, they're really big too But there's here's here's here's some on the pro side Here's one of the things that they always say why are we found a Bigfoot body? Okay Well, here's one thing that you need to think consider what was last time you saw a dead mountain lion Okay, there are a lot of goddamn mountain lions. I mean like a thousand of them in probably Southern California alone, like they're all over the place. There's a lot of them They're not like a Bigfoot. It's not like a mythical creature. It's something that we absolutely have evidence of but we never see a dead one But they must die. They must if you believe the idea that a Bigfoot is something that is evolved It's ability to hide in a way that's exponentially greater than any other animal than you can also add to that The idea that they would know to bury their dead We bury our dead one was the last time you saw a dead human, you know unless you're living in Syria right now You probably it's proud. I mean you don't see them that often. It's a rarity. We bury our dead It's not like dead bodies are always dead humans are laying around saying maybe these Apes or whatever they are they bury their dead which is why we don't see their corpses anywhere Right that's a very good point and it's a very good possibility if they really were this intelligent thing and in fact One of the guys that we talked it to this guy talked it to talk to who the fuck am I? Excuse me one of the guys we talked it was a guy named William Jevnik and he is a guy who had his own experience with Sasquatch when he was 14 years old and The guy did not seem like a cook he was not he did not Register it all said it again did not seem like a cook. He did not register at all my crazy scale seem like a very reasonable guy who's an author and he was telling his experience and He was saying that when he was 14 years old. He saw a fucking Sasquatch. I believe he believes it He believes it. Yes, I think there are people who believe they've seen this thing You know, it's for sure There's no question but that there are people who believe that they've seen a thing Uh-huh, but that doesn't mean that they've actually seen the thing There's people in Alabama who think there's a leprechaun in the inner cities It doesn't mean it's there This dude thinks he knows where bro ground is oh, that's different. This is where it gets weird This is what this is where I had to go Because he was making sense to me He was a reasonable man. He obviously was educated. He spoke very well We were having a nice smooth conversation and then he tells me that he knows where burial ground is okay He tells me he knows where a burial ground is and he says he's known it for 20 years So I stop and I'm going well What are you talking about like if you know where burial ground is man like hold on a second? Why didn't you go and dig it up? Well, you know the Sasquatch they're not gonna like it if you do that Let me tell you something and this is the same thing that Tom Powell said Tom Powell who is a Teacher in Oregon also told us that he's had Sasquatch experiences Also told us he wasn't a believer until something happened and then he saw it and then all of a sudden became believer But also told us he knows where burial ground is when I said tell me where it is I go you tell me where it is I'll bring in a bunch of mercenaries and we'll dig this shit up Sure, like let's find out what's up you tell me you know where it is if it's really a dangerous area I'll bring in a bunch of dudes with guns. It won't be dangerous anymore All right, we'll bring in people with shovels and we'll dig it up come on if it's still there we'll dig it up sure and The fact that they haven't done that is where I start going What are we really dealing with here when you're dedicating your life to this thing that you have zero evidence of? What do you what do we really doing here and when you're telling me that you saw this thing when you were 14 years old I? Believe you I believe that you believe you it's what that's what I mean when I say I believe you sure But I don't know I when people tell me stories about shit that I just did five years ago. I'll go oh, yeah Oh, yeah, oh my I forgot about him. I didn't even I forgot he was even there and then you start Re re imaging right the past in your mind And I think that when you're dealing with something as insane as saying Bigfoot especially Bigfoot when you're 14 years old It gets real sketchy so that when you're repeating the story X amount of years later You're basically lying right? I'm basically lying when I talk about my childhood Okay, I know some very vague facts about my childhood But when I tell you while I remember this like it was yesterday Me and grandpa was fishing and grandpa was the only one who paid attention to me He cared and I caught that fish. He was so happy. I don't fucking remember what grandpa was in he might have been drunk You might have passed out. I'm gonna meet it all up. I might have might have danced it all in my head I don't remember what I did five days ago The whole things of murky blur. I can barely remember what I had for breakfast Exactly exactly so when someone tells you about a Bigfoot story it may or may not Be an accurate story. I would say it is not an accurate story I don't believe in Bigfoot and I think that the that that Having played saw scratch advocate. I have to say let me give you an example You know where a Bigfoot burial ground is right like you know that you know this thing I could take you there I could take you there. You know a you know where a big football Grand is This would be one of the most monumental anthropological discoveries of of our generation of maybe of our time and You're not letting your species know about this thing. What why? Here's the thing Duncan When you've been squashing as long as I have. Yeah, you basically consider the squash to be somewhat like family and I don't consider these things to be creatures I consider these things to be my wood brethren and my forest friends. Can I ask you something? Character Joe Rogan's playing are you on a TV show right now? Occasionally I am on a TV show looking for squash Squatching so you're revealing to the entire planet the existence of Bigfoot, but you don't want to prove it with a burial ground Well, I don't like the snippiness of your tone, sir Can I tell you right now when I'm looking for squash it is a hundred percent? There's no bad Intention involved. I have love for the squash sure the squash community Recognize me in fact. I know their favorite food. It is peanut butter and jelly I leave it in the gifting tray outside my house, and it's often gone when I return All right, well I gotta go what don't go don't go we get the chest no a man who lives Nothing but water and air no no water shit forgot no one but you need to me it seems like It's absolutely if they have discovered some proof of these beings existing I think it is unethical to not reveal it because the ethical thing to do would be to show the burial grounds that we can create nature Preserves to protect these precious woodland creatures from logging and all the variety of things that Human she really think that the government is gonna protect the squash Yes, this is the other thing this guy believes this guy believes that the government actually is aware of the squash Yes, and the government is hiding the squash because the government thinks that Society itself would fall apart much like an alien invasion much like in an alien invasion scenario Religion would fall apart. Yes. How do you explain the giant wood man that was not in the Bible? How do you explain it 10 foot tall person thing who lives in the woods and can spot camera traps a mile away wait a minute There's a squash watch. I'm gonna burn down the lighthouse. All right now here. We go pro-ponent Here's pro-ponent pull up. There's a photo of gigantic pithicus and there's a gigantic pithicus that is Right beside it's standing beside a person. It's a recreation. It's a man and a recreation of this animal and This is where it gets really weird Gigantopithecus is an animal that they found out about in the pothicary shop There's that photo and then there's another one. It's kind of even more interesting because they did it in front of a jungle Yeah, that one right there now look at this fucking thing spread this out. Here's what's crazy that Was real that's a real animal they have bones they have teeth They know that this thing was bipedal based in the shape of its lower jaw This was an animal that existed is recently as a hundred thousand years ago and existed in Asia and they didn't find out about this till the 1920s there was a guy who went into an apothecary shop. I should probably credit him here Let's see. Gigantopithecus. Yeah, it kind of looks like an orangutan Yeah, bake seven stands up on its fucking hind legs and it's 10 feet tall other than that. Yeah It would be so You saw the rangutan in the zoo and right behind it was that you like what the fuck is that? It's a ten foot taller rangutan that walks like a person Holy shit. Are you fucking kidding me? I just like the idea of those two actually being friends in real life like a superhero team Okay, this is the guy's name the gentleman's name is Ralph von Coings walled Coans walled Ralph von Cohen's walled and he was in the apothecary shop in China and there's it was in lite-ching cave in Loo-zio China I might have said that wrong anyway He found these teeth as well as several jaw bones in this apothecary shop and He apparently he was a He was a I believe is an anthropologist and he went and he found these bones And I think he recognized right away that these were primate teeth and that they were way And he went and he found these bones and I think he recognized right away that these were primate teeth and that they were way too big to be human and way too big to be gorilla. He was like what the fuck is this? The people in the Chinese apothecary shop just thought they had some random bones. And they actually were calling them dragon bones and they traced these teeth back to their source and it resulted in a recovery of more teeth and a rather complete large mandible. Now by 1958 it says here on Wikipedia that three mandibles and 1300 teeth had been discovered. So they know that this is a for sure real animal and the most recent fossils are 100,000 years ago. That's when you look at that thing and you hear a Bigfoot story that's that's fucking Bigfoot. And that thing next to that guy is Bigfoot. But again, they didn't find a skull. They found teeth and a jaw bone and they made you back out of it. They didn't find a skull. It's true. But by the shape of the lower jaw they can determine that this was a bipial animal. Okay, but they can't determine its hair color. No, that's totally made of it. That's also with Neanderthal. You know with the fall notice I said, thought is tough. When you look at Neanderthal imagery, that's all made up. In fact, there's a guy who thought of Neanderthal as a predator and he had this whole paper that he wrote and he even had a video made of proposing that Neanderthal had black skin like a gorilla and that Neanderthal were the super muscular predators that hunted humans and that that's why we drove them to extinction. And he actually bases this on the shape of their jaws. He's like, we impose human characteristics to Neanderthals. But if you look at it in Neanderthal skull next to a homo sapiens skull, they're very different to shape of the eye is different. Now if we know that chimpanzees exist and we know that gorillas exist and we know that their facial structure is actually more similar to Neanderthal than ours are. Why wouldn't we assume that they had skin coloring and skin texture that was very gorilla like? This guy made this video, see if he could pull that up. Neanderthal as a predator of humans, as a predator of humans, prayed at or of humans. I'll tell you what I find. It's called them and us. So look up them and us how Neanderthals were. But this guy had images that he created and he wrote a book detailing this theory. And his theory was that we had accepted a vision of what Neanderthal looked at, looked like, based entirely on what we look like. And he was saying, well there's no evidence of that. And you might as well look at it as being far closer to a gorilla. And he gives a bunch of reasons that have to do with the size of the bones. Sure. They had much different bone structure than us. They were like 200 plus pounds. They were only like 5 feet tall. They were totally weird looking. They were not like a person. Yes. It's just in the reconstruction that you just showed me. If you're saying this came from teeth and a jaw bone. And you're saying this was done by the professorial guy in the picture with a hairy or ring a thing like thing. I want to know where did you get the hair color from? Why is the hair color that long? This being... Oh no, listen, you're right about that for sure. Because I think anybody could take a few teeth and a jaw bone and stick that into a sauce watch replica and say look, it's proof. Well, yeah, sort of. I mean, I guess you could. But what we do know, I mean, that's just speculation. What we do know is that this is a real animal. So whatever this was, whether it looked like that or it didn't look like that, we know it was huge. Well, that's absolutely gigantic. Far bigger than any primate that's ever lived since then or before then as far as we know. If you look in the book of Genesis, there's reference to these beings called the Nephilim. Yeah. And then Nephilim were these giants. They said they were giants during this time. And, you know, who knows whether that's real or not? But I think all mythologies have reference to these giant human things that used to wander the earth. Well, we know, think about human giants that we know about, okay? Think about guys like Schilonio or Hong Man Choi or real giants. They have a lot of physical problems. And then think about what it takes to create a fossil. It's incredibly difficult to create a fossil. The only way you create a fossil is if you get caught in a landslide or a volcano or something happens where it preserves your body. You can get stuck in mud. But most of us are not going to be fossils. Most of us are just going to rot. We're going to go into the ground and then worms are going to eat us and then we're going to cease to exist. And we're going to be transmuted into the next stage of the afterlife. Crazy, crazy, crazy. But what we do know is that there's been people our size and then there's been these little tiny, hobbit people. Yes. I think it would be ridiculous to think that it's not possible. It could have been giant people. There were giant lizards, giant birds. There's been giant elephants, giant tigers. If you go down to the La Brea Tarpits, just check out the sculptures of the dire wolves out there. Those things used to wander around Los Angeles. How big were they? Huge. Like horse size wolves. What? Dyer wolves Los Angeles. Yeah. Now they're not going to be horse size. They're probably huge. Well, did you? Yeah, it's okay. Don't worry about it. Did you ever die or wolf Los Angeles? That's just going to bring up a crappy band. Remains of nearly 2000 dire wolves were exhumed. They lived 9,000 years ago. Look at how big were they? Dyer or a dog or a dog or a dog. Doesn't say. They were huge. I believe you, bud. Look at, I mean, look at saber-tooth tigers for God's sake. Look at those things. Those things used to wander around LA. Well, not only that, that was only like 10,000 years ago. So the idea that there were giant humans or giant primates is not to me, particularly shocking notion. I believe that. It's just hard for me to imagine that one of them has managed to somehow exist in the present day. It's also disturbing. And this is one of the things that we resist. We resist danger that we're not aware of. We resist it. What call? Come on. I was talking to someone about this. There's a community that's experiencing. They live near a factory and they're experiencing like these issues. And I was talking to someone who was saying like, hey, man, like this, this community might be poisoned because of this factory. And then I talked to another guy. I was like, oh, listen, that's nonsense. Let me tell you something. That if that was true, and he starts rattling off some reasons why he doesn't believe it's true, then I asked him if he had looked into it and he hadn't. And then I realized, okay, we're dealing with like reactions that humans have where we want to categorize dangers. And we want to put them in clearly definable categories. And we have to wonder whether we want to worry about them. And some things you worry about never take place. And if that's happened, then you're a little worry-wort in your pussy and then you're ruining society because you're a big wimp. And people don't want to be a big wimp. So when people don't want to be a big wimp, they dismiss things that may or may not be real and may or may not be a danger. And they do it as a defense mechanism. And so it's not entirely objective, the reaction to anything. Well, when you bring up Bigfoot, people immediately say, oh, you're going to look for Bigfoot. Go ahead and look for Bigfoot. Oh, what else are you going to look for? Leprechauns. Let me know when you find a Pegasus out there, fella, and take a ride around the world in a flying and horse. It's probably real. I mean, the Greeks made a statue of it. Why would they lie? Why would they lie? And what he's doing by berating you and by dismissing this topic. Yes. It's not just dismissing something that is preposterous and is ludicrous and stupid, but he's also making himself feel better because he's scared. He's scared a little bit worried about Bigfoot. You think that guy's scared of Bigfoot and his giant Rasputin dwarfing dick. Bigfoot must have a dick like a giraffe. It was probably like a giraffe neck tied to his cock. It's just his gigantic and it's probably black-like coal. I'm scared of so many things. I'm scared of taking my shirt off of this swimming pool. But I am not scared of Bigfoot. And my reason for not believing in Bigfoot is not because I'm afraid that my belief in Bigfoot, some Bigfoot's going to come trouncing into my house and silver lake. I don't believe in it. First of all, you fucked up and telling people where you live. Second of all, you say all this shit because you haven't seen Bobcat Golf Waits movie Willow Creek. I'd like to. You watch Bobcat Golf Waits Bigfoot movie, which is sensational. It's amazing. You'll shit your pants. You're going to be afraid to get out of the car and take a leak if it's dark out. And you near a patch of woods. I'm on a damn. Look, I don't know if Bigfoot's real and I know you don't know if Bigfoot's real. But I know that we both think it's an interesting subject. Why is that? Well, because it's a beautiful idea. It's this idea of being that is somehow managed to evolve to a place past the intelligence of chimpanzees and gorillas. And yet, simultaneously has reached this harmony with nature and is living out there in some kind of beautiful, primordial, pagan state. There's something really wonderful about that idea. It's like Avatar Depression. Yes. It's like a version of Avatar Depression. Yes. Like when people went to see that movie Avatar, when you see those noble people who would never lie and although they may exhibit a little bit of jealousy and they take that fake Navi into their arms because they're beautiful people. And they get their internet from a tree. And it comes down from this is some sort of a Wi-Fi thing where it's like the float and whatever. They all make their tails. Yeah, exactly. But there's something about that that's wonderful. And one of the things that you and I experienced is we went and we went to Mount Rainier with the lovely and talented cast and crew. And we went up there and we wandered through those woods and we went to a bunch of different areas where people have claimed to have seen Sasquatch before. And the thing that struck me besides the fact that it was unbelievably beautiful up there. I had never been to the woods, the Pacific Northwest in my adult life. I actually talked to my dad about it and he said we went camping up there when we were, when I was much, much younger, other than I was like seven. And I don't remember it because apparently it was like rainy and miserable and we hate it and we got out of there. Like it wouldn't be like the funnest place to go camping. But it literally is, and I hate the word literally, sorry I used it. It really is like you're stepping into another dimension. Yes, it's beautiful. And it's so rich with plant life. It's the plant life. This is how you consider it. Let's pretend that the Salt Lake is a blank slate. Salt Lake in Utah was that flat, the flat plains or the salt flats where they race cars, they take cars and they go like a thousand miles an hour because there's nothing out there of the flat salt. If that's a flat plain and that's a zero life environment, the rainforest of the Pacific Northwest is a 100% life environment. Every inch is taken up by plant life. There's elk running across. We stepped an elk shit every other step. Everywhere. It was everywhere. We were driving down the road, elk would just walk right in front of us. These giant wild cows, which are more related to cows than they are to deer actually. Huge enormous four, 500 pound animals just walking across the street. It's a wild place to think you have an accurate account on that. What are you going up there and measuring shit? Who's going up there? Even though it's right next to Seattle, even though it's 50 plus miles outside of Seattle, no one's going into those ones. No one. And when you're there and you take that in, that's when you're really start considering it. You really start going with it. Maybe. Sure. I went out there. I didn't realize how dense it was out there. I'd never considered that. And when you see how dense it is and how thick it is out there, then you do start entertaining the idea that there's the possibility that some extremely endangered being could be hiding out in these depths. Because people aren't going to go into that. What purpose do people have for going into that stuff? I imagine there's naturalists and maybe hardcore hikers who are crossing maybe point tenth of a percent of that terrain. If that. If that. Yeah. So in that way, you could see how there could be a being existing out there that maybe hadn't been discovered yet. And when we sent the drones up into the sky to overlook the area and when you put the goggles on and you could see through the drones and you're flying over that, it's majestic. Yeah. It is majestic. But it is unlike any place that I have ever been to in my life. I was humbled by the life. Humbled by the plant life. There's something about the amount of trees that you see up there and the density of it all that is just like it puts you right in your place. It just goes sit down and look at this. And it's almost like psychedelic. You walk into those forests. It's almost like the whole world changes. When you're in there, you might as well be in another dimension. Sure. It's so not the human world. And you walk in in every hour or so. You'll find some shit on the ground that a person left behind. But you're on one path. How much are you dealing with around you that you never see if you lived up there in the Pacific Northwest for the rest of your natural life. And just every day you just crossed a certain area off your list and just walked up and down and up and down and you made a grid. You're going to die before you ever see even a tiny fraction of the woods that are around you. And even with all the logging going on up there, it's not happening in every single part of that area. So not only that. I mean, you want to make the argument for us and it tells an animal being able to avoid you. So much easier is it to know you're there than when you're chopping fucking trees down with a saw that goes, I'm listening for elk snapped twigs. Okay. And I hear a fucking saw and I smell that stinky fuel burning. If a gorilla, for whatever reason got pushed out of a van in the middle of Brooklyn, it would stick out in the most profound way. It would within four seconds around the entire world would be videos of a gorilla in Brooklyn. In the same way, a human wandering through the Pacific Northwest with our stinky perfumes and deodorants on smelling of the cheese burger you just ate before your weird, impotent little hike, you know, two miles into the wilderness, that would be so easy to avoid. Creatures can already avoid us anyway. Cut and root beer farts. Yeah. To shoals. Bud light in your back, old spice under your stupid armpits. Yeah. Yeah. The stink of your tumors coming out of your mouth. They smell that stupid fluoride toothpaste. Yeah. You wash your face with. So we would, we stick out like a sore thumb in that, in that terrain, even though our ancestors, that's what we used to live in. We were born into that. It used to be where we were born into that wilderness. And there's something that happens when you go out there into that wildness where some mild little shift happens to you, you know, there is something that happens. Another part of your mind begins to activate when you're out there. And I think that part of your mind that activates is the part of the mind that Sasquatch hunters use when they hallucinate there and they're being flipped at least. Well, unfortunately, that might be actually what's happening. That's what's, that's what's the most messy part of this situation is that you can't pick a horse. You don't want to be the guy that says, no, Sasquatch, you guys are silly. Because that guy's a dick. Sure. Okay. And you don't want to be the guy that goes all Sasquatch Bigfoot research centers of America and gets a tattooed on your ass either. Because that guy's a dick as well. I don't want to be a guy, squatchen. What is Squatch? What is, would you say Squatch was again when we were out there? Squatch is the name for the dried semen that accrues in the hair and the beard hair of truckers who have been hanging out at truck stop glory holes. It's called Squatch. Oh, shit. And then you got some squatchen, your beard brother. It's just the reason why the hardcore homos at truck stops only have mustache. Right? Because we all know that hardcore gay dudes, this is like three types of people that have mustache. Mexicans, John Stassel and hardcore gay dudes. And Hitler. The kind of hardcore gay dudes that wear leather biker hats and like cut off gene shorts with Timberlands. Yeah. Yeah. Hardcore. Hardcore. Thick pasties. They're trying to avoid squatchen. They don't want to deal with washing, squatchen, or beard. It's annoying. Clumps up and it smells like dried bleach and burnt rubber when you wash it out. Greg Fitzsimons goes on stage in San Francisco. We're doing San Francisco together. Yeah. He goes on stage and he goes, you know what I love about San Francisco? You still have real faggots. I think it was real guys with like gene leather vest on and cut off gene shorts. It's hilarious. Like the blue oyster bar and police academy. There was a lot of gay people in the crowd too. And they loved it. They were cheering. Yeah. You know, and that kind of stuff drives me crazy because on paper or if you put that on the internet, people could get mad at him. But Greg Fitzsimons is like one of the least homophobic guys you will ever meet in your life. Like he has a great story about wanting to find out whether or not he was into gay sex when he was young. So like got drunk and got up his courage and then like found a guy in this gay area that he knew and went to the woods with them and then fucking panicked and ran away. He's like, I know I'm not gay, I'm out of here. But like he's not even remotely homophobic. He's not afraid of telling that story. He's not homophobic at all. So when he goes up there and says, I love San Francisco because it still has a lot of faggots. Yeah. And like they like were clapping. Sure. Like I saw a gay couple that were like going, whoa. Because he was saying it with it was in with coming from anger or fear. It's coming from a accurate assessment of San Francisco and that's fine. It's not a it's not a black or white issue. It's not to hurt. There's a there's a lot of shit going on when you say that word. There's a lot of shit. You could say it in a beautiful way. And the way he was saying it was describing a wild looseness and an acceptance of homosexuality in San Francisco that allows men to be really flamboyant. Yeah. And it's that that's a good thing. Sure. That's a good thing. So what he was saying was a good thing. But that's what's pissing me off about this current state of like criticizing stand up comedy is if it's a statement. Since these are not statements, we're saying we're saying wacky shit. We're just talking. The next thing offensive is the energy behind it. When you hear a fundamentalist right wing Christian say homosexual, it's the same ways when you hear a Nazi say the word Jew. It comes out in this like sizzling. It's like it's the sound of like, you know, and them alien when they kill the alien and the acid drips through the metal. It's that same just vile, dripping hate homosexual. It's like all the hate inside that person is coming through the window of the word homosexual. And that's offensive. But when Greg Fitzsemon says, faggot, that's like somebody throwing glitter in front of a disco ball. There's nothing dangerous or angry or pissed off. It's just sweet. There's nothing bad about it. And isn't it funny that when this is something that took a while for humans to figure out. But now there is a knee jerk reaction that when someone rallies against homosexuals, it's angry about homosexuals. It's fighting off homosexuals. They're most likely gay. 100% gay. Most likely gay. Just so gay. When did people figure that out? Was it 1980? I don't know. Not even. When did you think it was going to happen? I think that's way more recent than people wanted to admit. I think the idea like was really crystallized with Ted Haggart. Sure. When that guy got busted in his gay prostitute friend who he likes to do meth with when on CNN, it was like, that guy's crazy. Yeah. I might be a gay prostitute that does meth with my clients, but this guy's fucked up. I'm just mind. Guys, this guy's out there fucking making mistakes. The way Christians come out of the closet is they say they hate gay people. That's how you know you're gay. If you ever ever hear a Christian talk about how bad it is to be a homosexual, it's 100%. You're like, you poor bastard. Just do it. True. True. True. True. What's good about being gay is you get to find out who's an idiot around you. If you came out, you were gay and some people got upset at you. Great. You found the idiots in your neighborhood. Yeah, unfortunately for a lot of people, if they're fucking parents. I mean, when you look at it, when they post letters on Reddit where people come out of the closet and their parents write letters saying you have to leave the house and will never talk to you again, it's like, they got off light, man. If they had good friends, they got off light. I swear to God. If my parents are like that and I swear to God to be happy now, today, 2013 at 45. You mean you escape from, you escape from assholes. At a certain point in your life, you have to realize that your family is not just what you were born with. It's also what you accept, what you bring into your world and what you create. Yeah, but when you're 14, of course. And you're a worst. Think about just, just think of the reverse. I mean, it's like, if when I was 15 and I knew that I told my parents that I loved going down on this fainty albino and that would like to think that if you were my son, I could work through that with you. I would like to tell you that, listen, there's no perfection to this life and there's the beautiful thing about life. Is it everybody likes something different? Okay. And then everybody is different. Some people have blue eyes, some people love to suck cock. I'm just not on the same sucking cock. I'm saying, imagine if you as a child knew that talking about you telling your parents like licking pussy would get you thrown out of your house. Imagine the horror of that, like your entire sex drive when you're in a teenager, your sex drive is like, you have explosive explosive and to know that revealing that that mechanism, revealing that mechanism to your parents could actually get you banished from can make you homeless. It's terrifying that you're 14. That's fine. It's terrifying. And that's it. Yeah. And that's the reality of modern man. Sure. The old days, people trived up together and they got, you know, 50, 60 people and they got together and they all knew everybody. And they existed in these communities where they all shared hunting duties and cleaning duties and parental duties and that was how people lived a long time ago. Where we really fucked up is we removed accountability when we stopped being communal. We stop being communal in our child rearing. We stop being communal in our relationships. Sure. You know, that's where like, bitch behavior comes from too. When you got a guy who like starts texting your wife or your girlfriend or, you know, girl you're dating and says like stupid shit about you, like that's supposed to all be done like out in the open. When a guy starts sneaking around on Facebook and saying mean shit about you to someone who is here. What is he doing? He's revealing his weak genetics. He's a loser. And the girl will never respect him. What he's doing, she knows what he's doing. She knows he's being like weak and creepy and shitty. But they think we'll just tell you that guy still doesn't appreciate you. I know he does and I see the way he is with you. I see that you're hurting on the inside and I just want to look totally platonic. I am your friend. I mean, I don't, I mean, you're very beautiful and I would be honored if you ever be with me but I know you don't need to be. So this guy's an asshole. Why does that guy exist? He can't go hunting with him and oops he got hit by a trace beer. You know, these are supposed to take that guy with you on the manly duties and throw him in a lake somewhere. What's the impact? He's supposed to die made for that type of human. That type of behavior is not supposed to be fostered to the point where he's a member of society, a trusted member of society. But oftentimes in communities people deal with deceptive like traders, traders of their friendship, traders of their because we've separated, we've removed accountability. You can shut your door and lock it and just send a country email and everybody has removed themselves from this process of community. Yeah, it's amazing how how bad that is for our continued evolution. The fact that people like that have any kind of impact at all is pretty horrific. And that's where Avatar Depression comes in because it doesn't exist in Avatar and it doesn't exist in the squash community either. I don't think there's any bitch squatches. I think squatches in my mind, okay, whether or not they're real in my world, squatches are noble. They're very smart. They run after elk and they take them. They probably choke them. They probably get a good strong, reenaked. They probably just break their necks. elks probably made out of styrofoam compared to a squash. When we went squatching, one of those guys said, I like that. We said that because it is true when we went squatching. When we went, very few people can say that. We went squatching and I remember one of the, I clearly remember one of our fellow squatchers, our teacher squatchers, they said that the way the sausquatch hunts is it breaks the leg of the elk. And then after snapping its leg, that's when it kills. I don't know why it doesn't kill it all at once, but it grabs it, breaks its leg and then lets it kind of pull itself through the wilderness and then eats it. That's the way the noble sausquatch hunts. It also can turn into a bird and it also can sound like a leaf blower. I can also tell you that that gentleman, the same gentleman that told you that story, also told me that one time he was in front of a blackberry bush and he heard a frog. It was like, read it, read it. And he said, now why would a frog be hiding a blackberry bush? And he goes, you know what? I thought about it. I was like, that's probably a big foot. Yeah, sure. So just so you know, same guy, same guy. There's some critical thinking right there that there should be in the CIA. I see, here a frog, it's near a blackberry bush. It must be an undiscovered primate of enormous proportions. Oh, I can't hold the fucking shit it could be. Maybe it's a crazy frog. Maybe it's a frog that ate a psychedelic mushroom. Doesn't know what the fuck is going on. He's hiding in bushes. He can't even eat berries. He's lying on his back. He's flying on a rainbow of glitter all the way to Jupiter. He's a frog and he's understanding space travel for the first time. He knows that he's got a couple minutes to go before the psilocybin leaves the system and then he becomes a frog again. Just let's run flies. Can I make one point real quick about this? I think squatching is the hiking. What Renaissance fairs are to parks? It's, I don't know, I say that better. No, I know what you're saying. I think squatching is a history. What? To history. I think squatching is the hiking. What Renaissance fairs are the history. I think it's a way to turn hiking into this exciting play time. Play time. That's what it is. I think that's what it is. I think you totally, right? I think you totally, right? I met with a guy named Arscot Nelson and he's a crypto linguist. In fact, he worked for the U.S. Navy for almost 20 years deciphering languages and he played me some authentic. I'm doing air quotes. Authentic. Big-foot language. I want to play it for you because it's pretty fascinating stuff. He played me, this is what it's disturbing though. He played me two very different recordings. One of them sounded like total dog shit and I listened to it. I was like, that is not a bigfoot. That's a guy and he goes, no person can make that sound. I was like, oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah. There I made the sound. I made the same sound. It really did sound. But he played me another one that was called, they call it Samurai Chatter. That is really weird. I would love it if, once this show comes on the air, I know a lot of you are going to be like, this fucking bullshit, I can explain. I am a language expert and had some very educated points about this language that he'd hurt online. Now, he went into this a complete skeptic. He had no idea that there was like a bigfoot community out there and no idea that people who were silent. that he'd hurt online. Now, he went into this a complete skeptic. He had no idea that there was like a big-foot community out there, no idea that people who were scientists took it seriously. But his son was doing a project and he was playing him this big-foot stuff. And him being a crypto linguist was like, wait a minute, what is that? And so he plays it and listens to it over and over again. And immediately recognizes that this is a language. And that's where it gets weird because you're talking about a guy who is a real bona fide expert in human language. He's an expert in phonemes and different aspects of human language and how to distinguish them. So he's what's called a crypto linguist. Which means he would take a language that's an unknown language and decipher it. Okay. So he listens to this and he decides like this is a real thing, like oh my god. So he thinks that big-foot's real. I'm going to play you what he played for me. Sure. Check this. Two, for several years, had a cabin way up in the remotest parts of the Sierra's of northern California. And he was there one time with a friend and every evening they used to hear some absolutely bizarre noises and calls and they couldn't figure out what the hell it was. And so they took up a tape recorder one time. And this is what they recorded. Listen to the shit. It is very bizarre indeed. We decided to record the sound. But it wasn't a cabin and I heard that. Oh, Jesus. My hair would tone it. Hello Creek Bobcat Goldway. We stick people looking to it. They are very encouraged. Is there more of this? Is there more sounds? There is right. Scroll a little further ahead. Give me some more of this for a little bit of love and time. Is that it? Listen to this. So this is what he determined. He listened to this and he listened to the sounds. And it was his expert opinion that these are not sounds that are created by a human body. Yeah. The tone, the speed of the pitch, the way the language is being exhibited. He believed that this is a language, but that it's not being used by a human being. It sounds chimp-like. It does sound like it definitely sounds like a gorilla mixed in with. I see what they call it samurai. It sounds like the Asian somehow. There's something underneath it. I would love to slow it down and hear what it sounded like. Well, he did. He did. He slowed it down and it's interesting. He say that. He slowed it down for me and he broke down very specific aspects of it that he recognized as language. And again, we're talking about a guy who was a crypto-linguist expert, a language expert for the Navy. So he knows what he's talking about. It is very, very compelling. I don't know where that came from now. I mean, they say that it was a bunch of people in their Sierra Nevada's and they recorded this. All we're hearing is some really weird noises that a language expert say sounds like some sort of an animal. No, but you're not even close. There's some quality to it that just doesn't seem human. I might be wrong because look, we've all seen people that are impressionists that do things. You go, how are you doing that? You know, we've all seen that. So it might be. I can make a dog one here, dog. Yes. Jesus, that's a dog. That's not a dog. Don't do that. Do you ever do that to your kids when they're sleeping? No, how rude. One time, no one were on fear factor. There was this group of people and they were blindfolded and we led them into this room where they didn't know what the stunt was. So they couldn't see it because it was a big wheel and you know, they would have saw it immediately and said, what's the wheel for? So they brought them in blindfolded. So as they're bringing in blindfolded. They were shitting pants. Dirty fucks. So I don't know what a person can and can't make with their noise because I have to make some weird noises with my body. I've seen the guy from police academy. I know what humans look. Michael Winslow could easily do something like that. Yeah, so you can't just say because you're hearing some strange guttural orch-like language that it's definitely a big foot. That's something that could easily be fake. Duncan, there's only one way to solve this problem. Will you go to the woods with me and go squatting? No. No, so I would I did not. Yeah, of course I'll go. Dream come true. I'd love to go squatting. All right, let's go squatting. Let's do it. Let's do this.