Joe Roman reagan the Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Hey, gentleman man, what's happening? Good to see you my brother. What's going on? You got books you got notes. I got books. I got this. I got this for you Yeah, a little little note in there you can read later Yeah, the brand new that's what back from the Amazon with that nice marshy say hi to everybody I love that you bring more to have you his Marshall Cohen other podcasters. It's just Good boy, good boy. We should just have to keep him from going under the water. Good little buddy. Yeah I gotta keep him from getting under the camera Yeah, yeah, yeah He is the best he is the best he's soft man. He's got amazing coke Sweetie well, he gets groomed. Oh, thank you. Thank you for the kisses. Okay Like I'm pretty light out. I don't please so oh my god You were you released that video. I saw the video. Yes, the uncontacted tribe. Yeah hitting send on that was scary Whoa, yeah? Wild I sent you I sent you a message that day. Yeah, yeah, that is crazy I've showed it to a few people but we never showed it live, but it is so marshy you got a light down buddy You can't be climbing under the wires They damn boa That experience has to be so insane to yeah to contact like legitimately Uncontacted people there they are. Yeah Yeah, and so I'm gonna do not look at their dogs do not well I mean, you know, but also maybe take a style tip from them and time up weird how they got their waist wrapped up But they don't have their dogs wept up or their butthole Well, it seems like they're trying to protect or they're trying to keep lots of rope I think rope is like there are main things. That's how they carry all their rope Interesting and and and carry the rope around their waist they carry their rope around their waist and they just want rope They want rope and bananas Is Dubinanas grow in the Amazon so bananas don't grow unless people plant them So there's certain human settlements where you know you can find old bananas growing but these you know plantains really is what this is Mm-hmm and they were requesting them what you see happening here is they request them Yes, they come out and I mean, these are people coming out a thousand years late to society and they're out on the beach holding up their hands saying No, molly we are the brothers no molly means brothers Oh, so now we actually think that they call themselves the brothers Whoa, and their first thing was we want want bananas and so the local anthropologists that we were with we were just there to work with the communities that we work with and These these guys came out across the beach and you see them there holding that you know They're holding their bows and those bows are six foot bows seven foot arrows And we were said, you know the anthropologists were saying put down your weapons put down your bows Before you talk to us This is does not need to be violent because their first instinct is to defend themselves And so there's maybe 20 30 of us and the local guys had a couple of shotguns just in case for protection because we were not initiating contact That's the thing I've been explaining to everybody. We were just there working in the community They came out to us So they knew you were there and they came out to you and how does someone speak their language? There's one guy in the community that kind of speaks a little bit They speak in the community. They speak Yine the Mashko Piero speak a derivation of that and so he's they're speaking and broken in Broken terms across across the river So they were so sort of shirts versus skins we were on this side of the river They were on that side of the river and then I I mean the the the courage of this guy to get in the river and go You know 10 feet from them and push the canoe there was no contact no physical contact made But he gave them these these these plantains and then you notice when they take them It's not like oh, yes, take the plantains will go back in the jungle and divium up It's like what I get I get they're fighting over them and they were all screaming and fighting over them So there's desperation there. Yeah, like I mean, I guess food is fucking hard to come by right? I mean the jungle is filled with life, but it's still It's got to be difficult to source and you got to do it every single day every single day So the snow refrigeration there's no preservation no so everything is instantaneous You shoot a monkey you got a cook it needed, you know you get a turtle you got to you got to eat it You got to open it and eat it and so there's you can see there there there there's there's more Does that that questioning look on their face? They don't understand who really who we are and and the really the only Communications that we got was we need we need more food and Stop cutting down our trees They wanted they said who were the bad ones? They said of you who were the bad ones? Why are you cutting down? Are our biggest trees? Well, not just cutting on the trees But also killing the indigenous people the protest it that get in the way of it if their tribe is Essentially located in an area where they're chopping on the trees that kill those people yeah Yeah, and so right now what we have is we have the loggers and the gold miners coming in and so since like the last time I saw you it was it was we were we were nailing all these successes adding acres to the reserve because what we're doing is trying to create This corridor which is going to become a national park We're trying to save this one river in the headwaters of the Amazon and we had been on this success run You know from from people hearing the stories from things like this people coming in and helping us do that and Then it started to change where we realized okay We're protecting so much land that the logging mafias and the narco traffic are started pushing back And so now it's getting more serious as we're getting closer to the finish line It's getting harder because they're going we want this to remain wild and we're going We're trying to protect this and the local communities are going this is our forest and the loggers and the narcos and the miners are coming from other places And they're cutting down this forest And so it's just you know I mean everyone knows the Amazon is the lungs of the earth Everyone knows it's got a it produces a fifth of our oxygen on our planet It contains a fifth of the oxygen of the freshwater on our planet So it's vital to global planetary stability But we've already destroyed 20% of it And so we're seeing the moisture cycle gets broken 20% of the whole Amazon rainforest That's insane and that thing is so big 2.7 million square miles And I think the lower 48 is 3.7 million square miles. Wow. It's gigantic. Wow And they've already killed off 20% of it 20% of it's already gone. Is it mostly cattle running like what is What are they what are they doing it for? Cattle ranching accounts for 60% of Amazon deforestation and then it's just development Roads China has a new shipping port in Peru that they want to you know create a I think a rail road over the Andes mountains Or through the Andes mountains so they can start getting access to the Amazon for Asian markets Is it true they carved out a giant pathway through the Amazon for a climate change conference? You know I've been trying to figure out if that's true I saw that go all over the internet But it's one of those things like who knows if that's real that and then the other one is they're like You know Swedish billionaire bought this much of the Amazon and it's like but what's his name? We're saying that and I'm like I don't well, let's put it into perplexity and find out that's true The whether or not they carved out a pathway through the Amazon for climate change summit Because that sounds like horseshoe that just sounds too too ridiculous There's no way they would do something that stupid. I don't know, but I did see also Why would they have a climate change summit in the Amazon you're gonna do it at 10? No, I think they did it in Manas. I mean there are cities in the Amazon. There's a keto's there's manana sure So you can fly into those cities. You don't need to carve out a fucking pathway But I remember seeing a video of this guy and he was saying like this is where the jungle used to be and now It's just this big road and I was like but again who in charge of the climate unless they were gonna have a climate Conference and just local Administrators and politicians said well we better get ready and clear this area and like maybe it wasn't intentional I don't know Pictures of it. Whoa. It's on the BBC Amazon force fell to build road for climates out there you go. Oh my god. It's real Oh my god a new for lane highway cutting through tens of thousands of acres of protected Amazon rainforest is being built For the COP30 Climate summit in the Brazilian city of Belam Oh my god. It wasn't Manas. That is so crazy. It aims to ease traffic to the city Which will help climate? It's easier to drive. It's more than 50,000 people including world leaders at the conference in November The state government south of the highway It's highway sustainable Pretty I love all these that term sustainable is one of those wonderful terms. You can just throw on things sustainable Credentials but lacks local and conservation But some local and local's and conservationists are outraged at the environmental impact. Yeah, duh That's crazy. You're chopping down trees to protest chopping down trees. What's fucking insane? It's amazing I just you know What point are people gonna wake up at one point in time people are gonna wake up and I think that that's you know that sort of as I've been I've just started this book tour and everything else and it's the thing I'm trying to impress I was just talking about this the other night is like We've had world wars. We've had great famines We had the the dust bowls like there's never been a time in history though before where we're looking at Is there going to be ecological collapse? The thing that I'm talking about with where they've cut 20% of the Amazon science is for warning that if we cut Too much of the Amazon that moisture cycle. I think the the thing was that 20 trillion liters of water every day are pumped into the air from the Amazon and that becomes the cloud system that rains back down The crazy Amazon rainforest if you cut too much of that you break the cycle and that forest has been growing for Something like 55 million years. I believe it formed in the eocene And so we are the generation that's gonna decide do we find a sustainable way to keep the animal the Amazon rainforest Functioning or are we gonna break that cycle and once we lose it it's not gonna come back So crazy It's so crazy that people are so short-sighted because like we want them Have cattle ranches It is it is disorganization and apathy. It's like we we have the ability to organize and credit If you can organize an airport you can you can figure out a way to protect a forest But the fact that it's in numerous Latin American countries Brazil wants to develop in Peru. You have the legal gold miners coming in and now you have the pressure from the Asian markets and You know, we found that if you just I mean, that's what we've been doing over the last 20 years is going to these gold miners and loggers And going how much do you make and they go $20 a day? You go do you want to make 60 and you get a cool shirt and you get health benefits and you get to write a boat And you get a team and they're like yeah, that sounds so much better And they're happy to come over but then yeah, we opportunity we talked about you doing that I think that is really amazing. It's just crazy that it takes a person like you and your organization To like put some sort of a dent in this this isn't some sort of a gigantic global Effort that there's not a lot of people that are recognizing this issue when saying hey This is a huge problem if this goes away I think though that their ice icy in the world that I exist in I see that all over the world This people doing conservation projects and that we are at this point where There's enough happening where I mean you had Eel Wilson advocating for the half-earth policy where it's you know At least half of the earth has to remain ecosystems If you break too much down if you ruin our ocean fisheries you cut the rainforest in the forest You're gonna ruin the weather the stuff that comes standard with life on earth is going to be Depleted right and so I think you know you see tiger numbers going up in India You see that there's actually been an increase in forest cover globally But in some of the most important areas like the Amazon It's just wild and I mean that's what we're doing is You know the guy JJ that I work with whose local he's been trying to he's been saying this for years I mean since we saw each other he got which I don't know how this happened I don't know how some of this stuff happens, but we got a we got an email one day from time And they were like we're selecting our you know 100 climate leaders of 2024 and they're like JJ is one of them And I have no idea how the people at times select this But they chose this I mean JJ grew up in an indigenous community barefoot He didn't have shoes until he was 13 And it was because he saw his forest get destroyed and because he saw the fish vanished from the rivers as nets came in And then as chainsaws came to the region. He saw the trees go down. He went we got to protect the next river And so he's the one that you know when I went down there at 18 years old He's the one that was like look you got to help me protect this And of course at 18 years old is like how How do I do that? How how on earth is that possible? And then when we started seeing the smoke on the horizon And we started hearing the chainsaws and it got more urgent I started telling these stories and then the anaconda stories and everything else the first book that I wrote And little by little jing good all um People helped along the way Joe Rogan helped along the way Well, I'm happy to get the word out because I I mean it's It's kind of insane that it's happening But it's also that place is such a magical place And then as such an insane history that we're just starting to understand the history of the people that live there I mean through the use of lidar. They're just starting to understand that the entire place was Massively populated and that a lot of the plants that exist in the amazon are actually agriculture plants That went you know went rogue when the people were depopulated because people brought in smallpox I got a pushback on that that's that's I feel like that's a theory that's been becoming prevalent as a theory Well, I'm sure there was a jungle Yeah, because even in the lost city of zee me and even the talk what is it Percy faucet? Yeah, other people that went there. They talked about the amazon being a lush rainforest But and these enormous cities that were incredibly complex Yeah before the jungle swalled them up so it's it's clear that there was some form of jungle there already 100% But that these plants that they grew for agriculture were the ones that had You know once people stopped Tending them and taking care of them. They overwhelm the rest of the forest Yeah, I have a friend sent me a clip and you were I think you're talking to Tom Segura and you went you know The crazy thing about the amazon And you went it's it's largely man made and I was like Like through something and I was like no, we'll just find out why we said that let's pull that up Put run that into perplexing and see what articles we get Because what they're saying is that these plants that the number if I believe If I'm not mistading the numbers that they exist in are not natural But that's only around these ancient sites And so I went and did a deep dive into this and the sites that they've studied are along the watersheds And so in the amazon you have Terrafirmo which is sort of dry forest and then it dips into the river basin and you have floodplain Most of these cities existed on floodplains And so where the scientists are able to go is up the rivers and they go to the edges of these floodplains where they find ancient human settlements And that's where you find terapratus soil which is human engineered And that's where you find there'll be like a higher incidence of certain trees or certain plants What are these trees? And so like bananas for example or as some times they'll plant a higher amount of brazilnut trees Here it is our sponsor perplexity which is always accurate Estimates suggest that roughly 10 to 15 percent of the amazon standing forest shows clear signs of being man-made A strongly shaped by long-term indigenous management Not planted as Uniform tree farms but modified over thousands of years much of the amazon that looks wild has been influenced by pre-Columbian indigenous Agroforestry soil enrichment Amazon dark earth that's terapratus And species selection rather than being a purely untouched wilderness These systems differ from modern plantations. They're diverse semi-natural forests Enrich with useful trees and crops rather than rows of single commercial species So the idea of the terapratus was that a lot of the amazon soil is not good for agriculture. Is that correct? There's only one UFC 324 this Saturday and on draft king sportsbook the number one sportsbook for live betting once it's over Your shot to get in on the action is gone draft king sportsbook is built for live betting Not just pre-fight picks because in the UFC one moment can flip the entire fight one punch one kick one take down New to draft kings new customers bet just five bucks to get three hundred dollars in bonus bets If your bet wins with the code rogan download the draft king sportsbook app and use the code rogan That's called rogan to turn five bucks into three hundred in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with draft Kings the crown is yours gambling problem called one 800 gambler in New York called 877 8 open wire text hope in Y 4 6 7 3 6 9 in Connecticut called 8 8 8 7 8 9 7 7 7 or visit ccpg.org on behalf of boothill casino when resorting Kansas has to have per wage or tax may apply in Illinois 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void An Ontario restrictions apply that must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days Minimum odds required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer It used to be a vast inland sea crazy. Yes when it when it's separated from Africa The the the the Congo and the Amazon used to be joined in some sort of proto Congo System and then when they they separated the Amazon South America hit up against the Nascar plate the Andes mountains shot up And then the salinated water drained out and that's why we still have Inland freshwater stingrays manatees pink river dolphins Makes sense and so that happened over millions of years as so the salinity water the salt water dolphins adapted to freshwater exactly And is that why they became pink? They became pink I think because they've lost their pigmentation they have terrible eyesight They almost don't need to see because you don't in that sediment rich water They're using they're using sonar. Yeah, that's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. So they've become almost blind All the fish you pull out these giant catfish. They hardly have eyes. They have like light sensing organs You can't see I mean there's there are clear rivers in the Amazon which I would love to go I've never been to one I don't like the streams are clear But the Amazon river itself is nothing everyone's like oh you should bring a GoPro in the river with you and I'm like for what You can see anything just sediment. Yeah, yeah, but the thing that that that the that this This theory about the the Amazon is even human engineered is wrong Because when you look at the size of the Amazon you look at that 2.7 million miles It's it's that they've said that what they're not getting is that in the areas that these people have been studying with Lidar and through this anthropological digging They're saying it's more than we thought there's certainly more human settlements than we previously thought there may be We're a few million people there before Pizarro and and and the explorers came But when you know what you don't realize is that between the rivers between each river which is the majority of the Amazon's is terra firm a giant jungle with hundreds of miles between the rivers Nobody's been there and so I just was reading a scientific paper It was saying they went out and sampled those areas and it showed absolutely no sign of human engineering and so most of the forests in terms of the growth of the plants But they do light art to see if there's previous structures Well the good thing with the light art is that they fly over and so the light art confirmed that Over those human areas like you get like a river confluence or two rivers are coming together There'll be a human settlement there and in those areas they find that the terra prey to they'll find that the plants occur in different Abundance and diversity than in the other places But that the this this message that the Amazon itself was engineered by ancient humans or prehistoric humans is not actually accurate It was a wilder saying I think they're saying it because people build their careers on you know if you come out and say I have a new theory about how this formed It gets attention there's even a and nothing against What's his name? Graham Hancock For a while it was like all Paul Rosie used to debate Graham. No, I don't I got nothing against Graham Hancock. He's great But but it's just the messaging isn't is is becoming that the Amazon was kind of man made and so what happens is You get leaders like in Brazil going well the Amazon was really man made then we can manage it now and That it's just not accurate if you look at the end even Smithsonian did an article where they said these are the current things that are coming out These are the theories and then it went yeah But these theories discount the fact that 95% of the Amazon rainforest has not been surveyed in this way and most of it shows That these are just wild ecosystems that have been growing since the dawn of time for the last 55 30 million years and It's just been Speesiating and growing and evolving on its own and it's only in these tiny areas that humans have Done this sort of engineering where they were there were tribes The first one to come down the Amazon he mentioned that There were tribes that had sectioned off parts of the river and they were growing the giant river turtles and that was their prime source of proteins They figured out how to get a giant river turtle. Oh tremendous. They're like three or four feet across the carapace Show me a giant river turtle jamming. Oh, they're huge. They're monstrous Absolutely, we don't have to be turtles like those sea turtle why sea turtle size they're huge They're absolutely monstrous and then we found fossil water there. We're on a beach We found fossils of an eight foot river turtle. Yeah, but so just like the ones you find in Hawaii Those sea turtles are like if you go to the big island. Yeah, you could swim with them It's pretty dope. Yeah, these guys don't have flippers though. They still have they still have claws Oh, okay, those are monster turtles massive and so they were growing them Farming them they were forming them and so in areas like that you're gonna see agriculture You're gonna see pottery you're gonna see terra Prada You're gonna see things where there was a small civilization by the edge of the river and then in the other 98% of the Amazon no one's ever been there. Have you had sea turtle before? Have you but this kind of turtle whatever it is have you eaten yet? Oh sea turtle note this yes, yeah, absolutely What is it like? Uh It's kind of slimy. It's not like anything. It's very strange because you They cook it and just you know everyone everyone always can help you be a conservationist and eat the animal because when you go to Someone's house and they live on the side of a river and they go we're having dinner. That's what they're serving I wouldn't do that man. You're really good. You let me throw paint on it Let me glue myself to the show. Yes, that's what I'm gonna do next time I showed you that video where I'm sharing the monkey head with the girl Yeah, I was like I was babysitting a six-year-old and she was like it's lunchtime And I was like well, what did your parents leave you for lunch? She's like opens this pot and pulls out a monkey head and she's like this So we put it on the fire warmed it up and then we both sat there just like rip it I would like rip off a piece for her cuz I was stronger and give it to her and then she was like No, no, I want the ear and she like she would rip off the ear like we just sat there eating a monkey face And so the turtle they cook it in the shell though just like you know That'll just like slit it's throw it throw it on the fire and so it cooks in the shell Then they part the shell and then you kind of just like it's like a slow cooked like you're gonna meet fall Off the bone oh, wow, just throw a little salt on there and it's kind of have a price So something they trade they trade for it. They trade for I mean the people I'm dealing with have access to the outside Even the really remote communities that are two days up river they they trade with the outside world They have some Interaction with money and so that's one of the things that we're doing as an organization is saying okay What do you want your future to look like? Because right now you have a couple shotguns you got a couple chainsaw as you got a couple boats and those Things make you want money, but you also want to eat fish out of the river every day You also want to eat monkeys every day and that these are your staples and they're like you know if if you cut down More of these trees there will be less monkeys if you shoot too many like it's not like they have deer tags where it's like a monitored thing They just they're not understanding this you know when it was a bow and arrow it was kind of a fair game Now the shotgun it's like you can go shoot with everyone yeah every time you pointed a monkey It's dead. Yes. It's not a tricky hunt And so we're worried these guys are you know working with us as Rangers and we're building this developing this relationship With the local communities of saying how do you do you want to continue living this way? Do you want your kids to live this way and the answer usually is yes, but with better health and education? So we want to yes, but yes, but yes, but so they like that way of life They want they want to continue that way of life Because it's the only thing that've known I mean has any of these people ever gone to like any of these other cities that are fairly close or that they could reach and and seem what that life is like Yeah, we bought we brought one of the communities They were having trouble with the proving government getting recognized as an indigenous community and they were having this trouble for 15 years And we we used you know now we have lawyers and and people and we have an office and all this stuff in Peru and so we We went and sat down with them. We said, okay, why are you having this trouble? I mean you clearly are an indigenous community. What's what's the hold up the hold up was that it takes two days for them To get to the nearest town when they get to the nearest town there Scared of the traffic. They have no idea is to do with paperwork They're sitting in an office These are people they're like putting their bows and arrows and guns down and walking into an office and sitting there in the air conditioning And they're like next and they're like sit and they're like do you have form like I-2-27B and they're like I-2-wah-baba They're like what's your social security number? They're like ah You know they got some like fish shells and they're And so what we realized is that they were just having trouble with the administrative part and so we put our lawyers on it and we got them Their indigenous title land and so now no one can take that away from them and so for that we brought them all to the city We had a big Conference and we had a big celebration about it and they were all had the feathers on their head and they were all celebrating and now they're safe As they get is there any pushback like is there any like political influence by the Whatever it is minors ranchers anyone who tries to stop that from happening bribe people to try to take over the land of these people Absolutely, and the Amazon is a war zone of influence and so you have I mean the the miners if anybody tries to protest the gold mining they kill you So one of the lawyers that I was working with his father had come out and said look as a local Peruvian person in the jungle. I want this to stop. They can't they're destroying There's a Jamie there's a photo in the folder that says I think it says sandstorm or something, but it's just It's not even again deserts are actually ecosystems. This is a wasteland They've they've destroyed hundreds of thousands of acres in the Peruvian Amazon You can see it from space. It's this horrible scar and they've cut the trees burned the forest and then they've sucked the land up and Then they take the bottom of the sediment and they use mercury to bind the gold out of the sediment and then they burn the Mercury off the gold released into the air. Oh great. Oh, yeah So that then in the rain it comes down as mercury rain which gets into the fish For discussions to the people and then also the miners must be getting mercury poisoning the miners all have mercury poisoning birth defects health problems respiratory issues. I mean it's Wow, some of the fires That's that's that is me that is me running out there with you right there Yeah, I mean as soon as we see forest burning we we run towards it and it rains there a lot right? So how long does this forest fire last? Well, they do it in September when the zilik? It's like July through September when the forest is at its driest They come in and they cut the forest and they leave it down. What was that picture? You just showed me James. That's a horrible picture That animals burned alive on the tree two baby Jaguars that were burned alive. Oh, God Yeah, and so people and they just stuck on the tree burned alive. That's crazy People talk about you know, we're losing ecosystems and it's like it's not just about us These animals live there. They have no where else to go and so there's massive individual suffering for and millions of animals on a single tree and So then when you have this these these five fires where they cut the forest and just burn everything This I mean those trees would have been filled with monkeys and birds and and and the snakes You know they they get scared they burrow deeper into their hole and then they're then it burns and so this is all for goldmine This was this was for cattle ranching this one This was invaders on our river that come in from other places. They would they set up cows. They set up papaya I mean this is what it's supposed to look like. It's supposed to be this lush verdant ancient rain forest fill from other places, they would, they set up cows, they set up papaya. I mean, this is what it's supposed to look like. It's supposed to be this lush, verdant, ancient rainforest filled with wildlife. I mean, the cacophony of sound when you, when you, when you'd go in a sleep and you're tent at night and you're out in a place like that, it's just this throbbing, pulsing symphony. It's incredible. The magic of that place of real wilderness is wild. I mean, this is play that particular shot was it's, we had to go for days to reach that spot. You know, all day on the river camp, all day on the river camp, you know, you're going up rapids, you're going up the waterfalls to get to these places that nobody can go. And there's an example of, it's, that was a, specifically a location where they've studied and they've found that there's never been a human settlement there. It's just a corner of the Amazon ever. Have they done LIDAR in these areas where they said that people have ever been? I don't know for sure. That's where it gets weird, right? Because like they've done LIDAR in some of these places that were like very lush and tropical. And then they find these structures underneath it. Absolutely. These areas that clearly had, you know, some sort of pathways and like geometric patterns that indicate foundations of buildings. Yeah. I mean, those are, those are there. I just think that right now the problem is that it's getting grossly overstated how much of the Amazon. If you take it, take it as a football field and you go, man, I thought it was only in this much of the football field, you know, in a few inches of it. And then you find out there's actually 10 feet of the football field that was, there's still the rest of the football field. They're still wild. Right. Right. And so what I think that's the message that's getting lost is they're going, there's a lot more here than we thought. That doesn't mean the whole thing. I watched a documentary once on this guy was losing his mind. He was a scientist who was a biologist, who's convinced that the giant sloth still existed in the Amazon. And they couldn't find it. Yeah. And that these people who lived there were telling him, we see them. Yeah. We know what they are. We have a name for them. And this guy had been there for years and he was losing his mind because he couldn't find it and he sort of staked his academic reputation on the idea that this sloth existed, couldn't find anything. But it doesn't mean it's not there. It doesn't mean it's not there. There's so much. There's so much. And the locals are never wrong. Like imagine if you were looking for a coyote and you had to look through the, you like there was a thousand coyotes in the center of the United States and you started in Pennsylvania and you were hiking your way. Like, I don't see any fucking coyotes. I see. But there's a thousand of them that are in North Dakota and you've got to find, like that's essentially. That's a great way of thinking of it. It's the same thing with rattlesnakes when I was a teenager, I was exploring the mountains of New York and I was going, it says there's rattlesnakes here. So I was just walking around finding every kind of snake. And I was like, well, where are the rattlesnakes? And you don't realize that wildlife occurs in populations. And so the rattlesnakes were all near rattlesnake dens. And so then I started making friends with other guys that were into snakes and they're like, yeah, we know where they are. It's only, you see that mountain right there? It's like, it's on the side of that. Go to that in the morning when they're sun and you'll see them basking. And it's like, you gotta go to where they live. Right. And you have to talk to the people that actually know. Yeah. Well, this guy was trying to do that. There was this one scene of exasperation where he was like sitting down saying that I stake my entire reputation on horseshit. You know, did he do you have to pee keeps getting up, which is unusual for him. Can you tell Jeff to come and get him? See, he might have to pee. He's generally he's happy to chill. Yeah, I'll just lay down. He keeps getting up and he's huffing. Yeah. Which is like, he communicates that way. Yeah. He comes up to me and he huffs. He might bite. He might bite. No, but I think that that's that's that's the truth. It's it's people think it's like you can just go find this stuff. And it's the secrets in this world are hidden for a reason. And even if there is a tribe that knows about the giant ground sloths, they're not going to tell us. Right. They're not going to tell us. Right. Right. Right. So it might be like one valley between two mountains where there's still a population. The bathroom bring them back in here. I'm pretty sure he has to go. Thanks, Jeff. I wouldn't, you know, I mean, there's got to be a bunch. Well, there's so many plants that they find there that this is an interesting statistic. Find out what percentage of pharmaceutical drugs that compounds emanate from the Amazon. It's an enormous percentage. Yeah. A lot of the base drugs, Quainain came from the Amazon. The first cure from malaria. I know Capdapro, which was a blood pressure medication came from Bushmaster venom. That was in the 90s. There's so much. I just got whacked by a stingray hard. I saw that. I got your foot, right? What was that? What happened? Brutal. I mean, that in the... Oh, you've been hit by everything. I had this. Dude, my body is a Jackson Pollock painting of scars. Do you ever get checked for parasites? Because you must have to hold them. I do. It typically say that about 25% of modern pharmaceutical drugs are derived from rainforest plants. And many of those known examples come from the Amazon, but there's no precise peer-reviewed percentage just for the Amazon alone. Most popular figures, you see like 25% of medicines come from the Amazon actually refer to all tropical rainforests, not specifically the Amazon. The thing is, how much of the Amazon has not been explored and how many potential pharmaceutical drugs or... Here's that's the term, pharmaceutical drugs. What about natural remedies exist in the Amazon that aren't... You don't need to patent them and sell them at a fucking pharmacy. Yeah, I mean, look, so we have... We have neosporin. You got to cut. It looks a little infected. You put neosporin on it. It might work. On there we have a tree that we tested this and it murders bacteria. It's like 100 times more potent than neosporin. What's it called? The songres de d'ago. It's not even a big secret. People know about this. Every time I post about it, everyone's like, yeah, we know about that. We use it. No, but no one's ever turned it into a cringy row in Austin. Probably. Can I get some songres? Sangre de d'ago, the dragon. The dragon. The dragon. The dragon. The dragon. The dragon. And a game of thrones again. That sounds like something Kalise would say. The mother of dragons. And by the way, called d'ago could have used that as he died of an attack. I mean, right? The thing that took him down. That didn't make any sense to me. I thought that was a plot hole. No, here it is. That's that. The dragon's blood. Sangre de d'ago. Yeah, but is it good? Is it sourced? Well, right. It's probably made by some asshole. It's probably like 1% of the rest of its quarts here. Because we just go, we just hit the tree with the machete and then we have a spoon. And you put it on your thing. And actually, exactly that, when I saw that, I thought the opposite. I was like, oh, this great warrior. I was like, that's such a great plot twist that just a nick killed him. I mean, I just had a staff infection in my leg from one mosquito bite that just got itchy. And then it spread and it spread and it spread until I had to be on double antibiotics. They cultured it and it was MRSA. And it's like, what have you done in the Amazon? Well, I got MRSA a years ago at a I had Dengue and I had gone to a clinic in the city, which MRSA usually lives like in like the hospitals and the human areas. Right. Because it's a medication resistant staff infection. Exactly. That's what MRSA stands for, right? Yep. And so I had gotten it and so I have a tendency now. I've been a little bit compromised in terms of infections because it's living 20 years in the jungle. And so I had already gotten it. So chances are that's what it doesn't exist. And that's the thing you see in the wild jungle. You don't have malaria. You don't have rabies. You don't have dang gay because the human population is so low that it doesn't spread. Mosquito bites you here. The next person is going to bite is me or Jamie. Mosquito bites me in the city and then I go out into the rainforest. There's no one else for it to bite. It's going to bite an anteater. And so it's not going to spread like that. Whereas if you have a town of loggers, that's why when you go to these like logging and mining camps, the diseases, they're just, I mean, there's this thing called this type of flea called a piki that goes burrows into your feet and lays eggs. There's less meniasis. There's malaria, dang gay. What's the birds like a virus? There's all these crazy things, but we don't have that out in the jungle because I mean, the ecosystem, the frogs eat most of the mosquito larvae. The mosquito larvae like like bromeliad cups or puddles will bromeliad cups and puddles are filled with tadpoles. And then of course there's turtles in the puddles eating the tadpoles and then there's other things eating the turtles. Everything's eating everything goes. It goes system regulated. When you ruin that, so then you cut down the forest, now you have puddles sitting in the sun and they're all twitching with mosquito larvae. So you have tons of mosquitoes. And so that's how nature they say, you know, mangrove forests will stop tsunamis from destroying a town because they'll stop the rush of the water. Well, forests will keep you safe by not only producing rainfall that'll come down on your crops, but also making sure that the ecosystems not out of balance. So you're not covered in mosquitoes and parasites. When I lived in LA, I moved into a house and in Cino that I was renting and no one had lived there in quite a while and they had left the water in the pool. And when I was going out to look at the pool, the pool was completely green and there was things swimming in it. Like, I mean, like school, swimming. And I go, what is that? And the guy goes, that's mosquito larvae. I was like, no way. And he's like, yeah, we have to kill them. We have to drain the pool. And like, I was just thinking about how many times I was going to get bit once these things hatched. It was crazy. Like, it was like watching little fish swim around. Well, actually. Yep. And then thank God for dragonflies because they'll lay there, they're young in the same thing and dragonfly larvae will go and mark those things. They're savage. And then you get tadpoles. And wild kingdom right in your pool. But when I got stung by the stingray, it was crazy because so that I had been walking. I had been walking with shoes in this stream. I took my shoes off because it's like, oh, I'm at a waterfall. I know this waterfall. I love this waterfall. Playing in the waterfall. And man, it's the one thing, bullet ants came in by its snake bites. I've had it all. The stingray bite was the one thing. Where's the bullet ants? 100,000 times worse. Yes. And I'd seen one guy get stung by a stingray. And he had nerve damage, a systemic infection up his leg and his whole body and he didn't walk for months. So when I got hit, I felt this is what I felt. I felt in a flash of a second, I felt the stingray bark go into my foot and it wagged its tail under my skin. So it flayed the skin off the arch of my foot and came out. Oh, and it has venom yet. So there all the skin is. Man. Yeah. So I put the skin of the dragon. So I sat and of course my first thing was I was like, OK, I got a document. I'm unconscious. I'm unconscious at this point. You're in that much pain. Yes, I was black now. I was freaking out. He was like, what? I was literally, I knew people were filming and I was like, I didn't, you know, you want to be tough. You want to be like, all right, I just got bit by a stingray. It's going to be fine. I was not tough. It says I don't remember any of this. Yeah. So that first thing right there, I started taking a video and my friend comes up to me. He was like, hey, man, he's like, we got to, you got to stop. I was like, because in a minute, you're going to go under. I was like, what do you mean I'm going to go under? And he's like, once the venom hits your system, he goes, you're not going to be able to walk and we're still a few miles from the river. And he's like, we got to get you to the boat and we can't carry you. And so they got me back to the station. I don't remember any of it. They had me laying on my back and I was in so much pain. I couldn't put my foot down. I was making deals with God. I was going, if I, if you just make the pain go away, as I go to church every day, as I go never smoke a cigarette again. So that's the plant medicine. That's where I'm going over this. I was going to smoke a cigarette every day. That's funny. That, that pack there, they went to two different trees and they removed compounds from the tree. One was the bark and one was the fiber and they put it into a leaf pack and they cook it on a pan and they heat it and it makes this plant pultus and they put this boiling hot piece of plant material. It's like a, it's like a fish cake and they put it against the wound and even that burned, but it felt better than the venom. And it starts to suck out the venom. And so when they took it off my foot after like, this is, this is them getting the, getting the plant material where they know the medicines and that's been handed down through the generations. So they're just shaving it off with a knife. Yes, you see this in the, the, the cake of all this stuff. Uh huh. And then they heat that up until it's scalding, press it against your foot. And you've been the Amazon for a long time. Is this the first time it's ever happening? You've been stung by a stingray? This is the first time. Now how does it happen? You just, you step us around. You step us around, please. JJ is nephew. So he knows he's got the indigenous training. He's, you know, exactly what to do. Wow. Yeah. So that's all the venom. All that black stuff is all the, all the, the, the denatured blood that came out of my foot. And so for about four hours, I was in this state of just level 10 pain, just white hot pain. I couldn't talk to anybody. I couldn't do anything. People were coming to me and they were like, what can we do? And I was like, just leave me alone. I was like, I don't want you to look at my face. You know, I was coming in and out and then, and then by night time it had, it had gotten this was that night where I was like, okay, the pain had subsided, but I didn't get nerve damage and I didn't get a huge infection because they had this indigenous plant medicine to save me. The last guy that I knew that got it, he'd went straight to the hospital and they had no idea how to deal with it. The locals know how to deal with this stuff. Wow. Look at that. That's crazy. That's crazy. That's crazy. So what happens? You just stepped in the wrong spot. I mean, I've stepped on stingrays before and you feel in flutter and one time I even felt the barb go like, past my foot, but it didn't penetrate. I do not know how. I mean, it must have been a small one or something, but it just right up through the archer my foot. And what's funny is it just. I would never walk barefoot ever. I walk barefoot all the time. But just days before, not days before that, about a month before that, I'd fallen off of something like a 50 or 60 foot cliff and just rolled down and bruised ribs and got it all banged up. I'd climbed up this cliff thinking I could. I was like, I see this root up there. I can get up to the top and at the top, my strength just ran out. And my feet were pedaling and I had no foot holes and I just went tumbling down this thing. And I just went, you know what? I said, I've had infections. I've had crocodile bites. I've had, I've had dengue. I said, I got a week left in the Amazon. I'd been in the Amazon for six months. And I was like, I'm doing nothing dangerous. No tree climbing, no anaconda hunting, no crock diving, none of that stuff. And I was just swimming in a waterfall. Bam. Just how long ago is the game? That was actually in April. I waited to post it until now. But everyone's, everyone's messaging me going, how's your foot? And I'm like, it was months ago. But it was like, it is better. How long did it take for us better? Honestly, two days. I was on my feet in two days. It was fine. Yeah. And if you went to the hospital, I did not go to the hospital. But if you did go to the hospital, I would take the guy that went to the hospital. Didn't walk for two months, had the necrosis and had a huge infection that he had to go get treatments for. I mean, he went back to his home country and had to continue being treated for months. I felt terrible. And him too watching, watching someone roll back and forth in that type of agonizing pain, like brave heart pain, like when they're just like opening him up. I mean, I just didn't know there was pain like that. You know, I mean, I've ripped open every part of my body. And I just, this was, it's from the inside and it's pulsating. And you just go, the other thing is you go, how much, how much of my year did I just miss? You know, am I going to, it's like that the one time I almost chopped my knee, I almost cut the tendon that holds your kneecap on. And I was just like, man, did I just take myself out of the game for a year? You know, just like, come on. And so when that happened, I was like, this is going to be so bad. And meanwhile, a couple days later, you walk around because they just did the medicine. The local guys know. Yeah. Wow. You asked them how they know this stuff. Yeah. Their father taught them and their mother taught them and their grandparents know. And so that's the thing with knowledge, indigenous knowledge all over the world. If you listen to authors like Wade Davis who writes a lot about indigenous wisdom, you know, this is stuff that's been one at a time gleaned from nature. And you know, you know, better than most, you know, you're living out there. Who's the first person to figure it out? I was. We take this and this, we take this vine and then we take this and we boil them together. How many trials in ours? How many dead guys were there before one worked? Right. And what was the motivation? And what was the motivation? They said the jungle taught them how to do it. They did. The prevailing thing is that science and sort of like the statistics of trial and error are incomprehensible given 40,000 plant species and all the different flowering and orcas and trees. And so it would take millennia if you did trial and error and the cost of human life to any civilization would make it too high. And so when they say that the gods gave us ayahuasca, that's the prevailing best thing we got is that it's a link between our world and the spirit world that the jungle gave us. Right. And you know, the other thing is like how much of our senses have atrophied by modern civilization? Yeah. What kind of communication do you actually get from the forest? Because there is it instincts, intuition, are there senses? Is there a feeling that you get where you get an understanding of combining two things because the jungles actually got a way of communicating with you that's a nonverbal way? I think the jungle, I mean, I view it as almost a, you know, it's like it's godlike. It's almost like a giant, complex sentient being. And so if you listen to, if you watch, you know, if you walk the jungle with JJ and indigenous tracker, he'll tell you, you listen to the birds, they'll tell you how fast you're allowed to walk. You know what I mean? And what he means is you walk into the forest on a sunny day, it's the afternoon and everybody's chirping and making tons of noise and all of a sudden everything goes quiet. And then you got to figure out, you know, is that because there's a weather system coming in and we're about to be in a thunderstorm or is there a Jaguar right over there and everything around me knows? And it's like the birds are the messengers of the forest. And so even that you start to become a tune to the frequency of the forest. And I notice when I bring people in that, you know, never been in the wild before they, they walk loud, they're talking the whole time, they're not paying attention to that sort of, you know, holistic view or so you learn. You know, modern civilized life has made us so clunky when it comes to the woods. Yeah. And just when I take people in the woods of people who have never hunted before, you know, they're stepping on branches, snapped, snapped, and rocks over, like, talking loud. My favorite is walking in front of you and then when the stick snaps back, like, having the sensitivity to like, they don't catch it. Yeah, they don't catch it. Like, yeah. Just get smacked in the face. Yeah. Well, this is a lack of awareness. You know, it's like if you've never been, you don't understand. But I mean, I would imagine as that times a million in the Amazon and then all the different things that are communicating, one of the things that they found out with, with monkeys is that monkeys have some sort of a language where they can say a sound that means an eagle is there. Yes. And that they will play tricks on other monkeys so that they can get to fruit. Yeah. So they will say that an eagle is there when an eagle's not there and then they'll go and steal the fruit. Yeah. So they will lie about an eagle being there. That's surprising. Get access to fruit. And then they're saying monkeys does not surprise me. It's African-verbant monkeys that I've read about that they have different calls, different words for land predator, lion, eagle, and they can communicate these things. So I mean, they're speaking. Yeah. They're speaking. That's our crows. Oh, God, yes. Oh, yes. They're super intelligent. Yeah. Oh, I don't know how we pull this up. I have it on YouTube, but there was this thing where we were coming down river. It was like seven in the morning. We've been up at our, this is a communication with monkeys theme. Because as we're coming down river, it's like seven in the morning and I'm always cold. So I'm sitting on the boat and I'm cold. I'm just like listening to music or something. And JJ is like, look, look, look. He's like, there's a spider monkey in the river. And I was like, there's always a, you know, spider monkeys cross rivers. That's okay. And he's like, no, no, no, the river is high right now. And there's all these whirlpools and currents. And so yeah, I jump into the river to save the monkey to save the monkey. She couldn't get to the side. So I give her my paddle and she looks at me and she goes, no, she's like, I'm scared to you. And then I spoke to her and spider monkey. What did you say? Like that. She thinks she's going to eat her. She thinks I'm going to eat her. But as soon as I started going, look, look, look, she's looking at me because I'm making the sound. And all of a sudden she goes, wait, wait, you speak me language. And then do it like you would do it. See, I'm making it right there. And she's looking at talking right to her. No, no, no, no, no. And then I'm like, look, it's okay. And they like their tail to be supported. Wow, that's crazy. She let you hold on to her. So now she's relaxed. That's crazy, dude. You saved a monkey. Only because I spoke her language and I learned her language from some of the orphans that I've rescued. That's crazy. And then she was like, well, if you let, because I could have grabbed her like, you know, like animal control that grabbed her by the neck. And I was like, you know what, look, she's looking at me because I keep talking to her. And then you got her over to the, to the shore. Yeah, got her over to the side. And she kept looking at me like, what is what? What have when you put her down. I put her down, she ran away. Yeah. But not fast. She didn't run away like she was in terror. Yeah. Oh, yeah. When I, when I first did, I went, and she looked at me and she went, she looked at me and she like responded. She was like, what? That's crazy. You're speaking. You know, that's why. It was why. And that's one of those stories where if it wasn't on video. And I said, I spoke to a spider monkey and she responded to people who were like, bullsh**. Right. I saved a spider monkey like pitch. That was your pet. Yeah. Yeah. Relationship with it. Like, as you're holding onto the tail, I get new you. When she was looking back, I mean, she was like, hey, thanks for the branch. You know, I was, she, she was drowning. We saw her head go under a few times. She was really struggling. She was exhausted. And I know that the spider monkey, their tail is their fifth limb. They have this incredible finger pad that's like 12 inches long. And so it just, it just wraps. They always had their tail anchored on a branch. And so I, I held her tail. And I was like, I got you now hold on to the stick. I was like explaining it to her. And she's looking at me going, how the hell are you? That is so wild. It was, it was really cool. That was a, I originally I was like, JJ, I was like, I don't want to get wet. She'll be fine. He was like, go get it. Go catch it. It's like, OK. Wow. That was great. Well, sure. That doesn't mean I don't want to save him. Right. I would save a deer. Hmm. There you go. But it does it feel, it must feel really weird eating a primate. I wish I could say it did. I don't care. Really? No. I mean, we've become very callous to certain things. But I mean, when people serve turtle now, I'm like, well, and which one is it? You know, it's like, I don't, I don't really, you know, it's like ribeye or T-bone. Like what are we, what are we eating? It's like, would you like order it at a restaurant? All right. So the problem is that the way they, the way they cook it down there, these are people that live, it's the hand to mouth, right? And so when they cook a turtle, if you get salt, you're lucky. It's not like they're sprinkling some cilantro on it, like marinating it. Right. You know, so if you just like took a chicken and threw it on a fire and then like ate a piece of it, it's not great. And so a lot of times that you eat this, this food way out there in the bush. I mean, I've been there where they've shot a spider monkey, grilled it up and I've been like, you know, I'll just eat rice. And I'm like, I'm going to be, I'm going to be tired tomorrow. There's no pro, I haven't had protein in a week. And I'm like, give me an arm, you know, just like eat the hand. And it just tastes awful. Just tastes like char. My friend Steve Rinella, he was in the Amazon with the Yano mommy. Yeah. And he said that that's their preferred food. Yeah. That they liked that above everything. Yeah. Yeah. And I see no conflict between, you know, we're trying to protect the ecosystem and save the monkeys. And I love the monkeys and I rescued a lot of them personally. But again, when you're, when you're in Rome, right, you know, if you don't eat with them, they go that green go, you know, they think that they're, yeah. Whereas they're like, oh, you're one of us. Right, you have to. You know, you show, you know how, you know, little, little things or, or we're, we're, chewy as fuck, right? No, it is. It's kind of smooth. It's kind of like, if it's well cooked, it's kind of like mutton. This episode is brought to you by armor every week. There's some new wellness hack that people swear by. And after a while, you start thinking, why do we think we can just outsmart our bodies? That's why armor, colostrum caught my attention. It's something the body already recognizes and it has hundreds of these specialized nutrients for gut stuff, immunity, metabolism, etc. I first noticed it working around training, especially workout recovery. Most stuff falls off, but I am still taking this. If you want to try, armor is offering my listeners 30% off plus two free gifts. Go to armor.com slash Rogan. Okay. So you have to slow cook it long cook it as I would it is. Ideally, yes. But a lot of times it's just they, they tie it to a cross like it's a little monkey Jesus and they throw it on the fire. Yeah. Yeah. When I saw them cook it, they cinged the outside. They cinged all the hair off and then they cooked it. I think they cooked it inside. But see if you can find Steve Ronella, eats on monkey. I think they, and then they boiled some of it in like a soup. I don't enjoy boiled meat. I'm never excited by boiled meat. But stew. Right. B-Borley stew is good. I mean, if you, if you sear it first and then you, I mean, it's kind of a boy. If you sear it first, right? Yeah. Because like just boiled chicken to me. It's like, you think a white like. Just eating it. Yeah. So here's just eating. They're like having a really good time. Yeah. Initially he was like, I'm not doing that. And then once they started doing it, it was like, OK. He said it tasted like smoked turkey. Yeah. My boy, Janice. Yeah. It is, it's interesting because if you live there, like my friend David Cho, he was in Africa and he hunted with the hodza. And they baboons. And he said one of the craziest things is when you hit the baboon with an arrow, they grab it. Like a person. Yeah. Like a person who got shot with an arrow and he's like, dude, it's fucked. Yikes. Yeah. But that's what they eat. They don't have a lot of food. And you know, it's like you were saying also when they don't have a sense of wildlife conservation. It's not like, hey, we, we have an accurate assessment of how many baboons are here or how many deer here, the dykers or whatever the animal is that they're hunting. They just eat whatever they can. And sometimes they eat them almost to extinction. And then they have to move on to baboons. And baboons were like the only thing that was left. And there's also like other people have encroached and settlements and, you know. That's the way my guys, because we have a lot of wildlife in our region and people from other regions will come as loggers and they'll go, oh my God, my dad told me that it used to be like this where we were. And now we have people from other watersheds in the Amazon like, you know, 150 miles away coming to us and they're going, can you guys bring jungle keepers over it? And they don't understand, you know, we're killing ourselves just to protect this river. And they're going, can you do this where we are? They're like, we have no more food because they don't have any regulation on this. And so what we're doing with the tribes in our area is just teaching this basic thing of like, you know, don't hunt, you know, at these times of year when they're having their babies. Right. Don't over hunt. Monitor how many monkeys you're bringing into the into the village. And so we're trying to develop this with them where if you're going to keep eating monkeys, do it in a way that they're keep being monkeys. Especially once they've gotten firearms. The one of the older guys said to me, he goes, man, it's so sad. He goes, we grew up. He goes, you could just pull fish out of the river and there was monkeys in the trees and there was turtles. He goes, you could eat whatever you wanted out of the forest. He goes, now he goes, we're eating sparrows. And he was like, we've just, we've eaten everything down to the smallest birds. He was like, it's just destroyed. And it was where he is is like something was like, Kormach McCarthy's nightmare. If Kormach McCarthy was still alive, I would show him that the, that I went to a part of the Amazon that really no one goes to up this horrible river. And, and that there were recently contacted, uncontacted people just, just this tribe that had just come out of the forest and they still had their bows. And they had no idea, me and JJ went for like a three week expedition, playing to play and to play and to three days on a boat, two days on a boat, to finally reaching this last settlement. And the missionaries had pulled this tribe out of the forest. They had tricked them. They said, just come with us for a ride, pulled them out, but then they said, well, if you want to go back, you got to pay for your gasoline. And the tribe was like, why do we pay with what? And they were like, money. And the tribe was like, what's that and where did we get it? And so these little people were standing, these were not tall people like the Moscow Piero, these were little tiny people. And they were standing there with the. What? And they were like, money. And the tribe was like, what's that? And where did we get it? And so these little people were standing, these were not tall people like the Moscow Piero. These were little tiny people. And they were standing there with their bows. And so we showed up with our tents and our gear and we were trying to go up this river and our boat and these little people came up to us and they were like, they're making the gesture for food. And so there's some loggers over there. And so JJ just didn't think. And he was like, you want some food? You got to go pay for it. He was like, money. And you know, he's through a a guy he was translating and these people going, but we don't have any money. JJ took some coins out of his pocket. And was like, just go buy some bread and he gave him some coins and they went and they tried it and they got some bread. And then all of a sudden there was 50 of them coming at us and they were surrounding JJ and they were grabbing at him and they were like, he's the guy with these tokens that allow us to eat. And we had to get out of there because it was causing a problem. But I mean, these people think they're with their bows and arrows and there's no more animals to hunt and no one's going to give them money and they live at the edge of the world. And they're probably tiny because they don't have any protein. Yeah. Wow. It was horrifying. It was one of the worst things I've ever seen poverty all over the world. This was again, behind together. A tribe we had no food with no food and no way of getting back to forest where they could be a hunter-gatherer tribe. Now they were in this in this wasteland where the loggers and the gold miners and the oil companies, there was there was even a barge with oil and it was like, this is where the Amazon is being eaten. And it was out of sight. You have to go for days just to get there. There's no foreigners there. Actually they did say we were talking to one logger and he said, it was a few years ago. He goes, there was a, we saw some rafts coming down river and then they stopped at this beach up river and they, they made camp and he's like, so we all talked about it and we said, well, we have a feeling they're organ harvesters and they, what, they were scared of these of these incomeers, right? They did organ harvesters. That's it is that the Amazon? No. And so, but that's what they were, they're sitting around the campfire and someone was like, what if they're organ harvesters? Why would they think that? I don't know. It would be that must be a thing that gets, I don't know. But, but the dude I was sitting with told me he goes, you know, we got real scared sitting around the campfire. Everyone was telling these stories and he's like, so we figured the safest thing would be to go kill them. So they went and they killed them and they were a couple of European like hikers on a mega expedition in the Amazon. I just got murdered by the locals preemptively in case they were dangerous. And this dude was like, yeah, we fucked up. And I'm talking to him. I was like, so who did the killing? I was like, it was it, you know, I was like, shit man. But I mean, this place was dark. You know, I, in the next book I write, I'm going to have to do a deep dive into this one because it was just, it was, it was heavy. And we also, we knew we, for the first time, you know, when you're in in the jungle, we're like, we're safe. This place, it was like people are looking at you and they're like, that's a jacket on a watch, you know, like a camera and a tent and a packer after like, you, we killed him. We get all kinds of stuff. They're looking at you like, man, that's a, it's a lot of opportunity. And you could just see them being like, well, let's separate him from the herd. Yeah, it was rough. It's like, you think like the cowboy day is like when it was really wild. Like blood meridian. Well, not only that, but it's probably a ton of stories about people that have come down and done horrible things. So it's not like you're thinking like these are wonderful people that come to give us plantains. No, you're thinking these are the type of people that would do horrible things to us. Yeah. So we have an opportunity to get something from them. And you sure desperation pure desperation. And so like the, the communities that I've worked with in my region of the Amazon, they're all, you know, you show, I've showed up on a pack raft and been like, Hey, and they're like, where did you come from? And I'm like, I'm just this foreigner who does its work here. And I talked to them and they're like, Oh, can't hear you'll be safe. They're really nice. They're caring their families. This place that we were at was this outpost. And it was all extractors. It was all gold miners, petroleum people, loggers. And it was like all the men who were in the dark bit, the black market people were all in the same place. So there was like a brothel. There was these displaced natives. And then there was like this one really scary missionary. This man looked insane. He had crazy eyes. And he wouldn't come anywhere near us. From where where is he? I couldn't, I couldn't tell where it was from. But he was dressed in the robes. It was like the mission, except he was evil. Like you could tell he, you could tell he looked at us and just vanished. And he had this little settlement that he had cleared and he was bringing his children in, and pulling them out of the forest. He looked like a white guy. But it was hard to tell. He had, you know, he looked at Grests buton. And these poor people are sitting there. And you could see them like they were all like breastfeeding their babies and like trying to eat rats. And like it was just we stayed there for one night. And we all, we didn't sleep. We slept back to back. We were just in our tent just awake all night. And then the next day we got in the boat and we kept going further up river. And we finally made it into the past, the edge of human civilization, into just uncharted jungle. But it was really. And so at least where we are, it's like we're, we're working with these tribes to make their lives better, to educate them. And there's this feeling, this is good feeling. We have jungle keeper shirts. I mean, now we're on the river and we see jungle keepers boats going by where we had gold miners just a few, just a few weeks ago. We had gold miners. Everyone, the whole team was calling each other. We sent our, we sent our ranger team out there. We brought the police. They arrested the gold miners. They brought them to town. They offered them jobs. And they said, you just can't be doing that here. And so they only cleared like half an acre of forest. And then we got them. So they didn't destroy anything. And so that's how we'd be somewhere higher than to mine gold, right? And that's the thing, there, no one hires them. They, they get it in their head. They go, you know, hey, to their cousin, they'll, you know, they'll go, why don't we go make some money? Let's go up there and see if there's gold. And they'll launch a little expedition. They'll bring like a 16 horsepower motor. Go for three days. And they'll, they'll sneak past us on. I mean, now the government's getting involved because we've been having the success. We're going to get a park guard station on our river. So we're not going to have this problem. But they'll go up the river. And they'll just set up and they'll, you know, they'll start panning. And they'll go, I see a little flake here. And they're like, cool, let's burn some forest. And then we'll start sucking it up. We'll run it through the big motor and they, they'll bring their wives and their kids. And it's artisanal. They're very, and so what they do is they get the gold and then they have to take it and they're little boat back to the town. And then here's the problem. There's one store where you go to sell the gold. And guess who's waiting outside that store? The people that rob you at gunpoint and take your gold and then give it to the actual people. And so it's, it's really sad artisanal gold mining. They're not organized. And it's the same with the narcos. We've been having problem with narcos. And everyone's like, dude, you can't mess with the narcos. Like you're going to lose the fight. And it's like, yeah, but these are, these are people that are like, we're just going to grow a little bit. And then we're going to sell it. Coca. They're, I mean, we busted. We helped the police bust a, a, we saw clearing on deep, deep, deep, way of river, days of river. There's a clearing out in the jungle. And so we sent our Rangers. The Rangers came back and we're like, we can't deal with this or something scary going on up there. And so we told the police and the police were like, yeah, we'll try and get up there. Now at the same time, I'm with JJ one day. And we always do the same thing. When there's, there was a, there was a bad patch of deforestation along the river. And we said, how the hell did this happen? They did it so quick. And so I put up the drone and I flew it over and I'm someone who is, you know, who are these people? They loggers were just trying to get a sense of what's going on. Fly the drone down and usually when we see loggers, they'll run in, they, these little palm-fetched huts, they'll run into them to hide from the drone. That's crazy. They know what a drone is. Well, these people came running out and they had guns. And we had already, on the river, we had passed their settlement and flown the drone back. Their boat came out after us. And we started going and I was like, JJ, you could just talk to them like normal and he looked at me and he went, not this time. And we had a, we had a 60 horsepower and they had a 40 and we were just blazing ahead of them and I had the drone in the air. And so this, you know, it's $5,000 drone. And so I'm driving the drone and I was like, can we, can we like, I got to get this drone and they're like, JJ looked at me. He's like, we're not stopping. And it dawned on me. They was like, we're, if we get caught, we're getting killed. And we arrived at the armed at this point, nobody on the boat had a gun. And so we arrived at a place where the police were camped out, where the go, they had been dispatched to go check out that other site. And so we arrived in the police force that we work with was there. And we pulled up and we're like, yeah, we got bad guys coming in and they, they messed up, loaded up. They got on our boat. We turned around and then as soon as they saw us coming back at them, they left. And then days later, they went to that same police force and assassinated one of the guys. Oh, man. So the narcos are different. The narcos are scary. And that clearing that we originally found, they were actually predeives sacks of white powder. The Peruvian military went in and actually raided that camp arrested everybody. It was so big that the American DEA knew about it. They were notified. And so this is now what's happening on this river where it's because it's the last wilderness, they're coming. And so we're, we're trying to, you know, we're relying on the Peruvian authorities to stop this from happening so that we can create this park before it's too late because they're also blazing roads that they're bringing in loggers. They're smart. They bring people and they'll send the loggers ahead of them. And then when the loggers clear the land, they'll just start growing coca. And so it's gotten, it's gotten scare. I texted, I texted you when it was at it's when I first started having to travel with security. I remember texting you because I was like, this is, this is a different game, you know, used to be like we're counting the butterflies and we're, you want to learn where to train. Yeah. Yeah. Because it's scary walking around. Well, the thing is the, the police intercept off the one of the people that they arrested on the phone. It said, if you see JJ or that shithead gringo that flies the drone, they said, if you kill them will reward you. Oh, man. So they found this message on WhatsApp. They showed it to us and they were like, you guys have a hit on you. And then a few days later, they, they, JJ was supposed to get in the car at the side of, you know, you take the boat down river to the car and he was supposed to get in the car and go back to the town. He actually came down river in the boat. And then what I forgot, I forgot that I wanted to finish up something at the station, take me back. He went back to the station. So our driver Percy started driving back along this little dirt logging road by himself. And they had trees across the road, mast guys with guns, they put the guns in the windows, they pulled him out and our windows attempted and they said, take JJ and Paul out, they were going to do it. So just so happened that JJ wasn't in the car just by pure luck, he was not in the car that day. And they roughed up our driver. They took his driver's license. They took his cell phone. And they just said, just let them know we missed him today, but we'll get him soon. Oh, man. And so we went, of course, we went to the police and we're like, look, we're going to need a lot more protection. They're like, it's getting, I mean, we're just trying to save the rain far as man, like we're not trying to. And these people are going, well, we're just trying to grow drugs. And we want to do that where there's no police. And the wilderness is only, the wilderness is becoming a finite thing now. So it's becoming this battle battleground. Jamie on there is a map. I'm wondering if you could pull up the map because I could explain to you. What's the status of this right now? Are they still after you guys? They are still after us, but it's been for for about eight months. It was really bad. It was really scary. It was horrible. Like every day, anytime JJ called me, I'd have a panic attack. But you see the the yellow on the right is the trans Amazon highway. That's the big, that's the big artery. That's what the Chinese and Brazil bit built. But then that smaller thing going up, that's that's the roads that the loggers and the narcos are making. And so that big red arrow, they're trying to make a road that goes in through there. And so the the white line outlines what we're trying to protect and that light greenish blue is the area that we have protected. That's that 130,000 acres that we have protected. And so that's what we're doing right now. It's a race against time. If we can fill in that area, if we can fill that whole thing in, we save the land. And once it's ours, once it's under jungle keepers protection, it's indigenous protected. All right, we're back. Yeah. So where are they growing the drugs in this map? So right at the upper tip of that arrow sort of the outside, they had cut a little road filament into there. And again, these little tiny trail roads, they go under the forest, the forest 160 feet tall. Is there a way you can communicate with these guys saying you're not trying to stop this? I mean, right now what we're doing is putting signs on all of these little tiny, I mean, these are jungle roads were just to go on the road. You're going out to where, you know, if anybody finds you out there, they'll just kill you. And your body will be decomposed and recycled within 48 hours by the jungle. So you're you're you're past where there's police. This is just earth. It's the wild west. More than the wild west, right? Because the wild west was never this dense. Well, it's the wild west and you can't see 10 feet in front of you. Right. I'm talking about this is more wild than the wild west. I guess so. You still have you have Indians with arrows and now you have these narcos that are that are straight up evil that are coming. I mean, they're taking girls from indigenous communities to work in their brothels. They're growing. They're all up there. They've got men working out in the jungle. And so they go to the communities and they tell them, hey, your daughter is very pretty, she'd be a great waitress. You know, we can educate her while she trains and helps people. And then they never see him again. And so it's all that darkness. And at the same time, what we're doing is bettering the lives of the community, making friends with these people. We have these amazing rangers. And I mean, we have different ranger stations along the river. And if we make this into a park like Teddy Roosevelt, no, John Muir took Teddy Roosevelt on a three-day camping trip and showed him Yosemite and like Sequoia and all this stuff. And he was like, we got to protect this like it's special here. Look at the size of these trees. Look at the beauty of this value and then they protected it. There's nothing as wild as this river on earth today. And so if we protect this now, the 200 indigenous people that live on this river get protected from the narcos, they continue having abundant fish and resources. And then they'll work as park guards and educators and chefs and boat drivers to maintain this gigantic protected area and then Peru will have this crown jewel of the Amazon. So they love it. But how can you protect them from the narcos? The police, the amount of money that's evolved in traffic and cocaine would make it a real problem. But the good thing is that these are the little artisanal ones. These are the guys that go, these are not like mafia bosses. This isn't like the Mexican cartel. These are like these little clans of people that go, you know what, we could just grow some cocaine and then we'll sell it to the big guys. And so they're just, they're like mom and pop cocaine growers. But they're also both of course. And so when the when the cops go out there, the cops just rest them and take them straight to jail. And so the cops have been supportive. Everyone assumes that Latin American police, no matter what, are going to be corrupt and like the police force we've been working with has been keeping us alive. And they want this park protected as much as the indigenous people do. It's amazing how many good people are out there. They're actually helping. And how many narco organizations are seasonal narco organizations are out there? Peru has become it's it's not great. Peru, I think has become if not on the same level as Columbia, I think they might have surpassed Columbia in terms of cocaine production. They're they're not doing great with that right now. And so we're at this very, very crucial juncture there. But you know, it's funny because in doing all this, you know, with even with the book coming out and I've been talking to people and people go, well, you have narco's now, they're like, so you're going to fail. And it's like, man, you're not even the one on the ground. Like I'm the one on the ground. I'm telling you, we're not going to fail. And the police have been successful at clearing them out and it's getting better. Just like the whole thing with, yeah, the Amazon's disappearing, but we can still stop it. It's like you got it. You think like before D day of Churchill was like, I will probably lose. Like you can't have them in Talladee. And so it's very, very encouraging seeing the, the local people stand up for what they believe in. And the job is dangerous. There's a there's a video on there that I think it says Sandra tree crush, but we I got woke up a few weeks ago and one of my managers came running at like 3 a.m. I see a flashlight coming through the jungle. And so I'm thinking the worst. And then he comes, he's going Paul, he goes a tree. And I was, I told you the last time I was on here. I said the most dangerous thing in the rainforest is the trees falling. He said a tree fell in the ranger station. And it's raining. And I'm talking about rain. You know when you're at the airport and you hear that sound where it's like, there's no sound louder. Your ears can't handle it was raining so loud. And he's screaming into my ear that this tree fell on the ranger station. He goes in one of the rangers was, was crushed. And I'm going, but get her alive. And he goes, we don't know yet. And so it's 3 a.m. And we get in this boat and we're going up river and there's lightning flashing and there's rain falling. And I'm looking with the flashlight and I'm navigating by the crocodile eyes because we don't know where the edges of the river are because they, you know, the eyes shine. And so we have footage of this and we arrive at the ranger station and sure enough, this tree had fallen crushed the roof, all the beams and all the scaffolding under the roof and fallen on this woman's face while she was in bed. And so she was crushed under this and she couldn't even scream because it was raining so loud. And so we get there and I stick my hand into the rubble and I hold her hand and I'm like, are you okay? And she was like, hey Paul, she's like, I have no idea. And she was amazingly like, like buoyant. She was like, I have no idea if I'm okay. She's like, but I'm alive. And I was like, we're going to get you out of here. We started to change. So I mean, like 16 feet of tree debris over her and all this gnarled roof material. And we had to pull her out of there and she had a scratch on her ankle. Wow. Got this great video for sitting in the hammock at like 6 a.m. And she's smoking a cigarette. She's like, I'm alive. She's going, I'm alive. And she didn't quit. She's still a ranger. And it's like, she's out there right now. Driving up and down because she wants that forest protected for her kids. And it's like, these people care. It sounds like the adventure of this is very addictive to you. This is what I'm getting. I think you love it. I think you love the forest. I think you love protecting it. But I think there's something about the danger of it and the chaos and the wildness of it all that it seems to me, I'm looking in your eyes. You're smiling because you know I'm right. I know. Yeah. I'm not going to deny that. That's when I was a kid, I remember sitting in school and being like, why did like you read about like Roosevelt and Jane Goodall and like these people had these amazingly adventurous lives. And I was sitting in school getting detention at detention and getting yelled at me and like, can I go to the bathroom? And I was like, why do they get to do that? And I have to do this. And they're like, you know, everyone around me was like, you know, when you get a job, then you're really going to love your desk. One of my friends, mom said that to me. She goes, she goes, you think you hate your school desk? She goes, wait till you get your real desk. And I was like, oh man. And so yeah, riding on the on the boat at at 4 a.m. with the lightning is incredible showering in the river crocodile eyes. Yeah, man. I mean, with the wind in your hair and the the fear. I mean, you know, you know the magic of the mountains and yeah, and the jungle has its own vibe. You watch that miss snarling up off the canopy. And it's like, it's so wild that you just you feel better. You feel healthier. And again, you know, that whole thing of of what's the thing to say like a sacrament is an outward sign of an inward grace. And it's like the the beauty of that, you know, you drink from the river. And then you sweat it out and you watch your sweat, join the steam and rain back down onto the jungle. You are connected to your environment. And every single day, you don't know what's going to happen. You know, I opened those one day where I was like, okay, I'm going to stay on the station. I'm not going to do anything. I've been hammering myself in the swamps for a week. And I was like, I'm just going to like drink coffee and like do office work on my computer. And so I was like at the station. And my team comes running. They're like, Anaconda. And I was like, where? I was actually a good noise. I was like, where how big of an anaconda? And they're like, no, it's a pretty big anaconda. We go down to the thing. And it's sure enough, this big ass anaconda on a log, like 11 feet, you know, not not a monster. But so then I started doing this thing where I was like, because they were all like, be careful. And I was like, of what? And they're like, it could bite you. And I was like, it's it's a sleep. I was like, she's just trying to get the sun. So when I started, I took out my phone and started doing this thing. It was like people were scared of snakes. And I was like, I was like, if you're scared of snakes, it's like, there's an 11 foot anaconda. I was like, do I appear to be in danger yet? And then I kept getting closer and I was like, how about now? How about now? And then I was like, she's not waking up. So I get on the log with her. And the anaconda still doesn't get up. And so I turned around and her coil is here and her heads like, you know, 10 feet over there. And I just put my head on her and now laying on the snake. And I'm still taking a video and I'm going, see this snake doesn't care that I'm here. And even if she wakes up, you know what she's going to do, she's going to jump in the water. She's not going to bite me. And she never woke up. And I figured, you know what, why bother her? She never woke up when you rested. She woke up. She moved her tongue, but she never she never freaked out. Well, they're the king. Yeah. It sounds like they don't really have any natural predators. Right? Uh, when they're small, when they're small, right? The crocodiles, the herons, the corona, right? The you forget you forget that like pelicans and herons can eat like a baby alligator. They'll just throw it back. Sure. Just just take it down there, throw it in the, uh, that was just crazy. Herons are, there's amazing hunters. Pelicans are disgusting. The way they'll take like a whole bullfrog and just glut it down. So you know that things like alive in their chest. I've seen videos of them doing it to pigeons or seagulls. Yes. The one where you swallow the seagull. Whole. The seagulls like getting smaller as it goes down. Yeah. And you realize like that crazy mouth that they have is just so they can swallow things alive. Yeah. I mean, it's weird, look at funky thing. You're like, oh, that's a monster. That's a monster. They just swallow things alive. Yeah. You don't think of birds as as as savages. They laugh in that, Jamie. Pictures of pelicans are trying each shit on the screen. I'm trying to dog. Oh, oh, come on. Marshall. Oh, I'm trying to get a happy strategy. Oh, my God. Yeah, they, they basically can eat almost anything that's near their size. Good Lord. That one just fly out. Wow. It's too late. Oh, man. Yeah, they're monster. I'm trying to eat another guy. That's that's that's I call bullshit. I know. There's no ways Pelican was trying to bear. I believe that though. I've seen that video. What are those things? Go to baby capy bear. Capy bears, right? Those are they've those are things that have made their way into lute. No, it's a different animal that's made their way into like Louisiana. They have to go out and shoot them. Have a leanness. No, no, no, no, no, no. It's a type of large rodent because David tell you to have a TV show called Insomniac and he went out at night one time with them in Louisiana and they're hunting these things that they're they're an invasive rodent, a giant rodent. And it was like David do his shows and then after it was a comedy central show, it was really good show and then he would find things to do in the town because he can't sleep because he's up all night. And so he went out with these people that were kind of can't remember what the animal was, but it's a large invasive rodent that exists in the south. I mean, nutrient. That's right. Yeah. And people eat them. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the rodent. I mean, casting their video because it's kind of crazy because they're out there hunting them with 22. With 22. Yeah. I mean, they have to. They're completely invasive species and they're huge to like a small dog. That's something I let yeah, left off the list. We eat those all the time. Like they we have to call the pack a small capy bear with spots. And those I mean, you know, it's like squirrels, but they're big. They're like, you know, cat size and fat. People eat them all the time. Those are delicious. What's your favorite thing to eat in the jungle? Perana. Perana. Yeah. Really? Oh, my God. They're delicious. And when you fry a Perana, you know, you just, you know, make the slits along. You just fry the whole thing. You just pull it right off of its skeleton and the, the, the fins become like chips, like little salty chips. Oh, they're so good. You just put salt on it and we just just just a little bit of salt and then fry it up. And then better than the Perana is the Paco, the big vegetarian, the Perana species. Yeah. Those are invasive, invasive species in America as well. Yeah. People catch them all the time. Yeah, they catch them in their like 40 pounds. They're huge. Yeah. Someone got a world record powerful really Paco, Paco PACU right? Yeah. Um, I want to say in Georgia, Georgia or Florida, somewhere in there. And fucking huge. Yeah. No, they're powerful. We, we, we fish for them, you have a, you have like a 10 foot pole with a rope on it. Yeah, there's a Paco. Yeah. Yeah. Look at the size of that thing, man. That's crazy. 50 pounds. World record size Paco cotton floor. There it is. 50 pounds. That's nuts. Dude, those are so, they're so nutritious. When you eat them, you feel like you're just gaining muscle. Really? Yeah. Like you, you, you still, eat a lot of elk. Oh, yeah. Like, don't you feel like it's like a super food. Uh huh. Yeah. This is how I feel. I live on this. Yeah. I feel like I just live on Perana. Yeah. Perana and Paco. Yeah. Wow. How do you catch the Paco? 10 foot pole. You have a piece of rope and you put like a piece of like last night's dinner. You're like a piece of you tie a bunch of rancid chicken. You leave it out in the sun, make it smell bad. You got a six in the morning. So they're not vegetarian. Well, they'll eat anything. They specialize on the nuts. That's why they have the human teeth. Oh, those are the ones that have the human teeth open their mouth. They have like molars and then like a few, like front teeth. And so we go with this 10 foot pole. Nobody can make a sound on the boat. You're just floating with the river. You're like invisible and you wait for a feature in the river, like a like a rock or a place where the water's rushing and you smack it against because they liked that that falling, falling fruit or falling seeds. And when they hit, I'm talking about like a four inch hook. When they hit that hook, this is the thing because you're doing this for you're doing it for an hour and you're like, all right, there's no, there's no Paco in here. We'll guess what? When they do hit it, they'll pull you right out of the boat. I've been dragged straight across the boat where like you got to use one hand to stop yourself and the other hand's holding this pole. And then your friends got to pull you back. You get this fish on the thing and it's going boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, How do they do they? They're catching them. They're big. They're huge. And then you got to have a hammer because you got to shut them off somehow. Right. You got to crack them right on, you know, between the eyes. Because otherwise they'll just either jump out of the boat or in your store. Everything was the other thing. We were going up over a few months ago. Or at night, we're all just quiet in the boat and we're going to go up to this tributary to explore it. And I had a group of tourists with me and this girl was sitting on the front and all of a sudden, I feel something go past me. There's something and all of a sudden I got, I got wet and all of a sudden I hear bang, bang, bang, bang, bang in the boat. What the fuck is going on? Turn on my headlamp and there's a poco in the boat. And the girl that was sitting on the front or head is bleeding. One of those huge ass pocos jumped out of the river in the night, hit this girl in the head and then fell into the boat. And so we just grabbed, yeah, we just ate it. But I mean, that poco was in the middle of the Amazon at night just jumping around and joined itself and it just jumped in the wrong boat. Wow. Wow. Two foot fish flying through the and that's your favorite. That's your favorite thing to eat. Absolutely. That else is really good to eat. There's these little cup mushrooms that are really good. You fry them up with garlic. You do that in poco. That's now you're talking good. My friend Roy is a chef. He's one of the junkie. He's the president of Jungle Keepers right now. He's a local guy and he focuses on Amazonian cuisine. And so he picks all the right flowers and funguses and he'll take poco and then he'll flavor it with a type of orchid thing. And like all of a sudden you have this amazing food. And like Lima, they have, you know, Peru's become this amazing place for food. Peru is great food. Wow. He does the jungle version. Wow. So it's not like nasty monkey soup. It's not turtle. It's the it's the curated, you know, five star version of of jungle cuisine. So that's number one. Poco's number one. 100%. I'm even right now. I think I tried alligator ones, but it didn't leave an impression on me. I haven't really. I also feel like they're my friends. Really? Yeah. How's that? I like them. Just because they're cool. Well, I mean, I work with them a lot. I'm always catching came and I always see them on the side of the river. You know, nobody's serving me. If they were serving me came in, then it would be just like the monkey where it's like, I got to eat it. But nobody's serving me came in. So I'm not going to. A staple of their diet. No. You know nobody's serving me if they were serving me came in then it would be just like the monkey where it's like I got to eat it, but right nobody's serving me came in Staple of their diet no in the in the north and Nikito state a lot more came in so you don't see came in On our river. There's still there's a came in on every beach. There's there's jabby rous dorks There's kakoi herons is just macaws everywhere. It's just there's just so much life. It's avatar. It's just just pulsing life It's incredible. Did you find that video of David tell no? It weirdly is like not online found a picture of the episode but not a video of it. Yeah And they're just Shoot newtria. Yeah, I think they eat them too, but I can't find it Yeah He was actually on the episode just yeah, yeah, yeah, this is a long time ago This is back when Dave was drinking so this is like days been sober for I Want to say 15 years at least Somewhere in that range. Yeah, and this is back when you know He would just drink at the comedy club and then stay up all night smoke cigarettes drink coffee Never and yeah, I mean he's the most unhealthy and also the most hilarious guy alive You stopped drinking right for months. I drink a little every now and then now I went like eight months with no drinking and I started having like a glass of wine with dinner. Yeah, and a cocktail or two But I have not had more than like two drinks in a night Feels good doesn't it it was the it was a good break. Yeah, they ate months I felt really good I was convinced I was never gonna drink again and then I drank a glass of wine. I was like well like this I missed this with the one that that's the one thing the line is yeah, but why would a steak? Oh? right Nice Yeah, a little I think it was important to just recognize that I was doing it and it wasn't an alcohol I was just I have a club. Yeah, I'm there all the time and you know You're out with friends. You want to drink. Yeah, sure. That's how we drink. Yeah, go to dinner have a drink I have another drink. It just got to a point where I was like I was feeling and I'm too healthy I work out all the time and I was like why am I doing this to myself? Yeah, you know, but now I realize you know little moderation a little more bad, but drinking is essentially fun poison fun poison. It's weird after Lex ruin drinking for me Lex gets saucy well This is the thing where he came when he came to the am when he came to the Amazon he he goes I want to do I was gonna and so we called you know JJ's oldest brother is 70 something we called this shaman in and he's like You know with the Lex voice. He's like brother you have to do this with me And I was like I am not drinking I was gonna I there's a chapter in the book about when I did it with the old master and he he he Overboiled it and we all like saw God and you know we were there for the big bang it was awesome There's art. No it was no no. No. No. I was like taking a mega dose. It was like sure It was awful. It was traumatic. I don't like it scared. I was terrified man No, so it's like I have retired as I come not doing it and Lex was walking around in circles for two hours And he comes up to me and he puts his hand on my shoulder and he goes I came all the way here for you He goes now you do this for me goes don't leave me alone in the dark and I went God I said all right, I'll do it We drank right next to each other and the guy's smoking his pipe and you know He's the feathers on and he's singing to us and you drink and you go in deeper deeper into the hole and God It was interesting though we both The shaman said that you know he was talking about what Lex was going afterwards He was talking about what Lex was going through on his journey and he just goes in and does this deep work of the things He sees coming off of you and this is a guy at the shaman I've known for 20 years. He's like my uncle and So he would come up to me and he'd go I'd be laying down you can't you can't get up and he'd come up to me And he'd go one more cup and I'd be like sure like Why not and he'd like give me like I could kiss on the forehead and throw it down my throat and then he'd go to Lex and go one more cup and Lex would be like yes And then you know give it to Lex and he said that he said that he wasn't worried about my spirit He said I was I was there to protect Lex and he said Lex was there to to do some real work And so it was interesting is that we both reached this sort of We we both reached the pinnacle of of what was happening at the same time where I felt myself about I felt it coming I was like oh no, I'm gonna throw up and all of a sudden my my consciousness lifted six feet above my body And I was looking down at me and Lex and I got this overwhelmingly calm sensation and Without speaking the shaman said to me. He said you're not gonna feel this I know you don't like it. He said you're just here to support him So you can vomit now and so Lex started vomiting and I started vomiting But I was watching myself and I was watching him and I was just like this is fine It doesn't hurt a bit and it was very very comforting and then he came and he started with the you know Shaking the leaves and singing louder and really cultivating making sure we gave everything that we purged all of it And then and then he brought the crescendo down and then he he calmed and then he began singing and then we came We we settled back into the the the symphonic throb of the night and then the trip went on for some time But it was it was interesting that things heightened at that moment and that we went through it together So why do you think that you were there to protect Lex? It was just like something he said that's what he said to me You know and then and then and then you know it was very interesting watching Lex go through his journey because he by the end of it. He just got happier and happier He just he just liked it more and more and around around I think cup six I I tapped after the after the vomiting after that thing It was sort of again. There's this energy is floating around that he's singing. It's great You know understanding a little bit of the language because you know He's singing to his grandfather He's singing to the spirit of Santiago in the spirit of the anaconda and using the old words for them You know not even saying anaconda. He's he's saying the other things Amato my own, you know, he's saying shua wakko and he's talking about the so he's doing this and shaking his thing And you hear the frogs throbbing and it's all moving through your skin and so I yeah I tapped out after while and Lex kept going. He's got an amazing constitution. I think that's the Russian thing But since then I can't drink really I can't drink I could have a cup of wine maybe if I have more than that I feel sick And like I feel damaged. I have not been able to drink I haven't had a beer since since two years ago So what do you think it is? It's just like let you know what it's doing to you? I have no idea. It's just a weird side effect. I keep trying it. I'll like smo I used to love whiskey. I like I like smell some whiskey and I'm like wow Really? So we cracked the bottle right now you turned off You would it would make just I mean I could take a sip of it But my body would be like no red light red light. No. Yeah. Well, that's your body's correct. Yeah But it made me suit maybe hyper-high percentage if I noticed from that moment onwards did it have the effect with Lex? No, I don't think so. He's still booed. I don't think so. Thanks goes hard Which Andrew Schultz is wedding with Lex? Yeah, and then we had a flow we flew with Whitney Cummings was doing a gig in Vegas Yeah, and we said we'll go with you so it was me and my wife and Whitney and Lex we flew to Vegas Yeah, and then we hung out with David Goggins. I called him up Come meet us at the hotel. Is he party? No. No, no, no him and Lex were doing push-ups. They were doing drunk Lex was drunk and David wasn't and Lex wanted to have a push-up competition with Goggins. That's amazing. I mean, but that's why he's Lex right? Because he's gone because he's because he's willing to try everything. Yeah, oh, he's you know I mean the fact that Push-up competition with David Goggins is silly. That's hysterical. He's quite a character that Lex He's only going to Dagestan to train He's gonna go to Dagestan and train with like a beep team. Yeah, good Lord You're like 42 like what how old is he? Let's gotta be his 40s but early 40s. I think he's still very young Yeah, but like yeah, you're gonna go there and train with How old is could be? Well, could be was retired, but he's Probably 35 if I had a guess You know somewhere around there. Yeah, you know, but it's a different thing. He's the one. Let's talk now He's training those guys now he's training. You know is la makachev and Umar and Nirmikabedov is cousin. He's training some of the best guys alive So he's running a camp down Dagestan because he's kind of like so so did he it seemed like At least I don't like I wasn't really following his career, but it seems like he came in like an assassin did some big stuff well, his dad died because dad died during COVID. Okay, and After his dad died he promised his mother that he was gonna stop fighting Got it. Yeah, his dad was his trainer. You know his dad His dad was legendary legendary trainer and trained Islam trained Kabib and when he died Kabib made a promise to his mother. He fought Justin K. Chi beat him to defend his title and that was it done But I mean he's he's very well regarded now for oh His accomplishments in fighting right one of the grace of all time. Yeah, I mean, there's an argument of who the greatest of all Sure, it's very subjective sure, but he's certainly in the conversation. Yeah, you know of he's one of I don't think there is a Maybe John Jones is the greatest of all time just based on his accomplishments and also undefeated but also the time that he's been to me John won a world title at 23 and Is still like up until he he relinquished his heavyweight title recently He's 36 37 now once beaten him crazy No one's out of run out of doubt no one's out of run like that. That's insane. How big is it? How big is he John's a heavyweight? Yeah, geez John I think is six three or six four You know and now he's about two 40ish, but he used to fight at 205 that was his main weight class That's some crazy. Yeah, and so you know the conversation of who is the greatest of all time in my my book mighty Mouses in that conversation too Mighty Mouse mighty mouse to Metris Johnson. He was a fly weight The problem is he was a very small guy and so a lot of people disregard the smaller guys in that Conversation but still wise The expression of mixed martial arts excellence. I put mighty mouse in his prime right up there with everybody Do you think that now you your arms are significantly bigger than mine and I feel like Like the guys who are good at striking have smaller arms Giant arms. Giant arms. There you go. Yeah. That's not like you swinging around some weight like Power behind it. Yeah, so when you do that. That's true. It's it's conditioning You know like the whole thing of swing. It's like did you develop those arms just doing bicep curls? Yeah Or did you develop those arms doing functional things? Yeah, yeah, constant constant training that gives you muscle endurance Yeah, it all depends, but if you see like a big bulky bodybuilder guy. Yeah, that's not good No, so like our level where we're still athletic and stuff I'm going man. I don't want I don't want to put on more. I want to get stronger, but I don't want to put on Yeah, I don't do really anything to try to put weight on Yeah, I don't I don't lift anything heavier than 70 pounds. Oh, he dudes just one. Yeah, they just want to look big Yeah, I don't do anything like that. No, I don't like I said the heaviest thing I lift is my body weight Yeah, I do have your body weight stuff I do a lot of chin ups and dips and sometimes I do it with a vest, you know and I do You know, but with kettlebells like the heavy occasionally I'll throw around a 90 pound kettlebell, but the heaviest I really trained with 70 Yeah, but that's plenty, but I don't like I said, I don't train for size I just train for function. It's a drink of function. Yeah. Yeah. It has to to me It's silly if I don't have range of motion function like what am I doing? I don't I don't yeah, I'm a martial artist like my my whole thing is to being able to use my body Yeah, it's not to make it look like I can use it. I'd rather be smaller and more functional and bigger and yeah, just look like a big goofy toad Yeah, I I bulk too easily I actually try to put on this way only do Yeah, I mean, yeah, we're telling an Irish and come on. We're get sick. Yeah, you get to quick You gotta watch the people a lot of thick people. Uh-huh. Uh-huh Can I take a quick? Yeah, yeah, we'll be right back ladies and gentlemen you've been you've been murdering it like you've been happy just Tons and tons of you do them every day. I just keep I mean, it's not any different pace than before Usually for a week it seems it's just I feel like I may be because I'm in the jungle for a few weeks and then I'll like come back and And look and I'm like whoa. Yeah Johnny Knoxville Matt Damon and like think bang bang bang bang bang the key is just keep going Yeah, you know like you've run a thousand miles right, but you didn't run a thousand miles in a day Yeah, you're on 10 a day and then days go on You get to meet everybody you meet a lot of people. Yeah, you definitely develop a better understanding of human beings Because you know you're limited by the amount of human beings you're interact with your scope You're understanding of people. Yeah, more you can talk to the more different people the more you get a different sense and Yeah, well, you're in a very you're in a very unique. I mean again I always go back to the B lady remember that though the yeah She locates the bees. She's cool. Yeah, and then you have people like Knoxville on and you guys are talking I just heard you guys talking about you when he gets when he got hit by the bull I was always wondering if that was real And then I remember the first time I came in here as asking you and Jamie has gone the one question with the David Blaine thing When he had you show that thing through I was I shoved it through I was real. I was going come on. They got it that can't be no That was real. Yeah, I mean because I did it once I hit a nerve and he had to restart it Yeah, maybe back out and shove it right through But it's not a trick, you know, it's just pain like I could do that For wanted to do that I could do that I could shove a needle through my arm. How bad do you want it? I don't want to do that Yeah, I don't understand why I would do that and I feel like that's a little bit of what Knoxville was saying where he was like Look, he's like I got a response and he's like this is what I started doing Yes, you know, and it's like One way or the other how you're gonna get the attention. I mean that's what brought him to the dance is just getting hurt all the time But when he told me he had been knocked unconscious 16 times and Then that last one that's really bad and then the last one was the bull one that he landed on his head And he was depressed for months and then get on medication I am Very averse to head injuries which is kind of hypocritical because I'm a Combat sports commentator, you know, yeah, we're and I've also been hitting the head a bunch of times But I just think it's really fucking bad for you overall. I stopped sparring When I was in my late 20s really yeah kickboxing sparring yeah, and then I did it a little bit when I was supposed to fight Wesley Snipes I went back to start sparring again Did you fight no Wesley Snipes was hysterical it was him I was in my mid 30s And it's like this is the last chance I get to do something like this yeah, and then I got contacted by Campbell McLaren who was one of the producers the early UFC's like this is gonna sound crazy But oh Wesley he was in tax problems. He wound up going to jail for a tax evasion Apparently he had some crazy guy who was telling him, you know, you don't have to pay taxes You know, there's there's those guys that are like what do they call them sovereign citizens? So they call them There's a lot of people that give really bad advice You know, I think I'd end with someone like Wesley Snipes, uh-huh and you know They tell you like they can't prosecute you it's not in the comping He believed it because he didn't have access. No, I never talked to Wesley. I don't know I don't have anything against you. You sure he just wasn't scared to fight you so he made up this whole story No, I think Wesley also might have been Embarking on a journey of cocaine. Oh Which gives you a very distorted idea of what you can't and can't do everything Yeah, you think you do everything. I don't know if that's the case. I think it might have been just well He's a very legitimate martial artist. I mean Wesley if you look at his like skills like from the movie Blade and yeah Like he's a really good martial artist. He knows how to fight. Yeah, you kind of have to be to do those movies Yeah, yeah But my thought was just I'm gonna grab him and choke the life out of him like yeah, he's gonna stop me Yeah, like also I know how to stand up like I was awesome It was a kickboxer that would have been awesome if you could if you could fight one person dead or alive full fight I don't want to do that. I don't know. I wouldn't eat. No the problem with it It really like theoretically not you as Joe Rogan the dad and like just Joe Rogan It would not be one person would it would be to start fighting again? It would be fight whoever it was the whole thing would be competing That's not that I'm 58 that's not no. I'm saying like but like Wesley snipes like you know You say like oh, I had one of fight. I just thought it would be an adventure. Yeah, and I trained for like six months I was training with Rob Cayman who's a Legendary kickboxing a Dutch kickboxing champion Yeah, he was my kickboxing coach. Yeah, and so I was training with him in the morning So and I was trying to get to it night. It was hard. It was really hard I was doing it for six months. I was training twice a day for six months It was really brutal and I was so tired I was tired all the time and that's where you got those leg kicks that you were teaching George St. Pierre Nah, I wouldn't learn how to do that when I was kid now my question is now he's such a legendary I mean may guy like he was Did he not have well? I was a Taekwondo specialist, you know, and I was Multiple-time state champion in Taekwondo and I won a bunch of national tournaments. I mean I was really good I was really good at Taekwondo like I thought at a very high level and I have a lot of really good Instruction that I got from I got very lucky and I stumbled upon a school in Boston called the J. Hunt Kim Taekwondo Institute They just randomly walked in the door one day and it turned out to be one of the best Taekwondo schools in the world Hmm and so I had trained with some of the very best people in the world Just by fortune yeah, and I was physically gifted It was very lucky in a lot of ways a lot of natural power and I learned technique and you know Which is the most important thing like perfect technique and so When it was funny it was because it came about because of John Donner her I had a conversation with John Donner her who's George's Jiu Jitsu coach who's maybe the greatest martial arts coach in the world maybe of all time Really legitimately like a brilliant man. He was a philosophy major from Columbia Who got I think he was a professor for a bit, but then he got obsessed with Jiu Jitsu And was just teaching Jiu Jitsu and trained Jiu Jitsu and sleeping on the mats and like literally literally literally teaching all day I'm in a train all day and sleeping on the matsel But but a brilliant man and we were having dinner one night and he's like George needs some help with the finer points of the spinning back kick Do you know anyone who can help him and I said This is gonna sound crazy. Yeah, I go, but I have like the best spinning back kick you're ever gonna see in the fucking life I know it sounds crazy because of a comedian. I go Find a bag. I could show you. Yeah, I can show you what I could do and then I brought there's a video of me Oh, I saw it. Okay. It was the sound that's imprinted in my mind George When we're at legends legends MMA in LA which where I trained it was where Eddie Bravo had a 10th planet Jiu Jitsu and You know, I go okay, let's go downstairs to the Muay Thai part and I'll show you and then I kick the bag and he's like No, I'm out and I find this mountain like it's he's filming with a flip phone. Yeah, crazy like that's how long ago this was This is I was probably 2005 or something like that. I had hair and It was it was funny because it was like this thing. It's like because I don't do it It was even back then it wasn't like I was training in kickbox. Yeah, I wasn't training in talk window It was just I just it's just it had it in. Yeah. Yeah You still do still you keep it did it today. You did it today. Yeah. Nice. Yeah. That was an impressive video And you just go Jesus he's he's if he's showing this to George named here How good is he at this thing? It's like I used to be really good. Yeah, but I Realized when I was like 21 well, I realized when I was 19 that I was gonna have to stop Because I fought in California I was living in Boston at the time was traveling all over the country and fighting and I fought in the nationals in California Against this guy who was the Illinois State champion and I knocked him out really bad. It was really bad I hit him with a wheel kick in the head and my heel was sore for days afterwards Yeah, I had a hard time walking from his fucking head. Yeah, and he never got up He he went down face first was snoring and back then my thing was If I knocked anybody out, I would just act like it was no big deal. I'm just turn to where I walk away No celebration. I just walk away like that. That's I'm gonna do that to all you guys Yeah, and so I walked away and then I turned to my friend Jungkzik who was my corner guy I said he's getting up because like he's not getting up. He's not gonna get up. He's out and And then they took him and they put him in a they they took him and they put him in a stretcher And then they were taking care of him and for like a half hour who's still unconscious Yeah, and then they took him to the hospital. I have no idea what happened to him, but I realized it was so bad It was because he came forward So what happened was he did you know what switch kick is no? Switch kick is you're standing with your left leg forward and you switch legs and you come like with the left kick So you think he's repositioning and then he's moving forward Yeah, telegraphed it and it's his left leg So I saw that his left leg was coming this way So I spun with my right heel and I hit him in the head as he was running forward So it's like multiple for the force itself of a wheel kick is so powerful. Yeah And then when you're running into a wheel kick it's crazy like two cars driving it is like getting hit with a baseball bat that fucking You know mark my guar swan. Yeah, crazy how much power there isn't it because it's your legs Your legs carry you around all day in the torque of your whole body You're whipping around and and you're hitting it with the heel and you you know It's no padding on your heel and it's not right. I hit him right on the fucking cheek Like right on the side of his head he went out and then I came back to my instructor And he wasn't there at the tournament. I went back to Boston. He's like He goes I heard you had a really good knockout and I said yeah, I said I was it was scary. I go I thought he was dead. He goes Sometimes they die and then he walked away from me and I was like fuck man Sometimes they die like that's me. I'm like I'm and I had no health insurance I was 19 I was broke. I was training for the I wanted to be on the Olympic team Yeah, that was two years from there and I lost a lot of my steam at that moment Because I was like what am I doing? I'm fighting for free. Yeah, I don't have any money I have no insurance and I'm doing this thing and I knew back then I was getting some brain damage for sure yeah And then I Then I started kickboxing like right after that and then I really kind of lost my face Feeling for type 1-0 because I really it was so limited You know that like when I was sparring with kickboxers. I was really I'm gonna come at hands or so limited So then I started working with this guy Joe Lake who was a boxing coach and that's when I was doing a lot of boxing and a lot of a lot of kickboxing and I was like man, I'm getting my brains beat in and I don't know why I'm doing this You know, I'm like there's no professional it wasn't like the UFC existed at the time Yeah, I got offered a kickboxing fight for 500 bucks and I was like 500 bucks So for 500 bucks, I lose my amateur status I can never fight in the Olympics and there's no money in it as a professional like what is my future? Am I gonna be one of the and then I'm new guys in the gym that I used to train with like when I was 19 and then by It's almost like 21. I was seeing brain damage in these guys. Yeah, I was seeing them slur in their words Forgetting what they were saying repeating themselves. The weird thing is they they'll tell you a story. Yeah And then they type the same story like two minutes later and like you just fucking told me that story They don't remember they don't remember anything and now but now You know George St. Pierre is a good example of someone I feel like he made it out of fighting before yes Like he looks very healthy. He's fine. He's fine. He's fine But he's you know, he's a very intelligent guy He does also does a lot of things to keep his mind very actively plays chess. Yeah, you know, and he's very Like proactive about it seems like even like I just seen him on social media where he's like Hey guys. This is how I do like he's just like a very oh, yeah seems like a very positive fun You know does the best case scenario for both another guy in the argument for the all-time great Yeah, for an all-time great MMA champion who has a Successful and happy life outside of him didn't end up with the note the shakes. No. No. He's fine. I mean I've hung out with him a bunch I've hung out with him recently. Yeah, he was great We came to the comedy club. He's actually playing my friend James McCann They were playing chess in the green room at the comedy mothership. It was so cool. We're filming it the last time I came I think he had been in there the night before and I was like, oh I would have been that would have been a trip to meet him. He's amazing. He's but he's such a sweetheart of a guy You would ever imagine that he's a fucking killer Arctic on yeah, you're such a sweet guy, but it's just like for him It was just this incredible challenge and he was really good at it And he just figured out a way to express himself that way and You know as a legend like I don't imagine that he was like big on like the trash talk before for not everything right He was probably just like look where he was gonna no there was no trash talk. He's very respectful No, unless someone was disrespectful to him and and you know and even then It wasn't trash talk. No, you always seem like he was cool. Yeah. You're just doing his thing No, he was a one of the best Representatives of the sport of all time if not the best. No, I like never got in a trouble outside the octagon Yeah, never you know was never drunk driving or beating people up and you know just a Great guy and if I would have to tell people who he is like he would he's like who's your friend? I was like what do you think he does? Yeah, what do you think my friend? Yeah, and like I don't know he seems cool It's like he's one of the he's about five nine five ten maybe and now he probably is 180 pounds 185 pounds maybe fought at 170. Okay, you know, he's not like a scary looking person I'm like that's one of the greatest fighters. Yeah, it's ever walked the face of the earth Like no way. Oh my god. I mean, he's like hey. How you doing man? What's going on? Jovial no, it's just sweet. Oh, he's not trying to intimidate like you know, Kavi looks like he's you know It's really smart. Yeah, he's really he's always like watching documentaries and breeding books Yeah, he's fascinated by ancient history and dinosaurs and really into aliens dinosaurs No, it's just crazy man you've gotten to this you've met everyone. Do you ever have Jane good on here? No, I did not unfortunately I wanted to I wanted to and I wanted to she's gone, right? She just died. I wanted to talk to her about Bigfoot Because she was convinced that Bigfoot was real. What yeah, yeah, she was convinced that yeah, yeah She did this interview fine. She said she's sure none of it. Yeah. Yeah. We'll find it. Jamie's I Not that I don't believe you, but I just don't find I mean good all I know No, no, I was stunned. I was like what and this is by the time I had been convinced that Bigfoot was fake Yeah, I'm in that camp, but I there's camera traps, but this is the camp There was an animal that it that co-existed with human beings for sure There was called Giganto, Pithika. Yes, you know the whole story. Yeah, so Giganth, Giganth, Giganthika they found bones in an apothecary shop in China in the 1920s or 30s and Anthropologists found these molars and said where did you get this these are primate molars and they're fucking enormous Yeah, like whatever this thing was was absolutely huge. So they went to the site where they got it They found mandible bones that indicated was bipedal So it was an upright walking walking primate that was eight to ten feet tall like what the fuck is this and so I'm sure you've seen the images of what Age I can't tell Pithika's look like in comparison to a human being. Yeah, it's in the ranked tank family and so that thing existed and also existed in Asia, right? So you look at the bearing straight and you look at the bearing land bridge that we know existed during the ice age And so we know that humans migrated from Siberia into North America. We know that for a fact You know one of the reasons we know that for a fact because Mormons were convinced that Native Americans were part of the lost tribe of Israel Yeah, so some Or effect, you know one of the reasons we know that for effect because Mormons were convinced that Native Americans were part of the lost tribe of Israel Yeah, so some rich Mormon guy did a DNA test on Native Americans and find out found out that they emanated from Siberia Yeah, and so it was incorrect. So we know humans came down from there. Why wouldn't Other animals sure we know they did we know short face bear a bunch of different animals that they find their bones in Alaska And they know that they probably made their way down through North America It just stands it just makes logical sense that if you have a variety of different megaphonas That probably one of those primates or a bunch of those primates lived in the Pacific Northwest Which is the area where they would be right and then you have incredibly dense forest right? Yeah, so I don't know what rule out existence but no no what find the video where she says I'm convinced I'm convinced Yeah, she was talking oh No, no, I'm not okay. Just find it because of the gist No, go to video I did she would have been awesome. You should I'm so sad get all on how big foot might be real That's it right there put the put the headphones on What's the headphones here we go I climbed into the hills. Oh, there's Jane This was where I was meant to be I want to talk to you about something that Someone say is fictional but you would say hold up we we don't know for certain and that's Bigfoot Everybody talks to me. I would I would I romantic I would like Bigfoot to exist I've met people who swear they've seen Bigfoot and I think the interesting thing is every single continent There is an equivalent of Bigfoot or Sasquatch. There's the Yeti the Sighari and Australia There's the Chinese wild man and and on and on and on and you know I've had stories from people who You have to believe them So there's something I don't know what it is. I've always opened my dad What about other mythological creatures? Well, pause for a second so there there's saying that to her he's saying that to her and she said that in reaction to a previous interview that you did the previous interview that she did she said I'm Convinced that it exists I don't know well, you know you got to realize this is a lady that live with primates and yeah an inaccessible area Yeah, yeah, where there's very few human beings and she had these interactions with them I don't agree with her, but I think that it existed at one point in time one of the other reasons why I think it exists is that different native American tribes Put this into perplexity how many different Native American terms were there for a hairy wild man or Bigfoot and I believe there's more than 80 That's wild now. They don't have a lot of mythological creatures in Native American culture Right and so in different tribes right, but they have a name for this hairy wild giant man that lives in the woods Oh, whoops Yeah, they also have the other thing that's really fascinating is giants there is a lot of ancient cultures have stories about giants and Native American tribes have ancient stories of giant red-haired men Which you know god they're in the it's in the Bible it's in a bunch of okay 40 to 50 separate terms cross different languages and regions hairy wild giant man No single agreed upon count, but dozens of distinctive American names for hairy wild giant man banks easily over 40 to 50 separate terms across different languages and regions Interesting I still I would love to see the clip eventually of jingle all saying I believe in Bigfoot because I'm saying there She's like I'm open to the idea of it. She's saying that and as a reason why jacks down in the back is because he had Exactly seen that he had seen the previous interview see if you can find another interview with her talking about Bigfoot She was she was awesome. You know, she was she she's the reason I have a career really her being awesome I was I it's two stories. I tell people if I go first of all because everyone goes what's your role in like? Yeah No, it's true because everyone wants to know and you're controversial My house goes the nicest fucking guy in the world. I go there. He said the first time I came you sent me a message And you said something about like hey don't worry about a thing like I'm even gonna bring my dog like yours You're it was very nice. It was a little pat on the back because you go Jane good all I Went to a talk when I was like 22 something and I was just writing chapters of my first book mother of God which didn't even have a name yet And I had chapters in a Manila envelope and I went to a talk that good all was giving And I mean I've been read stories and seen the black and white pictures So this is like you know like Einstein a blink and Jane good all so I'm living historical figure And so now she's talking in front of me and I had brought these chapters and been I wanted to ask her because I'd already sent the chapters to Publishers and they'd all been like kid none of this is true You know no way did you jump on a giant anaconda no way did you raise an anteater? They just didn't believe me and then I when it was my turn after hundreds of people I get to her and you know She goes hello. She goes it takes a little picture with you And I said would you read these chapters? I said I I would love it because I loved your stories as a kid She goes thank you and she puts it to the side 48 hours later her staff gets in touch and they go Jane actually read what you gave her Love did and said finish the book get a publisher and I will write you an endorsement She waved her magical wand in my direction and Gave me a career that's so cool and what's really great is that earlier this year I emailed her and It was because this book was coming out and I I You know I said it would be amazing to have I mean I said at this point no one's you know the conservation The voice of Mother Earth And she just you know she was just she just said you know just keep protecting the Amazon That's that's your mission. She was always very it was like, you know, Luke believe in yourself It was like you know, she was just like you your job is to protect this forest and it was incredible That's amazing. And so yeah right right meet you know at that six months ago I got to tell her I was like look because the last time I'd spoken to her we were protecting I Think it was like a hundred thousand acres and then in the last year we added 30,000 acres to the reserve and so I said you know We're making strides forward and she just it was good that I got to tell her that and then and then You know recently we found out that that she died but What a legacy what a legacy what a legacy. Yeah. I mean we know so much about Primate behavior because of that woman. We sent us so much about I mean Man the toolmaker before her we said there was humans that use tools and now we know that you know Capuchin monkeys use rocks. We know that otters use rocks. I mean I've seen elephants use a stick to scratch Seeing I've seen I've seen camera chat put it in an elephant using a tree to knock over an electrical fence Animals use tools. Oh, yeah, she was the first one. I mean she went out there when she was what 20 something years old middle Africa Blong girl crazy and then spent the whole rest of her life But the lesson that I take away from that is that even as famous as she was That she was traveling 300 days a year. I mean she'd been you know An icon for decades and that she still took the time To actually read something that some kid handed to her That's unfathomable grace Yeah, I do that and then literally if that didn't happen I never would have published mother of God. I never would have Started jungle keepers. I never would have been protecting the rainforest. She she she empowered that she did that with her magic It was and I think that that's incredible. That's so cool. Absolutely incredible. Did you find any other? No I guarantee it exists, but it's okay. You have to trust me Um, I don't think she's correct, but I do think Not Bigfoot, but I do think that it's entirely possible that there is a small Harry primate like Human like primate that exists still that's like the high the hot people from the island of Flores Yeah, you know, there's um, there's the thing called the orang pandek have you heard of that no the orang pandek? I think Indonesia Perhaps Vietnam. There's a bunch of places that have this creature that gets cited on Multiple occasions and they used to think of it as like just silly legend but now because of the discovery which was Was it in the 90s that they discovered the Hobbit people in the island of Flores? You know about that right? I've heard of them Yeah, yeah, almost those are real Sea-nceus. Yeah, those are real. We have their bones very real very real. It was a very small Um like Hobbit like creature. Yeah, that was a type of primate that was bipedal That was like a little tiny hairy human being that lived at least on the island of Flores Yeah, but most likely lived in many other places as well and There's there's a possibility that it still exists and It's not me saying this. It's like some actual anthropologists that believe that this thing might still be alive Because you're dealing with incredibly small populations, but are those I mean are those islands so small that know like unlike the That's small They're pretty Red ably dense Incredibly dense forest and no one is going down in there bushes right. It's like the Tasmanian tiger I was just gonna say that like a silo scene where it's like they're just they're just Exactly exactly small population like there's a lot of sightings of the thiolicine You know, yeah, but somehow all these sightings. It's never on a it's never clear. No. No. That was the It's also there's no one there. Yeah. Here's the thing. I mean let's pretend that you saw Wolverine in the Montana woods like that your Montana woods and it's a hundred yards away You see it briefly for a second get your phone. You're not gonna you might have seen it you might have seen it Really saw trees, but like how you gonna get it off your phone now You're gonna have to unless you have a Samsung we have a really good zoom Yeah, you're not gonna be able to zoom in enough. Yeah, you know, I get I've to have like this only two phones that are good Yeah, you're not gonna get good footage, but we know that Wolverine's a real but finding a Wolverine in the woods I've talked to God I've talked to hundreds of men who spend a giant portion of their life trying to see in the woods and only a few have seen Wolverines. I would love to see a lot of how I'm out lines. They're everywhere. I've only seen three of them in my entire life That's what I've probably been around a hundred of them and not known it You know that's what that's the reaction we got with the the tribes was that if you look at uncontacted trap in my whole life You look at photos of uncontacted tribes It was like blurry Gratty because who was out there like a logger right or it was somebody running Right and even when I saw them the first time when I was out on a solo as 10 days deep in the jungle I saw them and I ran for my life and everyone went get in see him. I mean, I'm a I don't mind that if I have Pixar it didn't happen right Um, and so with this when we started Started actually showing people what we had it was like this has never been it's like it's like a vision into the Into the Stone Age right I mean, I mean like really not even the stone age like not even the stone age The tools they use that sharpened sticks. Yeah. I showed it to an anthropologist and he was saying you know Stone Age Isn't necessarily accurate here. He said because they're not using stone. They don't have clay pots He goes this is something this is but I mean Then think about it's actually like a time machine because you're you're you're and we were standing across the river Look talking to these people and it's like you guys are a Couple thousand years back and so it's like this is such a strange aperture into history A couple maybe like 3040 maybe I feel like I feel like they I feel like somehow to me the number seems like two But it's like you know we were two we were like little tribe. Yeah, but two thousand years ago The Egyptian pyramids were already 2500 years old. That's true. That's true But I mean again the civilization Isn't homogeneous right like different of course, you know, so obviously there's uncontacted tribes still right now. Yes That's what's crazy. Yeah, it's like a man with a cell phone From the future yeah film people that's what I'm saying. He felt like that It felt like this was like a back to the future moment where it's like, you know, this is they have no idea and and my people Thinking of everyone else back home. I was like don't realize That these people are still out there in the jungle living like this right and probably in the dense dense dense forest There are many more of them. There are many more of them in fact. Well, we yeah, well We were watching them out front. There was a terrifying moment where the we heard something behind us And it was which we never saw them But the women came lightfoot in behind and they pulled up all the yuka and the bananas and they were raiding and so for a second We were like there's an ambush and everyone was like turning the shotguns away from the river and they were like we thought there was gonna be arrows flying So like oh my guy Ignacio grabs me and like put me down And if we were hiding behind trees waiting for it and it was no no no They're just stealing all of the fruit and all of the crops and they just raided our our whole village Wow, but I really I really did feel like you know, like you you go Imagine what it would be like to go back and see the command jeez Watch him riding across the plains after the buffalo and it's like we can't but in this case They were right there And now and now now That these videos are going out across the world. It's like look we're trying to explain to people You know first of all there's a lot of those you know you know exactly what kind of great people they're like leave them alone And it's like literally where the people trying to make sure that they get left alone Like that's our takeout ignore those folks. Yeah, you especially you you're not the type of person that's interfering with their life at all No, they can't give them the bananas you're help you're literally helping them Well, and again, I was a witness that was happening between the tribes and the tribes right right and so and so but but you know For all the all the indigenous cultures that have been destroyed in in the last few centuries We can we can do it right for once we can actually respect these people if they want to come out They can come out if they want to adapt they can But they need to have forests to live in right in order to make that decision right and so that's where it's like how can they make an informed Decision how could they how can they adapt? I mean, well, I think it would be very slow So crazy. I think it'd be slow. I think it'd be a few more banana exchanges Maybe without the the arrow shot afterwards and then maybe it starts to be like okay You guys can come here maybe maybe maybe the the communities teach them how to grow bananas Maybe they don't want to come but they want a few things right You know, maybe they want a couple of machetees because it'll just help You know, and they want to keep to themselves maybe for me I mean other than them the the thought of the most Uncontech people is north central island. Yeah, and north central island that the interesting part of that is one of the reasons why they're so Distrustful people is because they had been contacted in the 1800s bad. Yeah by a fucking pervert There was a guy named commander Maurice Vidal portment who was a Like a explorer slash pervert and the reason why I say that is like subtitle this guy had like weird Journal logs where he's like this one has testicles the size of a sparrow's egg Like who dressed them up like Roman soldiers and take pictures of them They kidnapped a few of them and then they gave a bunch of people to flu and a bunch of people died So they had this immense distrust for people because of this guy and his Explorations onto that island that island and other islands like it. Yeah, so they don't have a written language, right? These people there's no evidence they have fire so there's this story of these because that you know It's incredibly wet environment Yeah, so they they have the stories that they probably have these oral traditions of these white people that come and fuck up everything So when someone shows up on a boat I've just been a few instances where people are killed History few years back yeah, but not just him there there's a boat that sank there so wash assurance sank and They were headed to go kill those people when they were rescued and Now we've spotted them we people have spotted them with metal and they believe the metal they got was salvaged from the boat Yeah, so they got peace metal and yeah, so this this is the boat that that shipwrecked in 1981 a cargo ship named the primrose ran aground on the coral reefs surrounding north Sentinel The crew Radioed for assistance and settled for a long wait by the morning They saw 50 men with bows on the beach building makeshift boats to swim out to them and fuck them up Yeah, I mean they have a severe distrust obviously You know people so I was on the underman islands, which is right next to these that guy respectable lawyer on Twitter He's the one I got the information from he documented the whole story of if you scroll all the way up Talk about that guy Maurice Bedal port see look at he look at he dressed. That's the guy. Yeah, so that fucking creep So he's hanging out with you guys known he was a pervert look at them look at him Loyed dress is probably wonderful testicles probably didn't want to profile. Yeah, so that's the dude Yeah, he's from the English Royal Navy. Yeah, Portman Maurice Bedal Portman Yeah Dude those guys look good these guys fucking thrown those guys be doing some Sit-ups well they're out there hustling, you know, I went to the underman islands, which is right out there That's where the he originally land. Yeah, and if you want to feel like you fell off the face of the earth You go to the underman islands first of all beautiful You can only I think if you still like this you can only get there from the Indian city of Chennai or Calcutta because it's an Indian territory They don't they limit who can travel there and there's I mean There's they've brought elephants there because they didn't used to have bulldozers and stuff so the British brought elephants by boat and there's these old archival footed Photos of them lifting off of like pirate ships Lifting elephants on the rigging and then putting them and the I now the underman islands have elephants And there's still people riding around on the elephants, you know, like moving trees off the road and doing that That's crazy But when you go from one place to the other place exactly what you said because they don't want human safaris because they want to protect these Indigenous people you have to go with a police escort to cross the island Because you have to go through an element The police watch you like a hawk and I you know, I take a picture of everything. I take 300 pictures a day on my phone and Get that no see if you can see elephants being lifted off of ships. It's Bitch pictures here that are crazy. They're blown logs. I mean, but this is this is you know elephants moving logs happens all the time, but there's literally a picture of the elephants up on the rigging and But man you drive through areas where there's just these tiny little People with bows and arrows and there's still out there I got to go swimming with an elephant there. Yeah, you got to that so dope look at the elephant swimming. How cool is that? Yeah Wow, that's fucking awesome. There you go. Look at that. That's them nuts lifting What the fuck am I doing in the air? Yeah, look at that that's the blindfold no he's not blindfolded. I mean it's painted. You know, they're Probably should have but back then Elephant freak out elephants. Boy, it takes so much for an elephant to freak out and fucking kill people There's a horrible video of this guy's abusing an elephant like he's a trainer and he's like keeps walking the elephant And then the elephant goes that's enough. Yep, and just stomps him into a pancake. Yep Or that that video I sent you with the tiger that went to the tiger Which one that where the tiger mauls the guy and you're like that's terrible He kills him and then the second shot as they show the guy and he's still alive, but he's got slashes down Just don't just I mean these animals are You just don't push him yeah, especially not an elephant well human beings just want to fuck with everything It's part of why we're on every fucking square inch of the earth practically We want to fuck with everything You know, it's we're the weirdest animal ever because we're on every fucking continent. We're everywhere There's not another animal like us no, no, and you know all of us came from Africa Which is even nuttier right? So we emanated from Africa and just spread out all over the world. Yeah, as soon as we figured out how to float Slow out of where warm clothes. We just kept moving and now are we gonna figure out how to not destroy the systems that keep us alive Right and now we're talking about doing the same thing on other planets We're talking about it, but way before we start worrying about other plants. I want to make sure that this planet I mean, I'm just I'm so ever every I'm just I'm it drives me crazy how quickly everyone's going I just in in the in the when I come back to society So quickly we're like it's on people's minds. They're talking about This stuff and I'm going guys the ocean is filled with trash like the Amazon is burning I'm like can we just fix this in this areas where we have I mean, you know this like they brought bulls back to Yellowstone Like New York's waters are getting cleaner the humpbacks are coming back But but everyone's so I mean, but we haven't actually when we get to Mars Talk about it all day But it's like until then Right I just feel like we are so overwhelmed with serious problems here and the last chance in history to fix those problems So there's an amazing opportunity and I feel like people are so like this this modern nothingness that people feel where it's like Oh, it's the end of times and it's like do this is the most exciting time You can fly everywhere. You got information at your fingertips There's more people than ever before working to make good in the world to help people to save animals to restore ecosystems And it's like so I get confused when I come back from what's up? What I feel is like battle and I'm on this mission for 20 years to do this one thing and people like I'm just scrambled and Delirious and I'm like go outside Get up your phone put your phone down go to the mountains. I John your thing I'm you know, I to the mountains. The mountains are calling and I must go like go Close your phone go touch grass for a while actually. That was one of the favorite I forget what I posted a video of me with this huge anaconda around me and I'm holding her head as a 20 foot anaconda One of the comments is this guy. He was like, dude. You've touched enough grass go back inside What Netflix yeah, that's enough Opposite you've got too far Interesting you like free will what is fascinating to me when people were trying to save things and by saving things They don't realize that they're actually fucking things out far worse. They're saying them Well, there's a good example I think it's the Mahavi desert where they just now California and other infinite wisdom decided to build this immense Solar farm out in the desert. I saved it. I'll send it to you. It is so crazy So they decided to build this immense solar farm. It turns out this solar farm Because it's got mirrors that like point towards the solar panel. So it's incinerating 6,000 birds a year in Incinorating 6,000 birds of fucking gear which is like what does that even mean like how how is that even so it's a death ray a fucking death ray God, I know I saved it. Where did I save it? Oh, you got it It's okay Pull up any any of the articles, but I mean that when you look at it. It's it heats up to a thousand fucking degrees The Mahavi desert. Yeah, let me just shut it down So it's concentrated sunlight solar power towers use mirrors to focus sunlight on to receiver Creating extremely high temperature. The problem is they're fucking killing birds like a motherfucker just like those Oh, glee windmill farms. Those things are I blight on the face of the earth when you drive to South Texas The buddy might have a ranch down there solar Look at that Mahavi desert solar plant kill 6,000 birds a year. I think that that's in 2016 They just recently shut it down They've spent billions on this fucking thing and it's not generating nearly a amount of solar power that they were hoping It turns birds into fucking fireballs But when you drive down to South Texas, they have these that's what it looks like and that crazy Look at that. Isn't that nuts? Yeah, we got to stop spreading out. We're so stupid. We got to stop So that's like who said that's a good idea and we'll counter intuitively Nuclear power is like the best for the environment. Yeah, which is people think no three mile island No, they got to know what they just called something else. You just if you just rebrand it They just have to realize that the old new like the Fukushima plants and they fuck the whole area up forever Those are old. That's a plant that I think went live in the 1970s like you know the new technology You can have solar power and it's or excuse me nuclear power and it's clean But I think people are scared of the word nuclear. I'm saying if you came out and you called it like something something plant We got to get over it. We got to get over that that hump, you know, but that's uh It's just Human beings but this is constant battle right there's a battle of good and evil. Yes, there is and there's also a battle of ignorance and Information and it goes back and forth and the only way to educate people is Sometimes you have these brave people that are responding this intense amount of ignorance and they they have to go out there It's a no that's not it. It's this and then this is huge societal narrative The huge cultural narrative that they have to fight against because it's almost impossible to undo I mean right when you realize there's something that everybody has wrong right or you realize that there's something The amount because then you got it you got to get the message to everybody right. How do you do that? Right then you got to make them care about it right? I mean it's just it's it's wild to but that's us That's the battle there's always this like I think you need those things in order for us to push progress You need something to fight against Like think about where you would be if you didn't have this thing to push against Like there's it's not that the thing is good But it is bad, but it creates good people that push against it And this is the constant battle of the human spirit We're always engaged in this Battle to write wrongs and to figure things out and to make things better that are bad and then to realize that Oh, we're making it way worse someone has to come along and course correct. Yeah And then you know, it's usually a few brave people that are pushing back against This tidal wave of negativity and ignorance Get the tidal wave of negativity is wild the the grief is just it's like they're it's like a poison peddled by the darkness It's something they want you sad and disoriented and I just feel like so many people now and I come back They're they're downtrodden by the just just the buzz of the news and yeah I'm like listen like choose something that you care about and work on it Yeah, you're just picked that one be the good you want to see in the world be the good you want to see in the world And it's like I'm I'm in this unique position because I'm contacted now all day long By people that want to help us protect the rainforest at people who are want to use that blueprint to do it somewhere else And we're on the cusp of doing this in the summer. So I'm surrounded by it I get I get a lot of positive people with innovations people with ideas people I mean even you know everyone says oh, why can't the billionaires? And it's like we get people who have money and they come in and they're like I'll help you get that piece of land That'll be protected. So yeah, I get I get reinforced I all the time people go the world's going to shit and I'm like the world's amazing People are helping yeah, you know, and it's like I have seen so much good done It really is all what you're focusing on if you're focusing on that that's the very thing Unique thing about today is that you're inundated with so much information and we generally tend to gravitate towards the things that are terrifying and the things that are dangerous that scare us and so you're paying attention to the news of Literally eight billion people Which is not natural. It's not normal. We're supposed to know about our village and maybe the next village, right? And so like that's one thing I you know, I had a friend You know, did you hear about the flood that happened in Bangladesh? I was like what do you know My sympathy, but like there's there's always a flood happened the world is gigantic there's eight billion people Right, and so like you know, there's only so much you can pay attention to it If you have a phone all the bad stuff is coming into your pocket Yeah, and I think a lot of the it's funny because a lot of the people like the adults are People are worried about the kids. I think the adults are worse. Yeah a lot of them Yeah, and a lot of them they're searching for meaning and so they find meaning in the kids, I think the adults are worse. Yeah, a lot of them. Yeah, and a lot of them, they're searching for meaning. And so they find meaning in activism or in pseudo activism and yelling about things online. And then maybe going out into the street and screaming at people. They think that that gives meaning to their life. You know, there's a lot of people that just feel like really lost. And this strange concrete culture, concrete and electronic culture that we've created, it doesn't give you the fulfillment that the natural world does. I mean, I'm sure it's one of the draws that you have to the jungle is that living out there in nature is wildly fulfilling because it's normal. It's like it, it fills in all the slots that you have evolved to have like as a human being, we have always lived in coordination with nature up until fairly recently. You know, if human beings have been alive in this form for half a million years, how long have we been in cities? In cities? We've been in even agriculture, a few thousand years. Yeah. Yeah. With a little noise box constantly stressing us out. Also, Wi-Fi and EMF signals, I was just reading this fucking crazy thing. Have you paid attention to this Jamie about the 49ers about San Francisco? Is that fucking nuts? They think it's real. So there's a disproportionate amount of severe catastrophic injuries that come out of San Francisco. And their training facility is right outside this power station. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, way more Achilles tendon blows at, blows, blown out way more knees blown out way more like catastrophic ligament and 10 tendon ruptures. Like, and they've been talking about it since like when the players start talking about it in like 2012, I believe, and people like, oh, that's nonsense. And now the stats are in and you're looking at the amount of injuries that come from this area. It's like it's not normal. No. And so you think what if they're getting weakened by the water, by the electricity? Electricity. Yeah. By the EMF signal. I mean, it's like EMF signals, we know disrupt human beings. But to what extent? Like to what extent does LED lights and to what extent? Is it minimal? Do you feel it? Is it not? Is it does it have a long-term effect that take forever until it actually compounds? But they're looking at the data from this one training facility. See, you can find something on it. Because there's a lot of stories have come out this week about it where people are starting to gather up all the data and like, hey, this is not normal. I mean, this is like a much higher percentage of severe injuries from this one camp, which doesn't make any sense. It looks like that Aaron Brockovich thing where it's like, you find a place where a lot of people are getting the same kind of cancer. And it's like, there's a reason. So what does it say here at the top of the article? The article says about the thing explains. So is it true? What is this from? How long ago is this? Two weeks ago? Yes, two days ago. Okay. The injury conspiracy theory and is it true? So what is this? This is USA today, which is another. These so-called mechanisms have not been established. Many of the experiments are contradictory. Many of the experiments of exposures either don't relate specifically to 5060 herst magnetic fields. It's a topic that will likely resurface or any major injuries during the Super Bowl Levi stadium February 8th in Santa Clara. Santa Clara near there? That's where they play the game. But is that the training facility? The idea is that it's near the training facility. Right. And I don't know. That's again, that's this is. So that's where the electrical substation is and there's the field. I mean, cut the shit. Whoa. That's that can be really radiating onto them. That can't be good. But I don't think it's going to affect the game. You know, I'm saying, I think it's like being there all the time, practicing there all the time is what's going to weaken their body. It's not checking. I don't know. I don't unless that's where they practice. I don't see a large practice facility. Look at the fucking multi use fields. I know they don't practice on those fields generally. Right. But they use the fields. I mean, they must practice there. It could be it could just be a park. That's like I got to look up where they practice. Right. Right. Right. Really. Rams don't practice next to so far. I can't imagine it's good for you. I mean, there's also, okay, we'll find this out. Is there any truth to power lines and people living under power lines having increased rates of cancer? Because I've heard that that's true. Yeah. I mean, in environmental college, that was this numerous giant class action lawsuits for people that were living under high tension power lines. And I mean, I actually knew someone who, I mean, I've been to the places where I did for my senior product I was doing, where we went to the areas where they were fracking. Remember that documentary where they were light in the world? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Great documentaries. Yeah. And those people were screaming. They're trying to get the attention to say, this is not good. And of course, the companies come in and they go, we'll give you two million dollars before you deal with a stroll on your land. And these are people that couldn't write, need the money. Right. And then a few years later, they're all of their kids have cancer. Pull that back up again, please. So we put it into our sponsor perplexity. There's some limited evidence, a small increase in childhood leukemia risk, very close high voltage power lines. But overall, the leak is weak, not clearly causal and typically residential exposures are considered within safety guidelines. See, the thing is, it's like who is, one of the things about perplexity or any large language model is you've got to get the information from online and who's publishing this information. So it's like there's only so much of it that's available. But possibly carcinogenic is a weak category. So parsley, so it says international agency for research and cancer classifies extremely low frequency magnetic fields like those from power lines as possibly carcinogenic to humans, mainly because of the childhood leukemia data. Fuck that. It's wild. Yeah, just fuck that. I would never buy a house near them. What are you looking for? It's a molar. Yeah. From my buddy John Reese from Alaska. That's that guy. Yeah. That's incredible. Yeah. Actually, no, this one is from colossal. So that's a company that's bringing the William Amuth back. Yeah. Yeah. Those guys. This piece is from my buddy John Reese. That's a more, a more, that's cool. Yeah. That's a two, that's a, that's a, that's how many of them they have that they could turn and make it into art. Yeah. Yeah. So I'll pull you that has bully bameth ivory in it. Look at that. Look at that. That nuts. And that is so beautiful. You something 10,000 years ago used that to mash down vegetables. That is a gorgeous pino about the bone yard, right? Yeah. No, you were the first time you told me all about incredible place. Shout out to my boy John Reese. Yeah. That, that, that I would love to go there. Oh, you should do it. It's pretty incredible. Fascinating. Yeah. The colossal guys have been up there. Yeah. Quite a few people have been up there to explore. I think either Grant, when no Randall did Randall cross him go up there, I think he's either gone there or is going there. Yeah. You got to make the intro for me. I would 100% love to go. Yeah. Yeah. I'll set that up. He's always trying to get me to go out there too. I just don't have the time. But what a phenomenal play. By the way, he's found a new site. He's found a new site up there that has more bones. Yeah. I mean, that's, he's, you're talking about an area that's only about four to six acres that he's been exploring. He's got other deposits, right? It's like massive deposits, thousands of animals, including animals that weren't even supposed to be there. Yeah. That's so crazy. And a thick layer of carbon that indicates that f**k a place was on fire. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that, when you find fossils in the wild, there's nothing like finding fossils. Remember the first time I found like a little shell? And then like I said, we, not that long ago, we found like a seven foot turtle shell, thick, thick, thick, like black fossilized in the river basin in the Amazon. The river was especially low and it was just, you know, it was half out like a crashed alien spaceship. Like it was just this huge thing. And it was like, you get this sense, you get that, that tactile visceral sense of like, whoa, these used to be here. You know what they found in China recently? What they found? They found dinosaur eggs that the inside of them is all crystals now. Oh, it's crystallized, is it like crystallized baby velociraptor? No, it's just basically all crystals like geotechnical. Yeah. But it's a dinosaur egg. It's just over millions and millions of years. It's probably making art out of that right now. I don't know what they're doing with it. I think it's fairly recent that this discovery, at least the article that I read was fairly recent about it, but it's just crazy. Oh, so much cool shit in the world. So here it is. Yeah, 70 million year old dinosaur egg contains surprising a sparkling crystal surprise. And that nuts. Have you heard it? Great fruit sized dinosaur egg from a fossil bed in China. Gave paleontologist huge spot rather than a dinosaur embryo or sediment. It was filled with sparkling crystals of calcite lining, the inner shell, a natural dinosaur geode. Rare occurrence provides research with unique information on the structure of the shell. In this case, it never before seen oo species, oo, oo, oo, double o species species of egg named, oh boy, good luck pronouncing that. Identifying a 22 paper led by paleontologist, Qing Hei of Anhui University in China. Not only that, it's among the first dinosaur eggs or evidence of any dinosaurs for that matter found in the roughly 70 million year old, upper-cretaceous, christian formation of the quieshon basin. Wow. That's insane. Fuckin. Hey man, dinosaur eggs that are filled with, look at that crystals. Beautiful. It looks like a geode. It's a dinosaur egg. Nuts. That's the same nuts. That's why I'm, yeah, the world's a wild place. My brother, the world is a really really good one. You know more than anybody. Well, that's what I've been, I've been trying to see as much of it as I can and save as much of it as I can. Well, I'm glad you're out there and I'm glad you're still alive. Because you freaked me out every now and then when you send me messages, don't worry about your safety and I need someone to train me to use a gun. I'm like, oh, Jesus Christ. Oh, we're dealing with the narco people. Oh, Jesus Christ. Well, we're closer than we've ever have been. Thank you for how much you've been able to help us get that message out. This book is 20 years of the wildest shit. It's the story of how Jane and how we went, how I met JJ, how we found the Anaconda, all the, everything that led to this. I mean, how, how, I mean, you talked about it when you started out, I mean, just being a kid and you have a dream and I went to the Amazon. I just wanted to see the Amazon. That was the dream. I never, a million years imagined that I'd get to go on these adventures, see these animals and then now that we're on the cusp of protecting an entire river. The wildest dreams that, that me as a kid had couldn't even touch this. And so it's, it's, it's a fun book to be sharing with you. Fuck it. Dope, my brother. And the book is Jungle Keeper, what it takes to change the world. Paul Rosley. Available now. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Always great to see you. The best. Do it again. Thank you. You got it? Thank you. All right. Bye everybody.