The Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day I come bearing sign gifts for you sir very much I hope that's why the rational believe the irrational right. Why is that? Is it simple it wouldn't be this big of a no simple. Yeah, it's not that simple but Well, first of all my argument is that it's not irrational to believe conspiracy theories because enough of a true that It pays the air on the side of assuming more of them are true than actually are then missing Real conspiracy theories and then that's a costlier air to make that's a rational perspective The term conspiracy theory got thrown about there was the first the first introduction of it into the zeitgeist was during the Kennedy assassination correct Yeah, well around that time right it before that before World War II really Conspiracy theories were kind of common knowledge everybody knew that things were going on behind closed doors and it was just kind of commonly known and we just kind of try to figure it out It didn't become really frinji until right after the JFK thing that it kind of got as a meme that You're crazy to think these conspiracy theories are true. It became pathologized Yeah, Richard Hofstetter's you know the paranoid style and American politics kind of put that on the map It's conspiracy theories are Something delusional It's a it's a pathology in your brain whereas before that it wasn't it was just I mean even the Declaration of Independence It's a conspiracy theory it's saying look the British are doing This whole train of abuses and usurpations and here's what we think they're up to and here's what we think they want to do and we're against that Britain right there in the decor so it's not frinji right It was kind of commonly known that these things happen the term as a bjord of though was it was introduced into like sort of American Culture around the Kennedy assassination. Yeah, that's an interesting story because I'm I'm convinced Lee Harvey. I was well-acted alone. I'm not a really. Yes. I am What makes you convince the well to have a whole chapter on it and we can get into that in a second but The twist about it where it seems like there was something up was that John President Johnson was worried that if It looks like there's a conspiracy a foot with the Cubans or the Russians that that could lead to a nuclear exchange So we don't want the American people to think that this is some kind of vast Conspiracy of the other Russian. So we can go back and forth on that at all or is it just something you've always believed no No, no, well before the Oliver Stone film I hadn't really given it that much thought it well the you know Warren report seems pretty Thorough but you know who knows what do I know and then you know the Oliver Stone film which floats every conspiracy theory There was in one package that I thought well, you know 10% of this is true seems like there was something else going on But then you know there were web pages posted of like here all the mistakes in the film and here all the counter Arguments and then I read Gerald Posner's book the case closed about the life of Lee Harvey Oswald and why all the evidence points to him and then Vincent Boyosi's book Reclaiming history which is like 1500 pages long and it it dissects every one of the hundreds of conspiracy theories are something on the order of 140 people have been accused and You know a couple hundred organizations have been affiliated with the JFK assassination The problem is is that there's no convergence of evidence to any other one Than Lee Harvey Oswald acting alone and all the evidence points to him So it's not impossible. You know all the evidence points to him massive amounts of evidence Right, and so now we're supposed to get a new Try to document but they're not they're they won't release them. They keep stopping the release of these documents I this worries me because that makes people suspicious as it should and So any but back by wait a minute. It worries you because it makes people suspicious or it worries you because it points to Their withholding information because that information looks bad I would love to see the information and I would change my mind in a heartbeat. What do you thought it's in the magic bullet? Okay, the magic bullet is not a magic bullet. It's a single bullet theory. That is What it's usually rendered as is Kennedy and Connolly are sitting like this side, you know, bomb aware of all Yeah, yeah, right so the bullet doesn't have to go left to right and and so forth And he was elevated yes, right. Yeah, so if you draw a line straight back to the sixth floor window of the book repository building The bullet goes straight through his back at his neck into Connolly through his arm into his leg and so forth In a straight line well, you know the only reason why they had to come up with the theory that that one bullet did all that damage You know that right well, you know why well I don't go because someone was hit by a ricochet And so they had to attribute all that damage to one bullet right. That's right. Yeah, but there's more in Connolly's body there was more Pieces of bullet than we're missing from the actual bullet itself Did you ever look at the actual bullet itself if you studied it? Yeah, I have a picture of it in there Yeah, I know a lot about bullets. Yeah, and one of the problems about bullets is there's never been a bullet that's gone through Bone and shattered bone and gone through two different bodies and came out looking like that Looks like a bullet that was shot into water. It is deformed though. Yeah, it's slightly deformed But every bullet that leaves a gun is slightly deformed that indicates even more so that it didn't hit anything When bullets hit things they deform. That's the whole purpose of making bullets like that These bullets are designed to shatter things and expand upon impact and it creates more damage Well hollow point bullets are sure, but all bullets are yeah hollow points even more specific But all bullets are designed to expand upon impact right even rifle bullets that are copper Because in California you can't use lead bullets anymore because condors and a lot of other Birds of prey they eat the lead bullets and they get lead poisoning because like if there's an animal that gets shot And the hunter doesn't recover it and then the condor or something else eats that you know some sort of a raptor eats that Then they get lead poisoning But bullets expand and they break up. They don't look like that That bullet was found in Connolly's gurney Which is like so ridiculous the idea that oh look we found the bullet here. It just managed Magically fall out of his body and look pristine Okay 80% of the ear witnesses heard three shots. Yeah, but you know The witness is look yeah, but okay, so that's that's just asking people what happened if you talk to witnesses after 9-11 They said they heard explosions. Yes, right. Yeah, right exactly So again, it's a probability argument. It's not black or white, but that was a probability Of that having gone through bodies is very well. I don't know almost if you're seeing those Those tests where they shoot the bullet through the The you know the the foam stuff that mimics a human body and so forth Yeah, but that is does it or that's ballistic gel ballistic gel is not bone But they have shot it through pigs with the bone and tendons and ligaments Doesn't look like that never looks like that. Well anyway, there's good shows on this No, no, no, no, never looks like that There's no evidence of bullets hitting bone where they come out looking like that. I don't know Joe. Are you sure because I? I am sure it was the it was either Nova or National Geographic that did this and replicated it shot it right through a body I saw that yeah, they looked deformed the bullets looked deformed It was bent up. Yeah, okay, so what is your counter then where I think where is the last? Lee Harvey Oswald was involved. I certainly think he was involved and I think the possibility of the conspiracy is high I do not know whether or not Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone I think Lee Harvey Oswald was most certainly a part of it But when Lee Harvey Oswald was captured when they were talking to him. He said I'm a patsy I'm inclined to believe he was a patsy, but I'm also inclined to believe that he had knowledge of it He was there for probably a very specific reason and they were probably setting him up I think there's probably multiple people involved. Yeah, who's today? Who is the day? That's the question. Is it the CIA? It was at the Mafia where they upset because he turned on them after they got him elected because there was a conspiracy to help him Get elected the mob was involved in getting JFK elected Was it the people that were upset because of the Bay of Pigs incident? Was it the CIA because he wanted to disband them? Who knows? I think there's a lot of people that John F. Kennedy upset Well, that's true for every president though, but the ones that don't get shot then no one pays attention to that How many people hated Trump or Nixon especially right? We're talking about an actual murder or you're not saying it's saying to say it's true Of every president is fine, but we're talking about a president that was murdered And you look at the people that may have had some sort of a vested interest in getting rid of him Okay, so here's one argument. I'm making it's it's the argument from proportionality The effect should have a matching size cause so let me just back up here for a second if you take a little pebble and throw it It doesn't take a lot of effort to do it. It's a fist size stone takes more effort big boulder massive effort So our folks physics we feel like causing a faction match right? So interesting experiment if you take subjects and give them two dies and say okay now try to roll a low number The they'll kind of just gently toss it like that now try to roll a high number like an 11 or 12 Give it a good heave like that dumb people. Well, but that's our intuition, but that's you. It's don't know about dice We're talking about trained assassins But let me let me finish so you know our sense is that big events JFK assassination princess die dies 911 COVID-19 Counterfactually if Oswald had missed Kennedy or just wounded him and he didn't die with their be massive Conspiracy theories about who he was Okay, so this has actually happened. Well John That's a straw man because you're saying that Oswald did act alone if he had missed But nobody would be talking about after the murder The reason why there's a conspiracy is because he was murdered right So why are there no conspiracy theories about John Hinckley shooting Reagan? Because John Hinckley has a real trail of mental illness He wrote letters to Jody Foster. He was a very specific human being who is obsessed with killing Reagan to impress Jody Foster Right. It's all really documented. He's out now, too It's not like they got rid of him like they got rid of Jack Ruby. Or squeaky from tried to shoot I Gerald Ford Okay, but she's also in the Manson for this is there's a big conspiracy about that about the Manson family and the fact that Charles Manson was a part of NK ultra Yes, right. Yes, right. Right. So we could do whatever read chaos by Tom O'Neill No, I haven't read a fantastic book. It's all about why Manson kept getting released You know, my Manson was in jail Right and during the time he was in jail. He was visited by jolly west who was the head of the CIA's MK Ultra LSD Experience they most certainly did something to Manson while he was in jail And they also supplied him there's anecdotal evidence and shows that they supplied him with LSD when he got out of jail Every time he got arrested for violating parole These cops in these local sheriffs that had caught him were told that it was above their pay grade They had to release him Manson got out for Multiple offenses after he was on parole things that should have kept him locked up There's some real good evidence that you know about MK Ultra was a rear thing and that's an interesting Conspiracy right because it's a real what's documented our own government was doing. Yeah. Well, there's this operation midnight Climax that they were involved with where they were you know about that one Mm-hmm. That's where they were dosing up John's when they would go to visit prostitutes and then would film them through yes two-way mirrors right You know he was jolly west was a part of that and he also was a part in some way shape or form of that Manson family Okay, but my point is that if it let's say it was the mayor of Dallas that was shot that day would there be vast conspiracy industry of books and films and so no was but it wasn't the mayor It was the president of the United States. That makes it a far bigger issue right. That's my point We want something big. It doesn't seem right that That alone nut like Lee Harvey Oswald could have pulled this off or that 19 guys with box cutters could have taken down the world trade center Billies just doesn't feel right so we add elements This is my theory we had elements of causality to match it, you know, Princess die cause of death drunk driving speeding No seat belt, but it doesn't feel right that princess famous and so forth would die the same way Yeah, but you're adding a bunch of different conspiracies to one that's very specific Well, you're adding a much better much more easily disproveable than one that's very specific This is my my problem with all conspiracy theories In one of the things that you said at the beginning some of them are real. Yeah, that's right. All right, so let's distinguish conspiracy theories from conspiracies conspiracies by definition or two of them are people plotting in secret to gain an unfair Illegal or immoral advantage over somebody else that happens all the time right sure So how do we know so it's a signal detection problem? How do you know which conspiracy theories are correct? They right they tag an actual conspiracy right so I draw this two by two grit So here you have real conspiracy theories that are real and you associate them with that correctly you you say yeah, that's that's what I agree That's a hit so conspiracy theories that are real and you go no I don't believe it. I don't think there's a real conspiracy that's a miss So that's a big miss right that's a type two error You don't want to miss those because those are real. They could harm you down here You have conspiracy theories that are not true and you think they are so that's a false positive a type one error That's a low cost error to make doesn't cost a lot It's not risky to assume a conspiracy theory is real when it's not And so this is my argument is that we've evolved this cognition To be very suspicious and paranoid about other people in what they're doing because historically and Evolutionarily wise in these small bands and tribes of the hunter gatherers anthropologist tell us there's a lot of conniving and And and cabbles and right and so on this goes on so I call this constructive Conspiricism it pays to be a little paranoid Because sometimes they really are out to get you But it also pays to be rational and recognize which ones are conspiracies and which ones are probably people Just in the moment of chaos like 9-11 adding a bunch of Stuff to what they've experienced and just the chaos of the incident. I've heard explosions I saw this I saw that and you know that in times like that of great distress People and eyewitness testimonies are some of the most unreliable because people are so blown away By the extreme moment that they can't really recall things correctly Okay, let's just do a counter another counter factual What would be true if this really was a conspiracy? Well, there should be some documentation somewhere there is and that's why they won't release it Yeah, well, okay, so that's the problem release it damn it. Yeah. Well, why do you think but what possible reason? I thought Trump was gonna release it. I don't think they want to let anybody release that stuff If it's anything if I had to guess it would be something like what the CIA was up to even more than what we know about You know over overthrowing rigging elections in South American countries assassinating Communist dictators real conspiracy these are real conspiracy these things happen We found out about this in the 90's so why you should convince that Lee Harvey Oswald act alone. Okay, so let's just pull back for Okay, I'm not God you're not either. I'm not I'm mission. We don't know for sure what happened I like to get you in a room with Oliver Stone Because Oliver Stone is so compelling. I mean that guy will talk for days I know I watched this for our documentary. I watched them. What did you think about it? Well, okay So again, here's my problem is that it's not a just a black and white thing. What's most likely to be true? Okay, well the evidence is massive against Lee Harvey Oswald. Okay for sure. He was at least involved. Yeah, all right Who else would have been involved? Okay, can you pit so stone thing? Well CIA Alan Dulles something if you had Alan Dulles here could you get a grand jury to agree? We have enough evidence to put him on trial. I don't think so. There's nobody in fact that you could point to Grand jury and happen over 50 years. Well, I mean is this rewind the tape to 10 years after or something? Okay, so we got somebody here. He is well, this actually happened right Jim Garrison put on trial Clay Shaw and At point all the evidence he could find and the jury acquitted him and another jury also acquitted OJ Simpson Well, yes, okay, you know, I don't know if that's real good evidence juries or you know They're not the most informed people well there was a made for television BBC trial on of Lee Harvey Oswald in absentia in which Was it Jerry Spence was his defense attorney in absentia and And and what's his name was was the prosecutor the Reclaiming history the Manson guy the I put man said away. I just mentioned his name on saying I'm spacing out on wheels Vincent Bologie again the the jury again. It's not a real jury. It's a made for TV series But you know they present all the evidence and they acquitted I mean they convicted Har Oswald based on the evidence as the loan of SAS because there was just nothing pointing to anybody else So here's how I think about it. There could be somebody else involved But we need some evidence at least some paper trail why in the Pentagon papers that released all these top secret documents that Nixon tried to cover up and and prevent from being published There's nothing in there about you know the conspiracy to assassinate the CIA They've stopped release of all of the documents about the Kennedy assassination They keep postponing decades and decades My guess is probably the CIA was up to even more no good Back in the 60s and 70s, you know, we know you've mentioned MK Ultra. Don't forget That's a good guess but another good guess is that they were involved in the assassination in some way Okay, then I'm okay. I'm a good Bayesian. I'm willing to update my priors change my creams and change my mic Completely go. Yes. I'm just very suspicious. I mean it multiple parts of that assassination including the fact that you know, do you know the jolly West visited Jack Ruby while he was in jail and Jack Ruby Something happened to when he went fucking completely insane after visiting with jolly West and the assumption is that jolly West gave Jack Ruby LSD while he was in jail Maybe but why would jolly West go to visit the guy that killed Lee Harvey Oswald when he was ahead of a mind control Experience for the CIA again We're this is what's called anomaly hunting like any big of this. That's we go little shit Normally like that, you know the umbrella guy the umbrella man, Louis went on that. Oh, there's a lot of that silly ship You can ask act that but that points to be to this thing where people always try to look for connections And I do agree with you that a lot of conspiracy theories are ridiculous But a lot of conspiracies as you said are real. I don't know if Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone But I have a feeling that there were other people involved based on the evidence Based on a lot of it in like stones thesis that they see a military industrial complex and so on We're involved because Kennedy wanted to get us out of Vietnam Nixon got us out of Vietnam. I'm not going to assassinate it him from the next time. That's only one piece that I mean his assumption that it was because of them trying to get out of Vietnam was only one of the assumptions that they made His other assumptions were the mob It was the CIA it was I mean he wanted to get rid of a lot of the intelligence agencies I mean he had a real problem with secret societies and secrecy and secrecy and government You made that famous speech about secrets Right well and again, it's complicated by the fact that we did try to invade Cuba using Cuban Nationalism In the Bay of Pigs that was a disaster Also see I Asian Northwoods and operation Northwoods that that's one of the creepiest ones Oh totally, you know fact that that was a real conspiracy that they were really planning I'm blowing up a drone jetliner and blaming on the Cubans. They were gonna arm Cuban friendlies and attack Guantanamo Bay all to get us to go to war with Cuba Yeah Pretty wild that that was signed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and vetoed by Kennedy Mm-hmm and McNamara. He didn't go for it either But this is an example again of constructive conspiracism. It's not irrational to think that a lot of conspiracy theories might be true because enough of them have been You know so or a co-intell pro right where the FBI was sending in agents to act as social justice activists in American Indian movement feminist groups the black Panthers and so on and You know including blackmailing Martin Luther King Jr. Yeah recording his Sex-Gabades and hotel rooms. I mean our government was doing this. What? Yeah, okay. The guy who assassinated Martin Luther King What is it? Ray Ray Jesus Christ This is name John James Earl James Earl Rhett. Yeah James. I always Forget that guy's name for some reason, but I talked to Mike Baker who was formerly with the CIA. I use air quotes formally He had investigated that for his television show and he said that is one of the weirdest ones because that guy was funded in some strange way like he was kind of a loser and then all suddenly had money and You know there was some someone he believes was involved in aiding that guy to assassinate Martin Luther King Again, so like we have the WikiLeaks, okay? Millions and millions of top secret Documents why is there no mention of 9-11 is an inside job some documentation of somebody in maybe 9-11 wasn't an inside job Maybe that's why and why is there nothing about JFK or the fake moon landing nothing like that So we would we would expect if X was true that the following should happen. Yeah, but WikiLeaks didn't get all of the documents The government is ever hidden. That's that's a weird way to connect the dots there. Mr. Shurmer, I'm disconnecting the doctor. You working for the governor or the government. What's going on with you? I'm an agent of disinformation. I've been accused of that actually. Have you been? I think I have been too That's okay. Yeah, but I mean again, how does how do these systems really work? You know that so this is my kind of conspiracy detection kit You know the grander the conspiracy theory the less likely it is to be true like say Volkswagen cheating the emission standards in Europe that you know that's a very specific conspiracy theory turn out to be true. They really did do that and for obvious reasons profit motive, right? But but but so if you scale up from that Well, they're trying to control the entire European Economy or something like well, no, that's too big. Let's just try to make money. They're just trying to make money, right? So You know the more people that have to be involved the more elements that have to come people are competent people can't keep their mouth shut For the most part for the most part. Yes now to be fair to to the other side You know if you read about the development of the YouTube spy plane and the AR71 Blackbird, you know This was done in Burbank There were used to live and that's right in the heart of L. How did they do this for all those years and nobody knew about it, right? Well, they were acting on the interest of the government They were trying to be patriots. They kept their mouth shut because they were trying to win a war against the the evil others right so Again like with the recent UAP sightings what I want my initial response is the SR71 Blackbird was Before it was declassified. They were commercial pilots going oh my god There's something right going 3000 miles an hour 50,000 feet above me at 30,000 feet. This is impossible We don't have anything like that. Well actually we did have something like that. Yeah, so I suspect that's what you think I think in a decade or two we're gonna find out. Oh, we had these incredible drones Yeah, fly at these speeds. I tend to lean towards that as well sometimes. I go back and forth with it I had Ryan Graves on yes, I saw that it was a fascinating conversation Because the way he was describing things with no visible means of propulsion No technology that we currently know is available could act in the way those things are acting I wonder if that is what it is if they have some sort of a very advanced drones And the fact that they seem to be trans medium They seem to be able to enter into the ocean and then leave the ocean I wonder I wonder if that's something that we have because these things They're you know one of the ones that he described is like a translucent circle with a black sphere inside of it That when they updated their radar systems in 2014 they started seeing them all over the place on their systems And that these people spotted them visually and that they were behaving in a way like at you know 130 mile an hour winds Or completely stationary. I wonder if those are super advanced drones. Yeah, a lot of another problem with these videos is that they're very grainy blurry can't quite make out what's going on like the one that it looks like it goes in the ocean comes back out It's not clear that it goes in the ocean because it the the the horizon in the ocean is so blurry right? So I'm a member of this Galileo project at Harvard run by Avi Loeb the head of the astronomy department I had Avi on yeah, I know and you know we're he's raising money to put cameras high resolution cameras all over the world Particularly in the places where people like Graves say these I mean when Graves told you we saw these things every day It's like every day. Yeah, they're surely must be high resolution photos But those things those jets are not designed to take high resolution video They're designed to fight against enemy jets right that's what they're designed for they're designed to recognize These enemy combatants and engage with them in the most effective way possible That's not with high resolution digital video right well that would be the That would be the solution. We just need better data Well, I wonder if they want better data now Let's assume they well we do the government But listen to federal government imagine they are running top-seeker programs using advanced drones And the technology that we're not currently aware of right and that the United States government has these they wouldn't want people Taking videos of these things why would they Right, but everyone has one of these in their pocket yeah, but you cannot we have digital video of something that's seven miles Away moving you know, right? The speed of sound you're not going to get digital video That's what we want to do with the Galileo project and according to the Christopher Metland a guy who you know did work for the Defense Department He said there are top secret videos and photographs that he's seen are that he's aware of that are pretty spectacular That they don't understand right I've heard him say that it's like okay, then let's see him. Yeah But why would they release that this is this is the question is like if they just like the black bird Just like the stealth bomber many of the other projects that they have that were top secret before they became public Why would they release all right information? Probably it wouldn't right yeah, right? I wonder what that stuff is in the fact that it happened so often in that very Specific area, you know, who knows another thing I was thinking about that with the U.S. is in the history of technology No nation gets very far ahead of any other nation They either back engineer to copy it or steal the secrets and so on It's not likely we would have anything that the Russians and Chinese wouldn't be pretty close to having also You know, just think of this development of jets or the development of the nuclear bomb the nuclear bomb I mean the Russians had you know, so 1945 was Hiroshima and 1949 the Russians Right, they stole our secrets right so this idea that you know, these are super advanced Drones that we have and the Russians and Chinese don't have it's not likely they would not know the technology that we know the physics The aerodynamics and in the engineering and all that because they they read the same journals They do the same research. We do so. What do you think it is? Well, I well I think it's probably multiple things. I think some of them might be drones that just really high High-tech drones some of them are just blurry videos that are I think the one of the sphere inside the cube or Cube and sphere is probably a balloon a Balloon yes, a balloon that stands station already at a hundred and thirty mile an hour winds appears Stations appears with the most sophisticated tracking devices I know these military jets out. I know these are anomalies yet So we just need better. Why would you think it's a balloon? Well, what else would it be? Okay, it might be You know might be a drone it certainly probably not an alien spacecraft and so on certainly probably not why do you say that? Well, because well this is kind of gets into the argument of the SETI program There's so many there's so much empty space out there the chances of them finding us are pretty slim I so I say I say I say we've planned it's all the time Yeah, but we are all woops not right And finding us are pretty slim. So I say I say I say we've got this planet all the time. Yeah, but we are all wips not right. Is it telescopes and satellites and all sorts of, you know, things that we send into space, but we find planets all the time that are in the Goldilocks zone. And we have a very relatively unsophisticated in terms of like what we'd expect from something that's capable of intergalactic travel, relatively simple technology. And comparison to what we would think if you took what we have today and you increased our capabilities, you know, a thousand years from now, you could imagine that it would be quite easy for someone that at least send a drone from another planet to visit Earth and observe. This is the Fermi Paradox. Yes. Yeah. That you know of. And where are they? Well, of course, most scientists like him don't think they're there here. So I separate different scientists. Most scientists. Meachio Kaku thinks they're here. He's been a little fuzzy about that. He's not totally committed to that. He's totally committed. He was here. He was here and he talked about it on the podcast. He said for the longest time, he was a skeptic. Oh, yeah, that's right. Okay. He has kind of come down on that side a little bit. Why would you be firm on that? When you think about the fact that there's hundreds of billions of galaxies in the known universe. Let's separate two questions. Are they out there? Have they come here? Are they out there? Almost certainly. Right. I would say you know, 99.9 percent they're out there. I would agree with you. 100 billion stars in our galaxy. 100 billion trillion galaxies. Just do the numbers. Yeah. No matter how improbable it is you get from bacteria to big brains and civilization, it's going to happen. Right. But, but have they come here? Okay. So how good is the evidence for that? Not very. It's pretty thin. How good is the Ramadotol? It's human, it's human eyewitnesses. It's blurry videos, granny photos. If they were here, damn it, where's the, you know, pick up the widget on the dashboard and bring it back here? But just looking at what we know that these fighter pilots have witnessed, the data that they've acquired when they're looking at something like Commander David Freaver, who when they were off the coast of the, with the, the Nimitz, when they tracked that thing that went from above 60,000 feet above sea level to 50 feet above sea level in less than a second. What's that? I don't know. Yeah. What is that thing that they have visual, they have visual contact by multiple sources and they tracked it and they have video of this thing moving off at insane rates of speed. Mm hmm. What's that? Yeah. I don't know. This is the problem with the anomalies. No theory explains everything. Right. But if there was any evidence that pointed to something that operated in a way that we can't comprehend any of the known technologies being able to reproduce, that's that that's one of them. But no technologies come out of a vacuum like that. They always build on previous technologies. Right. But if you're talking about something from another planet, well, okay, we're something from another right. Another civilization that we're not aware of that's on Earth. Maybe they lives in the water. We don't know. We don't know. And when you're seeing these things, when you're talking about people that are the best fighter pilots that we have available that are operating with the most sophisticated fighter jets with tracking systems that are, you know, constantly being updated. And then when they update them, they start picking up these things like Ryan Graves discussed on the podcast. Mm hmm. Why would you think that those are not possibly something from somewhere else? It depends on how you want to like pose the problem. So here's how I think about it. So I take Leslie Keene's a book on UFOs and pilots and generals go on the record and so on. In that book, she says 90 to 95% of all sightings have perfectly normal explanation. I would have probably agree. That's true. So the question is, what do we do with that other 5% of anomalies? Okay. No theory explains everything. There's always going to be anomalies in every scientific theory. What do you have to do with it? Nothing. You assign it to a graduate student figure out or, you know, that's future research. You know, rather than going to, you know, a grand theory of visitation by aliens or the Russians or Chinese have these super advanced technologies that we don't have or we have them and they don't have. I mean, again, if we had this technology, surely the Russians have something pretty close to that. There's nothing from the videos in Ukraine of any Russian drones that act anything like these UAPs. Surely they would use that technology. If they had it, well, we're assuming that those UAPs are military in nature and not something that they used to observe things could be. I mean, why would we assume that these things, if they're capable of behaving in this way and they're just some sort of a device that can travel the same rate to speed, why would we assume that those things can launch missiles or act in a military capacity? Right. And you know there are UAP sightings over Ukraine. Yeah, but the okay. So Avi did a nice paper on that showing that these were artillery shells. And not what the other people said they thought that thought it was that it was like a drone or a plane or something weird like that. He showed that if it was what they thought it was, it would have had a much bigger impact going through the atmosphere at that speed and burning up. But it didn't. So these are artillery shells. Anyway, he did a nice paper on that. Interesting. Yeah. But what about these things that supposedly move far faster than speed of sound without the sonic boom? Yeah. How is that possible? How is that possible? That's right. It's not. That's where it gets weird. Right. But is that's where the question is? Is it ours? Is it really moving at that speed? Or is it a misperception of the video or a miscalculation? People make scientists make miscalculations of these sorts of things all the time. Yeah, that was one of the things that was posed to David Freaver. And he said they have multiple sources of data. It's not just like one system that's monitoring these things is multiple systems. Yeah. And I follow these guys. I agree. They are incredibly credible. Right. And they have good arguments. What do you do with the anomaly? I think you're an anti conspiracy theorist. That's what I think. No, I'm a skeptic. No, I'm just a little bit. You literally are the ones that are what's your position in skeptic magazine? I'm the editor in chief publisher of something magazine. They're literally a skeptic. Yeah. That is my day job. Yeah. But it isn't that I don't believe things. I mean, I believe the theory of evolution. I think the Big Bang Theory happened when people like Neil Degrass Tyson and my quantum physics friends tell me quantum physics is true. Does that we know it? To me, it's weird, spooky. I don't really understand it. But okay, you know, we have tons of evidence. Have you seen some of the new discussions based on the observations from the James Webb telescope that maybe the Big Bang Theory needs to be revisited? Yes, vaguely. It was the expansion rate changing. Right. Well, they're getting new data. Right. They're constantly getting new data. And we would assume that with more and more sophisticated ways of viewing the known universe that we could possibly get some new data that would change our ideas of what the theory of the Big Bang Theory or the theory of the universe itself would be. And that's one of the things that they're discussing right now. What was that? There was a recent article. What was it in? Which scientific publication that they were discussing, whether or not the Big Bang Theory needs to be revisited based on the James Webb? Yeah, I did see that. Yeah. I mean, it would be astonishing if that didn't happen. Right. Because you know, no theory and science is permitted. Especially like right. It's not like right now we have all the information about we have the entire universe mapped out every planet, everything. We know exactly what it is. We know exactly how old everything is. And we know for sure. We just have a limited ability to look. That's it. It's a limitations of our technology. So in the late 90s is when they discovered the universe is expanding at an accelerating rate. Well, how can that be? Because in an explosion, you know, the initial explosion, the inflation in cosmology is really rapid and it slows and slows and slows. And so it was supposed to slow down in another 10 billion years or something. It collapsed back on itself. And then they discovered, oh my god, no, these type two supernova, whatever it was, indicate that the expansion is accelerating. So there's this weird force, dark energy that pushes it away. And dark matter is this, you know, proffered thing that explains why galaxies are held together. Because they don't have enough mass to hold them together in the structures that they are as I understand it and rotate it the way they're rotating. So there's something else we can't see. Right. Now, so when astronomers talk about dark energy and dark matter to explain these two anomalies, like how could this be? That's not an explanation. It's just a linguistic placeholder until we figure out what it is. Right. So surely there is going to be some discoveries of some kind of new energy or some kind of matter that we don't know. Century from now, it's like, oh, of course, if you came back to being chronically frozen. Oh, that's what it was. So what would it take for you to look? I mean, what kind of discovery would it take in terms of UAPs for you to revisit your position and say it's highly likely that this is either something that we don't understand that we are observing that's come from somewhere else or something that we don't understand because it's technology that hasn't been released. The actual specimen, the actual equivalent of the SR-71 blackboard, I can go to the museum, I can see it touch it, walk on it. So do you hold it like you have a like a placeholder like perhaps? Yeah, I do. I do. I do. Nothing's 100% right now. Why is it so fun though to think that it's from somewhere else? It's so much more fun to think that we're being visited than to think that our government has some super sophisticated, you know, gravity propelling drones that somehow and other violate our laws of spacetime. Why is it so much more exciting to think? I think it's a religious impulse. I think it's an idea that it feels like we're not alone and when you think about the narratives from different religions that there's something an agent, a person, a being of something, not just matter, not just the laws of nature, you know, we're like daddy. Like when Einstein says, well, like Spinoza's God, it's just the laws of nature of God. It's like that's not particularly comforting. It's like, well, they don't even know I'm here. But the idea that they're out there, they're super advanced and they know we're here, maybe they're even coming. You know, it's like the day the earth stood still, right? That was a kind of a film that was a Christ allegory. Remember his earthly name was Mr. Carpenter in that film in the first one in 1951. Oh, right. Clap to clap to clap to, but his earthly name was Mr. Baratu, Nick. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Exactly. Yeah. And and that was really a reflection of and by the way, in the climax scene where the authorities kill him and they put him in the tomb. It's like, it's like the crucifixion of Jesus and they put him in the tomb in three days later. He's resurrected. Well, and then and then she goes to the robot and says what you just said, Gort Clap to Baratu and Nickto. And he goes there, burns a hole into the morgue, takes the body, takes it back to the spaceship, lays it on that slab, does some stuff with the lights and he comes back to life. Now in the original script, she, the Mary Magdalene character woman and says Patricia Neal. You mean, this is the power that, you know, extra tristles have and in the original one, he goes, yeah, we have the power of life and death and that brain censorship board in 1950 said, no, no, no, you can't say that to the American public. Really. Yeah. So if you want censorship board, there's a brain censorship board that censored films that said, you know, you can't defend religious people is one of their great to hear you. A friend. Yeah. So they change the defend. Yeah. A, a, a, a, a, yeah. So they, they change the script. Now he says something like, oh, no, no, we don't have the only the great spirit in this guy or something. How's that power? I didn't know that there was a censorship board that, that would monitor films and say, you can't see these things. Same way we have, for, you know, ratings, people who are eating science fiction. Yeah. They had censorship boards for science fiction, but they didn't for vampires. Well, I mean, even Star Trek, the original series, I mean, Rod Marry had to sneak in a lot of, you know, anti Vietnam war, you know, commentary through these characters and had to be careful of how they, they were, you know, kind of presented because censorship boards are like that, you know, Captain Kirk, you know, he's got the woman, but you know, you never saw anything right. Right. But that's just that's normal work. Yeah. Yeah. But yeah, I didn't know that they would have a censorship board that would say you can't offend religious people by saying that aliens have the power to bring things back from the dead. Right. Because there it kind of secularizes God. So in this scenario, I call this Shurmors last law is one of my scientific American columns. Any sufficiently advanced extraterrestrial intelligence would be indistinguishable from God. Right. Because they, as you went through the scenario earlier, a thousand years more advanced than a million years more advanced than as look how far we've come in a hundred years extrapolate that out. They'd be able to engineer life forms probably even sure. Engineer entire planetary systems to create Dyson spheres to capture this, all these fantastic scenarios. That would all be possible if you had a sufficient time intelligence. How would that be any different from what religions think God is? Well, hasn't there been where it wasn't there some sort of a recent experiment with a created an artificial life form that had what was that that thing? Do you know, we discussed this? It was they developed some sort of an artificial embryo. You know what I'm talking about? Yeah. Yeah. Some sort of an artificially created embryo and it even had a heartbeat. Yes. That's right. And before that, an artificial genome. Yes. I mean, it's coming. Joe, it's coming. Scientists grow synthetic embryo with brain and beating heart without eggs or sperm. Right. Yeah. I mean, and now extrapolate, go from here to a hundred thousand years of technology as long as we don't blow ourselves up or super volcano, kill us all. Scientists through University of Cambridge have created model embryos from mouse stem cells that form a brain, a beating heart and the foundations of all other organs of the body. Pretty wild shit. Well, it's just a molecular machine. Mm hmm. You know, life. And once you know the blueprint, you just print it out. Yeah. So we're getting there. It's a hard problem, but you know, it's coming. And it may not happen in our lifetime. You know, it requires the singularities coming 20, 30, 20, 20, 20, 20, just take it out two centuries, right? Yeah. It's coming. Something like that is coming. And how would it be any different from what our religions describe God is an omniscient, omnipotent being? Right. Especially if you go a million years from now, a million years of evolution, we conceivably would have the power of God's. Yeah. It's coming. Yeah. It's, assuming we live our life. I think of a life form that exists out there, you know, millions of light years away that has achieved this sort of advanced technology. Do you think that they would want to be visiting us and be interested in us with our nuclear power and all of our chaos and our territorial behavior and the fact that we have these thermonuclear weapons, we're pointing at each other. And I think they'd be pretty interested or the plot of many of these like the day of the earth. It's the alworniness. Yeah. Stop doing this or else or intervening. Yeah. There's been discussions about them hovering over nuclear facilities. Yeah. I know about that. But that may be a selection bias of where the cameras are located or where the monitoring of that. Of course, we have more monitoring around our nuclear sites. Sure. Missile sites. So that could just be an artifact of measurement. But nevertheless, your larger point. Yes, maybe. Yes, maybe this is not an skeptical. Well, not not in principle just because you're a cynic or, you know, an nihilist, not not not for that reason. The question is, is, you know, what should we believe, you know, justified, true, believe, what should I believe is true? Some things are true, some things are not. I want to believe the correct things. How do I know? Right. So this is what, you know, science is kind of developed science and rationality of over the centuries. Okay. So we know we're biased. We know we have to be careful about the confirmation bias and the hindsight bias and so on. So we have to set up some kind of system where it's not just me claiming it. You have, you can look at it. You could run the experiment. Here's how I did it. You do it. Right. And when that's not done, we have all kinds of problems like the replication crisis and psychology and medical science or the last decade or so. You know, some significant two digit percentage of these experiments can't be replicated. Even though they went through peer reviewed professional journals and they were done by professional scientists at real universities and so on. And so this is a, it's hard to know what to believe. There's also a problem of basing science on falsified studies, like the Alzheimer's issue that they're dealing with now. You know, the whole amyloid plaque thing where they found out that a lot of like what is the, I don't want to butcher this because obviously I'm not a scientist, but this, there's a series of Alzheimer's drugs that were based on research that was falsified and they're finding this out now. And this is a terrible thing for people that have, you know, invested their health in these medications, people that have promoted these medications that this was all based on falsified data. Or how about the, find that because that's pretty fascinating because that here it is. This is a legitimate conspiracy. Neuroscience, image, sleuth, fine signs of fabrication and scores of Alzheimer's articles threatening a reigning theory of the disease. That's terrifying. You find out that the people that are responsible for doing these experiments falsified, Matthew Schrag, a neuroscientist and physician of Vanderbilt University got a call that would plunge him into a maelstrom of possible scientific misconduct. A colleague wanted to connect him with an attorney investigating an experimental drug for Alzheimer's disease called Simafilam, the drug's developer, Cass of a science, has claimed an improved cognition partially partly by repairing a protein that can block sticky brain deposits of the protein, amyloid beta, a hallmark of Alzheimer's. The attorney's clients, two prominent neuroscientists who are also short sellers who profit if the company's stock falls, believe some research related to Simafilam may have been fraudulent according to a petition later filed on the behalf of the US Food and Drug Administration. So this is a huge scandal in medical science. And this one appears to be more fraud than just error or bias. So well, that's horrible. Yeah, this is what whistleblowers are for. Often these things are exposed through insiders. I mean, almost always rare that a journalist from the outside discovers that it's usually a grad student or something that's suspicious of what the mentor professor is doing. So that yeah, that's a problem. Right. So that's why you have to disclose any, you know, financial connections you have to companies that might be affiliated with a drug that could treat the thing you're studying that sort of thing. And so there's more pressure to do that. There was another big meta analysis on SSRI's, the antidepressants. Yeah, showing, you know, big massive meta analysis, you know, 50 years we've been prescribing these SSRI's for depression. And they do no better than nothing or just chance or just talking to friends or whatever. Well, also that this idea that it's a chemical imbalance of the brain is not based on science. Yeah, well, it's based on something, but it's probably incorrect science or yeah, or fraudulent. I don't know if it's fraudulent. You know, that's a pretty hefty charge to heave on a science. That's the end of their career is the end of their lives. If they get convicted of actual fraud, they'll never work again. That's different than making errors. And well, this Alzheimer's thing is certainly has done fraud. It looks like it looks like it was successful for decades. Yeah, we just terrifying. Yeah, well, and you know, there's dozens of examples like this from say the last 50 years. Sure, but it's still rare and usually scientists that figure it out and then call them out. Yeah, ultimately. We I like to think of it that it works reasonably well. Right. I mean, we find out about the errors, the mistakes. I mean creation. So I was used to point out the errors that evolutionary biologists made. Therefore, God did it. Right. The theory is not sound. Right. But but it was always scientists that disclose that the error was made by either science. Different scientists do do have there is an incentive to uncover these things. Right. Right. Right. So now there's a movement of foot to kind of have scientists say ahead of time post on these websites. This is the experiment I'm going to do. Here's exactly what I'm going to do. I will report all of the data. So then you avoid the file drawer problem where you only published the successful ones, the rescue in the file drawer that not successful. You know, so this I mean a lot of major journals will not publish replication experiments. They're not interested in that. They want cutting edge new research. Well, this is a problem because like again, you know, if you have this theory and no one can replicate it, but no one wants to publish the non replication because it's not interesting, then you can go down this rabbit hole of, you know, of an error. Perpetrating for decades. How can they mitigate these problems? Well, that would be one way, you know, just transparency. Right. How can, but how could they mitigate the issue of a lack of transparency? Is it funding? Is it? Well, you know, the motion of these. Okay. So some of the publisher parish pressure leads their studies on why scientists commit fraud. And it's again, like conspiracies. It's not a big grand thing. It's just like wants to get tenure. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. You know, keep his job. I remember one of the most interesting podcasts you had with Edward Snowden. And you guys were talking about conspiracies and he starts talking, let me tell you how it really works behind closed doors. It's just bureaucrats trying to keep their job. So they're ramping up the threat of terrorism because if we don't have a threat, then we're going to lose our funding. Right. So very narrow. I just want to keep our funding for our department. And a lot of science works that way. Without, let's say, external private money, you know, there's massive competition for public government money for research. And that leads to these, you know, I'll just, I'll just report the positive ones are all kind of throw out these data points because they're too extreme. And that'll bring my p value level to where I need it. It's called p hacking. And you know, the p value is the probability of it being chance rather than a real effect. And it's set at 0.05 or 0.01 and maybe you're at 0.06. Well, I got this outlier data point here. So I'm just going to not count that. Then all of a sudden, now your p value is at 0.04. Oh, I'm in. Now I can publish it. You know, this used to happen a lot. Now there's pressure like, no p hacking. Right. So it's kind of the shift in norms. Like in journalism is kind of going through this now. You know, where's the fact checkers and the editors of the editors? And, you know, the editors editor should have editors. Right. And, you know, because too much gets published. Right. That's managing the managers. Yeah. Or, you know, like, yeah, just think about like the Kyle Rittenhouse story. Right. And there's a bunch like that that it fed a certain narrative. So it got published as a certain way. And then it's like, oh, you know, weeks later, months later, when they dig into it, it was like, okay, well, that was misinterpreted. Why did that happen? Right. Or the kitty litter boxes in schools from last week, you know, that got spread around as I mean, because it kind of fit the conservative view of, you know, liberals and their confusion about gender and sex and the k-liter boxes is a weird one. It is weird. It's like an urban legend. I fed it to that. And let me, I should probably clarify that a little bit. I have a friend. And my friend's wife is a school teacher. And she told him that there was discussions in the school that a mother wanted to put a litter box in one of the bathrooms. And he told me this. And I talked about it on here. And then people were saying, that's not true. It's an internet rumor. So I contacted him again. And I said, tell me exactly what she said in contact her and find out. She no longer works for that school. She works for another school. She contacted the other school. She didn't get a response. I don't think they actually did it. I think there was discussions about doing it because there was one particularly wacky mother, but there is, it doesn't seem that there's any proof that they put the litter box in there. The reason why I was interested in it and willing to entertain it was there was about 10 years or so ago we went to, there was a UFC in Pittsburgh. And when we went there, as we landed, we were driving from the airport to the hotel, we see all these people with mascot outfits on. We're like, what is going on? And we talked to this guy and he said, there's a furry convention in town. And I said, wow, this is crazy. So they all decided to get together. So they were at bars and on the streets. And it was like a get together. They used to do it in San Diego. But at the time San Diego was a little bit more conservative and they were having a hard time doing it. So they moved to Pittsburgh. And this was the year they moved to Pittsburgh. This is according to him. So we check into the hotel. The hotel, the guy was working in the front desk was to stay and how crazy it was. And these folks were asking for their food to be delivered in bowls on the ground so they could eat it like animals. And I like that. It's crazy. And then he said, they asked for a litter box in the lobby. Now they didn't put a litter box into the lobby, but someone, according to this man, asked him for a litter box. Like that is crazy. So I went and did a deep dive online. I went to forums where furries go because I was trying to find like, is this a thing? Do they like to use litter boxes? Out of all of my searching, I could only find one poster, one guy who said he had used a litter box. So this one person who was saying that he thought it was kinky and he'd like to use it. He if they ate them, whatever, like to use a litter box. So that was all I could find. So is that something that people do or is it something that people talk about doing because it's fun? I don't know. But one of the things that I found about these furries is like, it's sexual in some sort of weird way. They like to get together and have sex with their furry outfits on them. And they don't want people to know who they are or what they want to keep the outfits on. It's a cosplay kind of thing. Yeah, it's like a cosplay kink thing that some people engage in like, how that got connected to gender I do not understand because it seems to be a completely different sort of kink. But what I think people have concern with is that it's nonsense and that it's created. And if this nonsense starts getting into schools because there are Jamie, what was the thing that you were telling me? There's someone who's telling you about one kid thinks they're a wolf and they're, I honestly don't know if I still need to. I think it's a, I think they're trolling. I think there's something. Maybe, but you know it got out of hand in that film. What is a woman? Well, there was that one person that said that there were. Yeah, I mean, you can always find somebody who's right report from ABC though where they went and talked to a bunch of younger kids and parents that were having like a meeting and they're like, our kids like to dress up and talk this way. But like you should see how different they are when they do it. They weren't being very reserved to like outgoing. Right. Because it allows them to, when they pretend that they're a wolf, they can just be freer. So maybe they're like very shy, introverted kids and this allows them like some form of escapism. Like you said, like a cosplay type thing. Yeah. But so what happens then is so there's an element of truth to that. It's true with conspiracy theories. I was a little element of truth and then it gets blowing up into something else. And then if it gets politicized, oh, that's just the sort of thing those livedards would do in these schools to try and groom our children. Right. You know that right. Then you get a moral panic. It's like the satanic panic of the 1980s started with that McMartan preschool case in Manhattan Beach. Yeah. So we'll talk about that because that's pretty crazy. Don't be crazy. So this was kind of in the time in psychology where Freudianism, sort of unconscious memories of things and so on, becoming popular. And there was this idea that, you know, there's a lot of molestation and secret satanic cults all over America. And there's a lot of these kind of preschools. So the McMartan preschool case was based on children telling these fantastic stories about the stuff that was going on at the day school. Now you have kids. I have kids. It's like how this is impossible for parents not to know that over they have tunnels underground tunnels where they have horses. They take them out to Catalina and they do these satanic things to them and what the parents, no one had noticed this. And they were kind of coaching the kids when they were asking the kids these questions. Like what did they do? Did they do this? And the kids like, I remember the anatomical dolls, anatomically correct dolls now. Show me where he touched. He had worse, you know, they separate the kids from their parents that mom's outside and the kids scared to death in this room. Yeah. And then he's like, okay, he touched me there. Can I go back to my mommy now? Right. And then this ruined people's lives and careers and these people were accused of these horrible things that turns out they did not do. They didn't do it. Before the OJ trial, this was the longest and most expensive trial in California history that McMartan preschool case. But it years and these people were accused of these horrible things that turns out they did not do. They didn't do it. Before the OJ trial, this is the longest and most expensive trial in California history that make Martin preschool case. But it launched this kind of satanic panic around America. There's one of these cults in every city. Finally, the FBI got involved and said, all right, we better look into this and they found nothing. Okay, you can always find some weirdo who's a Satanist. Right. And maybe they do some weird things with a cat or something. Or a cat gets mutilated by a dog. And then you get the Satanist. He's over there and then the mutilated cat was found over there. There must be some connection. And before you know it, you get this spiraling moral panic. Right. And it was similar to the recovered memory movement in the 90s that when we started 92, we started covering this because it was the same kind of thing where these were adult mostly women going into therapy for various issues, sleep problems, depression, issues, whatever. And the therapist who had bought in all this Freudian stuff that you suppress, you suppress your memories. And we can get them out as if memory is like a video recording. And you can watch it on the little Cartesian theater of your mind as if there's a little homunculus in there looking at the screen. Okay, play back for me. What's your father? They don't start off like that. They're just okay. So what are your issues? And clients as what the issues well, you know, some people that have those symptoms were molested when they were children. Well, now that didn't happen to me. Well, I know you don't think it happened to you. But in fact, we know about repressed memories that you repressed the memory of that trauma because it's so traumatic. Really? Yeah. How do I know? Okay, have you ever had a dream or ever had fleeting thoughts about this and this and this? Yeah, I think I might have. So six months later, now the person thinks I think this actually happened to me. Then there's this big moment of confrontation with the father, grandfather uncle, whoever it is. And of course, they're just in a state of shock like this, this is horrible. And then it got worse where they were actually tried, put on trial for us. And some of these guys were convicted based on nothing other than one of these recovered memories. Yeah, that's a real issue with hypnotic regression. Right. You can introduce thoughts into people's minds. You know, that was an issue with John Max work. Where of John Mack? John Mack, who was a psychologist out of Harvard, he wrote a book called, it was called abduction, I believe it was abducted, abducted. And it was all about, do you have faux abductees? Right. And it was a similar situation where they were using hypnotic regression. And the problem was the way the questions were formulated and the way these hypnotic regression sessions were conducted. A lot of people thought was extremely unscientific. And in fact, could have introduced these guys, because like one of the things was like, oh, this is a uniform tale that everyone keeps telling, okay, well, do you have the same person asking these people these questions? And how are they doing this? And do they have a vested interest, like perhaps maybe they're publishing a book? Yeah. They have a vested interest in trying to make this a narrative. And it turns out, yeah, that seems to be the case that they were asking these people these very leading questions and taking them through the as hypnotic regression sessions. And they were all convinced that they were abducted by aliens. Yeah, the pioneering research on this, Elizabeth Lóftus, a psychologist studies memory. She made famous these studies of where you show people like a video of a car accident. And you ask one group how fast would you estimate the cars are traveling when they collided? Second group how fast would you estimate the cars are traveling when they smashed into each other? The latter when it gets a higher estimated speed? Or you show subjects a video, little 30 second video clip of like somebody sitting on a park bench and some guy walks up and grabs your person runs off. All right, what color was his hat? Oh, it was a blue hat. It was a baseball hat. It was a knit cap and some of the guy wasn't wearing a hat at all. So just asking the question, plants and now the memory is corrupted. Now the person thinks the the person had a hat. That's the new memory, right? Right. Her most famous research was on the lost in a mall. So these are adult subjects who had been screened and they know that when they were children, they were never lost in a mall. Right. But they introduced amongst many things that they were talking about. Do you remember the time when you were five because your parents told us about this? When you were lost in the mall? Oh, yes. Oh my god, it was terrible. I was so scared that I remember hearing the voice of my mom. And then this guy helped me and he was wearing this flannel shirt and he took me to my mommy and so on and so they just make up this completely. It never happened. Right. She just made that up on the spot. So we have this little internal storyteller to try to make sense of this chaotic world. And so the moment you get new information, you've got to try to fit it somewhere in there. What's the narrative? How does this fit with my life? Well, this goes back to what we're talking about with chaotic events and eyewitness testimony. Yeah, it's always screwed up. Not reliable. Not reliable at all. No. No. And so what do we do about it because in the criminal justice system, back to our signal detection problem, right? You got the guy sitting there, is he guilty? If he's really guilty and you find him guilty, then that's good. That's a hit, right? But if he's really innocent and you find him guilty, that's really bad. Right. So we had this kind of with the blackstone ratio of 10 to one better 10 guilty people go free than that one innocent person be found guilty. Yeah. And so the criminal justice system has the same problem without before DNA and some of that forensic evidence, they was all eyewitness and it's terrible. So the innocence project is, as you know, exonerated, I don't know, 300 and something people, many of them on death row for crimes they never committed. And that's the problem. Even like forensics stuff you see on CSI, you know, the bite marks or the hair analysis of the fabric, even that's not very well tested and replicated. No. In fact, Josh Dubin who worked with the innocent project talked about that. He has a podcast on junk science, particularly discuss bite marks about how you can tell people that it was a bite mark from a specific individual and they'll go with it. And then you can show them that that absolutely is not the case. And you know, this is not, this is not like it's not like DNA evidence. It's not like something that is absolutely 100% true. Even the polygraph is there's a reason it's not allowed in all the polygraphs worship. Total horseshit. Yeah, that's horseshit. When you know, someone tells you they pass a lot of text tests, like congratulations or sociopath. That's right. Doesn't fucking mean anything. If you believe it, you're not going to give up the case. Also, like you have to have a very specific response to like this question. And everyone's response to stimuli and stress that they're very some people are going to react in a certain way. But that's not indicative of evidence. Like you can absolutely prove. Also, like, you, there was a woman who was convicted, I believe in, in India of, uh, from FMRI data of a murder because she had knowledge of the crime scene. And so, like, I, I discussed this with a neuroscientist in America. And she was like, that is absolutely not evidence that that person committed the crime. But if you are in a trial and you have knowledge of the crime scene because they've told you, this is the case. This is what they're saying happened. And then they use this FMRI data to show that you have knowledge of the crime. Well, of course, you have knowledge of the crime. You're about to go to fucking jail for something you didn't do. And they're telling you, you know, was a Colonel Mustard in the library with a candlestick, like, oh, look, through MRI data, we can show she knows about Colonel Mustard. Right. I believe this woman was actually convicted. There are people, neuroscientists trying to figure out how to use MRIs to see if you can see if somebody's lying. I think we're a long ways from that. Long ways. And I did a TV show once, I don't know, 20 years ago for Fox Family exploring the unknown. We did an episode on a polygraph. So we found this guy, Doug Smith, who was now working, he was a former cop in Dallas, and he was working with defensive attorneys showing why the polygraph is bullshit. So he had the funniest story where he said, first day on the job, he got the training and how to do the polygraph. So his first day is his boss says, okay, we got the accused in there. We think he's the perpetrator. Go in there and do the polygraph test. So he does it, then he comes back. Well, boss, I think he's lying. Yeah, we know he's lying. They're all lying. Get in there and get the confession. He's like, what? Yeah. Tell him we know he's lying. Tell him we got his fingerprints too. You mean you just, yeah. It's like Jesus Christ. So now, so he gave up because he thought, oh, you mean this is like planting evidence in a way. Mm. Okay, this is my type specimen for what I call proxy conspiracies that is conspiracies, they're standing for something else. The OJ case, OJ was acquitted based on a conspiracy theory that the LAPD planted the bloody glove and the blood splatter and so forth and the jury accepted it. Now, you know, the evidence is pretty overwhelming. He killed his wife and her friend and there was no police tampering. There was the one guy, firmen, who was probably a racist, but it wasn't clear that he did anything. But my explanation is that in a way, the jury said, yeah, maybe not this time. But the LAPD have done these sorts of things. Right. And there's this great ESPN documentary series called OJ in America. And it's like six hours long and it tracks the history of African American community post World War II coming to Southern California. And how bad the relationships were between the LAPD and the African American community, particularly right in downtown LA. And they did plan evidence. They did do things like this. Right? So there's an element of truth back to conspiracies. I think he should be to firmen did plant some evidence or if it wasn't for firmen, that there was some evidence that something was planted. Whether it was blood splatter or something. And they use this excuse that they know he's guilty. And so since they know he's guilty, it sort of justifies that falsification. That was the argument in the 50s and 60s. Well, I don't know if this guy did it. He's done something. Right. And he gets off. He's going to commit another crime. So we're doing the justice thing here by planning that. So enough of that has happened that it's reasonable for African Americans to be suspicious. Same thing with their higher rates of vaccine hesitancy now recently. Anyway, because of the Tuskegee experiments, you know, where this, you know, our government did do these things, right? Yeah. There's syphilis patients that were not treated when they could have been without their consent, without their knowledge. Just, I mean, it's Nazi like experiments. Let's see what happens if we don't treat them and it went on for decades and it's terrifying. Most of them died. Their spouses got syphilis. Yeah. Their children, some of them got, you know, it's terrible. And it's the kind of thing that Nazi, you know, doctors were doing. And you know about Operation Paperclip, right? Because you had Annie Jacobson on this. Yeah. She's really good on these things. Her books are just first class good journalism on that where she tracked down. You know, if you put a paperclip on the file, it means we're going to adopt this guy as one of our scientists before the Russian. These are German scientists before the Russians get them, right? Right. And a lot of these guys were doing, you know, chemical warfare experiments, biological warfare experiments. And of course, Verna von Braun with the V2 rockets, the most famous of the paper clip. So enough of that goes on. It's like, wait a minute. On the one hand, we're trying these guys at the Nuremberg trials and executing them for war crimes. And then we have these other guys that pretty much the same thing. Yeah. Now they work for us. Yeah. So there's another, you know what? You know what? That was a crazy one because they were just justifying it based on listen. We're in the middle of a cold war with Russia. And if we don't get these people, the Russians are going to get them. And yes, they are Nazis, but they're also very advanced scientists. And they have research that could benefit us and our rocket programs and a lot of other scientific experiments. It's pretty wild shit when you find out that it's true. The guy who invented sarin gas, the German chemist, and he lived in it. Fritz Haber. Yeah. No, not for example. Fritz Haber was the other guy. He invented that and he also invented the Haber method of extractor nitrogen. So they wanted him for crimes against humanity while he was also out for the Nobel Prize for extracting nitrogen from the atmosphere. Same thing with Linus Pauline. It was one of the great scientists of all time. One, two Nobel prizes. One for peace, one for chemistry. And he was spied on by this, by the FBI. And he was not allowed to go, well, he's allowed to go get collect his one Nobel Prize, but he couldn't go to some conferences because they thought he might be a communist and all this stuff because he was anti-nuclear war. That was during the red scare. Yeah. Yeah. During the 50s, right? So again, you think, wait a minute. Our government was doing this? Yeah. Yeah. Well, maybe I should be suspicious about your current stuff. Right. Well, that's also the MK Ultra experiments. There's so many people that were involved in that that one of them was Ted Kuzinski. He was involved in the Harvard LSD experiments and wound up being a horrible murderer. Who knows what they did to his fucking brain while they were dosing him up with LSD and running his abusive studies. So is that being confirmed by his brother? Yeah. Yeah. He didn't, they didn't not only did that, they, well, he had a horrible background. I thought it was schizophrenic. That too. Yeah. Well, when he, when he was a child, he had some sort of an ailment where they took him from his parents and they put him in an orphanage or some sort of a children's hospital where when he was a baby, he had no contact with human beings. It would just cry in his crib. They would feed him and that's it. And this went on for months. And they think that just that development really fucked up his brain. And then on top of that, he goes to Harvard and he's involved in the LSD experiments. And apparently those experiments were very abusive because they were studying like what would happen. If you give these people LSD and you emotionally and psychologically abuse them. And you know, he had, according to his brother, all sorts of real problems with relationships and other human beings like a real just a really damaged human being overall. Did you see Earl Mars' film, Warmwood, about the Frank Olson case? No, I didn't. I heard about it, but it didn't see it. It's quite good. It's a little long. Netflix is cranking out these really long documentary series. Not a drag. Yeah. I'm keeping there. I'm two hours in. I still have no idea what's going to come on. I get to the point. Yeah. So this was Frank Olson's one of the chemists that worked in the MK Ultra program, but they dosed him at some, he's just had some bar and some club with the other CIA guys and they said, hey, let's put some LSD. And then like 10 days later, he jumps out of a New York City high-rise window or did he? And there was evidence that there was a couple of CIA guys that were there. Maybe they pushed him. And then his son, Eric Olson, who's been kind of keeping the story alive. This happened in the 50s. You know, I had the body exhumed and it there was evidence of like a blow to the head like a crack in the skull, like hit him first and then shoved him out the window. Oh, wow. But you know, but maybe hit his head, you know, it's like and and see more, Hirsch was the journalist that they kind of tried to track this down and they couldn't quite get the CIA to see I paid him off. They gave him, I think, 750,000 bucks. But they said, but no guilt. We're not going to say we did anything. It's like, this is the problem with conspiracies, right? That's some of them are real, right? Right. Yeah. And so when you have something like Alex Jones, when he was on on your show and I show a clip of this to my my class actually last night, you know, where he's ranting on about NASA has this headquarters in San Francisco where they're dosing people to talk to the aliens and he goes off on something, right? But that the CIA was dosing people with, you know, hallucinogenic drugs, that's true. Yeah. Right. And so this is the problem with conspiracy theories is they start off with some element of truth. Yeah, there's some facts there. Okay. And talking to Megan Kelly about this because she went to she came here to Austin met with Alex did a whole show when she was with NBC on Alex Jones. Remember that? And then she got a lot of heat for talking to him and letting him speak as you did. But, but she said, you know, she has a team of fact checkers at NBC. They go, okay, let's just fact check everything he said. And it's like, you know what, pretty much everything he said starts off with some little thing. Well, that's actually true. Right. And then he spins it off into something else that this is the problem with conspiracy. Well, it's also the problem with like if you're going to find all these different conspiracies, how much time do you have? How much time do you have to investigate all of these? And in a very thorough manner, there's almost impossible. It's almost impossible to get to the bottom of every single one of those and have an objective analysis of the facts where like where I was talking about Tom O'Neill, the book chaos, where he covered Manson. He wrote that book for 20 years, 20 years on one case. He started off. He was hired to do a article. I forget what magazine was for it. But whatever publication was for, it was the anniversary of the Manson case. So he was just supposed to do this sort of little thing about the case. And so as he's a really good journalist and as he goes into this story, he keeps uncovering more and more evidence of fuckery, more and more evidence of just a bunch of weird shit and it becomes obsessed. It takes him 20 years to eventually publish that book. And the book is phenomenal. I can't recommend it enough. Because Tom O'Neill is a really good journalist and the book chaos is riveting. I mean, even this, you know, that's already long enough, right? And I just barely touched the surface. I like how you can connect by the way. By the way, the word can experience the influence. And also has a CIA and S-O-R-O-S-R-O-S. It's all in there. Well, when you talk to like schizophrenias and they make those maps of all the connections that this person met that person who met that person, this person who was in the same airport as that person in 1969. So therefore they're involved with this, that and the other thing. Well, the JFK for that chapter, that took me a long time to write because again, it's just down the rabbit hole. There's thousands of books. Even Baliose's book, I mean, he, you know, 1400 pages. Holy crap, guy. Come on. Yeah. That's a lot. And then you get into remembering it all when you're on page 900. What the fuck did he say on page 100? Yeah. Go back and, or the 9-11 truth, you know, which go down there. You know, what do I know about explosive devices and how buildings are demolished? You know, someone had a really good point. They were talking to me about this person who was involved in construction. And they were saying, let me explain to you construction in New York City. When they say that that plane could have never taken down those buildings, he goes, when these people, he goes, and I'm not accusing these people of doing it, but I've seen it with my own eyes. When you're supposed to use half inch steel, if you use quarter inch steel, it's a lot less money. And then there's a lot of this and a lot of skimping here and a lot of sk- there's a lot of corruption. Interesting. Right. He was saying he goes, you know, they're seeing that in Russia with a lot of the, the Russian, someone else was explaining this to me, that a lot of these Russian weapons, they're faulty. And one of the reasons why they're faulty is because there's corruption and the people that are responsible for making them are skimming. They're taking, you know, you're supposed to spend X amount of money, you know, it's like, it's a lot of the shit doesn't even work correctly because of corruption, because there's a bunch of people that are involved that are, you know, they're profiting in a, right, observed way. His point was that the World Trade Center buildings were maybe not up to code. Exactly. I said that they weren't made the way they were supposed to be made. Yeah. Well, they probably weren't designed to be able to, and we stand up a plane hit from two commercial airlines. Well, I'm getting sure. Yeah. I remember I was visiting this guy who was a doctor. And this is back when you had to get a medical marijuana license in California. So he was that kind of doctor. I was going to him. And he gives me this book. And he was very loony. And he gives me this book saying that the World Trade Center towers were brought down by Tesla energy. And I'm like, what? And he was like, he goes, yeah, there's no way to turn concrete and dust knowing these buildings. I go, but what about if when concrete like smashes, it's made out of fucking powder, you mix with water, wouldn't it just become dust? And so I'm like breaking down this argument with this guy in the office while I'm trying to get a license for medical marijuana. I'm like, I gotta get my life together. Like, what the fuck? The thesis of my habit. Because this guy like was imploring me to read this book. I'm like, oh, boy, that it was Tesla technology that they use some sort of a, some sort of a thing. Again, a big event like 9-11, we need a big cause. Tesla energy, that sounds pretty good. For skeptic, we did an issue on that, which we commissioned an article from a guy that runs a demolition company. This is what he does. He brings big buildings down. And he said, let me tell you how it's done. I mean, you got to go in there, break down all the drywall, get into the support games or wrap them up. There's no way this could have happened that the World Trade Center builds. No one noticed people in their room noticed that you're constantly putting this, these detonators everywhere. Yeah, that was the, the weird argument about Tower 7, too, right? People were saying, looks how Tower 7 had felt like a controlled demolition. And it did. It felt like a controlled demolition. But if you see the full video of how it went down, the inside of it collapsed long before the whole building collapsed. There was evidence that it was falling apart. It burned all day. Well, yeah, it burned all day. And there was diesel generators in the basement. So there's all this diesel fuel that was on fire. So you get extraordinary heat that's weakening the entire structure of this building for hours and hours. And there's evidence that it collapsed at the top. So everyone's like, oh, the way it fell. It was uniformly, yeah, but it didn't really was falling apart. Like the whole thing was on fire. You know, it really bothers me about a lot of these is it kind of distracts us from real shenanigans that are probably going on. Like what was the relationship between the United States government and the Saudi government? Right. Well, where was that money? Who funded those those nine 11 hijackers? And why were the Saudi nationals allowed to leave the next day? Yeah, it's like that was why are we not talking about that? Right. Right. There was that's real conspiracy. Yeah. Yeah. Same thing again with the JFK paper. Why aren't they releasing them? I suspect it's because the CIA was up to some other things we don't want other countries to know that we were doing. I'm sure there's some of that. There's always some of that, right? I mean, that's like, that's that's the way they operate. And who knows if that's for our own good or if it's for their good? I mean, as a reason Castro was tagged as maybe one of the assassins because we tried to kill him multiple times, multiple times. Try to, you know, the cigar. And the and the seashell conscience with a bomb in it where he scuba dives. Remember when they, when they started the embargo with Cuba, when they wouldn't let you get Cuban goods before they did it, Kennedy famously got boxes boxes of cigars sent to him like you motherfucker. Like you motherfucker, like I enjoy cigar as much as the next guy, but Jesus Christ. It's like governor Newsom. Yeah. You gotta stay home. But not for me. You gotta stay home. But I'm going to this nice fresh restaurant. Yeah. What? I don't worry. I'll be outside. That's right. Yeah. For Boris Johnson. You know, that was a state trooper that took the photo of him. Oh, it was. Yeah. It was a state trooper who was on detail. Right. He took the photo of him. And it was like you motherfucker. Right. Making everybody wear a mask and you're in there eating at the French laundry. Right. Yeah. But that's, you know, but that's always the case with people in power. They, you know, they'll come up with things that look good in terms of optics. And like these are the measures that we're going to take and everyone has to abide by. I'm like, from me, I'm Nancy Pelosi. I want to get my hair done. Here's another, here's one of my own conspiracy theories when you get elected president. They take you in a back room and they go, okay, here's what's actually. Yeah. Well, but I said I was going to close get him. Oh, yeah. Yeah. You're not going to do that. Oh, yeah. I guess I can't do that. I was going to pull the troops up. Now we can't pull the troops. What do you think really happens? You think they're just lying when they're making their campaign speeches. Then they have no intention of doing those. I don't think they know because until you're the nominee and tell you the head nominee and it's close, are you allowed to know what's really going on? No way. I mean, I think when Obama won, when he actually won the election, I think that's when they gave him the whatever they call them, the white papers of briefing, debriefing papers, you know, from the national security agency and so on. And I'm pretty sure it's like he had all this list of stuff. This is what I'm going to do. Right. It's like I can't actually do those things because all right. So we close get more than this happens than this happens. Remember you want to do impose the no first, what was it, in nuclear weapons? No launch on warning, LOW, no launch on warning because it's too risky. And so I'm going to do this and then it never happened. And I think our NATO ally said, no, no, we have to be, we have to, we want the Russians to think we may just strike in any moment and not just defensively, you know, and no first use. Now that was it. That was no first use. And he didn't do it. He won the Nobel Peace Prize for his stance on nuclear weapons and then didn't do that. Yeah. Why? And I think because our NATO ally said, uh, uh, uh, uh, this is in the treaty, you got to do this. If you don't do that, then the Russians are going to do this and so on back and forth, back and forth like, yeah, someone actually should bring that up during presidential debates. Like you have no idea what's going on until you get in there, sir. Right. So why are you even saying that? Right. And then point to the fact that every single president that's ever said they were going to do all these things once they get in office and they get the, the information. Yeah. So here's where I'm conflicted about, you know, I'm a big free speech guy, transparency is key. But I'm sure there are national security secrets that it's probably good. We don't know. Right. Yeah. For, you know, this is the world we live in. We live in a right. My complex and, and there are bad people. Yeah. Okay. So my favorite film is a, a, a few good men, you know, Jack Nicholson. Yeah. His schooling, Tom Cruise on, on the stand, you know, son, we live in a world with walls and on those walls are men with guns and you want me on that wall. You need me on that wall. Yeah. You know, and so on. It's like, yeah, he's right. Actually, if we is right. And that script was written to kind of make parody, the conservative militarist position. But in fact, it is correct. Yeah. Right. It'd be better if we lived in a world without political borders and guns and so on. Bad people and bad people. And bad people, that's not the world we live in. Yeah. We just can't imagine that they don't exist and operate as if they don't. Right. And then you put us all in danger. This is what my question for Elon Musk when we, you know, colonized Mars, what are we going to do there? What kind of government, what kind of economy? How many people are going to have? Do you have to have police? Do you have to have laws? You know, because his attitudes of just minimize laws, we're all just going to, you know, just says this direct democracy. Everybody votes minimum laws because that's where things get, yeah. Okay. If you have 12 people, that probably works. But if you have 1200 or 12 million people, do you think earth is going to be the new United States? Like the United States was a civilization where was a country rather that was started because people were fed up with the way things were run in Europe. And they said, well, we're going to go over here. We're going to declaration of independence and the constitution. And we're going to establish this, you know, this land of the free. And you know, it worked out pretty well for a long time. Yeah. And you know, as time goes on, it gets more and more complex and more and more fucked up. Is it inevitable that government bureaucracies just grow? They just can't not grow and they get more complex and you need more rules and laws and then you need guns and jails and it seems like it is. It's just, I mean, you can have as many checks and balances as you can just to keep the growth in check not too much. Right. But it seems like if you started with 10 people at Mars and then you had, you know, a thousand and then 10,000 and then 100,000 and then a million, you're going to end up with, you know, lawyers, yep, courts and mediators and police. And so what's the solution to that? How do you mitigate that completely? You don't. I don't think because of human nature, right? We're naturally selfish is part of our nature. And we're average and, you know, we're greedy and just, it's who we are. I wonder if the solution to that is some sort of an integration with technology. That's what I wonder if things like neural link and these new proposed technologies that will increase the bandwidth of the human mind. And I wonder if those, because if those perhaps will come with a nobility to read thoughts and minds and communicate telepathically, which is what I think ultimately, you know, we talk about the evolution of the human body and, you know, the human animal from, you know, lower primate to what we are today, you know, we assume that it's going to be a biological evolution from here on out, but it might not be, it might be symbiotic. We might be connected to some technology, which seems inevitable. There's another argument from the SETI people is that if we encounter aliens, they're probably not going to be biological. Right. But they've moved past that. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's the fear of artificial intelligence, right? The fear of artificial intelligence that has become sentient and it has no use for us. Yeah. That's an interesting thing. Let's think about that for a second because when you say, the A will want to conquerors or want to control this. Wanting is a human emotion. Yes. Why wouldn't computer have wants? Yes. That's a really good point. Like why would have desires and needs and all those are based on biological needs? Like these primate desires that we have to acquire wealth and status and, you know, to breeding rights and all the things that motivate people, greed and ego that motivate people to do what they do now. that we have to acquire wealth and status and, you know, to breeding rights and all the things that motivate people, greed and ego that motivate people to do what they do now. The artificial intelligence, unless we program that into it, won't have that. And if they are sentient, if they're sentient and far more intelligent than us, it seems to me that that would be the thing that they would realize right away is a real problem with the programming. Like, why do we have all this nonsense, ego and all this, these needs to acquire things and control things? Why is that baked in? Why do we even need to communicate with people? If sentient's artificial intelligence was really far more intelligent than us, why would it even talk to us? Why wouldn't it just exist? Right. This is my argument for why I don't fear making contact with extraterrestrials. This is the argument that we shouldn't try to communicate with them or send signals out because look what happened historically when an advanced civilization came in contact with a less advanced civilization, they enslaved them or genocide or so on. But I don't think you could get to the point where you have a interstellar civilization, and you have dicence fears, and you have massive, super advanced technology and so on. And still be colonial and salavian people, genocidal maniacs. I don't think you could get there with that kind of attitude. Yeah, I don't think so either. Do you think that the only thing that separates the biological organism from this advanced creature, the only way to get past that, because everything that evolves biologically evolves in a state of competition. I mean, there's a reason why it advances and improves its natural selection and there's a lot going on there. Would that be the only way that we could get past all of these bizarre human emotions and ego and greed and need is to separate ourselves from biological evolution and become in a way that's what we've been doing, I think, through the last several centuries of moral progress. Just take my previous book, the moral archives, the bankers books, talking about the shift in norms of what is acceptable behavior has been massive in the long run, right? I mean, they used to burn cats and slavery and the death penalty and torture and this was common and people just burning witches, burning them as witches. This was common and now it's not why it happened. Our nature didn't change, there's no biological evolution. We just kind of learned a channel our better angels and kind of suppress our inner demons through not just laws, top-down laws you probably have to have. But we don't really need laws now to prevent slavery from happening. I mean, there's just not pretty much nobody, no government's going to say, hey, I got this great idea that it's enslaved people. The norms have shifted, pretty much nobody wants to do that, right? And that has driven a lot of human progress without having to do the biological evolution or genetic engineering or re-programming because you don't want to take out somebody's sense of, I don't know, pride and avarice and I want to be successful, I want to make money, I want to be creative, I want to I have these drives and there's a dark side to that, maybe you're also a little bit psychopath and you're kind of mean and nasty in your competitiveness. But if you take all that away then what's the motive to do anything? Why would you want anything? Right, why would you? I think we're stuck with both, right? So we have to engineer it culturally from the bottom up by changing norms. I think that is happening and that's one of the reasons why, you know, when things happen like like this sort of social progress movement and, you know, social justice movement, the reason why I think that's a good thing is like maybe it goes too far in some ways but the direction of it, the thought process behind it is making the world a fairer, better place, which I think is ultimately good and there's going to be like it's not a perfect thing because humans aren't perfect. So there's like, there's a waves, the ebbs and the flows, there's an overreach and then there's a correction and I think that if you look at Pinker's work and one of the pushbacks on Pinker's work is, you know, Pinker says that the world is safer, it's better in so many ways now that's ever been before and people will say, what, how can you say this when there's all this crime and injustice and racism and murder and rape and thievery and all this shit that's going on, yes, yes, yes, yes. It's not denial of all the horrors and atrocities that exist currently but if you look at the grand scale of what the world was like during Genghis Khan's reign versus the world is like today, it's far safer than it's ever been before. This is the best time to be alive ever. Even though things are still relatively fucked up in comparison to utopia. Utopia is a terrible goal to have because we're never going to get there and also it gives a perverse calculation that, you know, we can achieve this perfect society in which everybody is happy forever. If it weren't for those people right there, right, we're going to get our enemy, we've got to get rid of the gems, the Catholics, the Romans, the whoever capitalists, everybody, whoever it is, yeah, fine in enemy, fine in other. Right. So how about just so this is what Kevin Kelly calls protopia, not utopia, just make tomorrow just a little bit better than today, just incremental just tiny bit and just goes two steps up, one back, okay, adjustment, boom, boom, boom, boom, and then in the century, you know, things are twice as good as they were. Okay, that's good. We should be happy with that. I think ultimately that is kind of happening. It's slower than most people would like because there's an idea of what we would like society to be like and it doesn't fit that yet and so we're angry and frustrated but I think it's a time management issue too. You know, the human being is only alive for 100 years but during that 100 years, think about how much has changed. You know, I remember when I was a kid, I was, I guess I was 11 years old and we moved to Florida and I moved from San Francisco to Florida and San Francisco, we lived in a gay neighborhood and our neighbors were gay, my aunt used to go over there and smoke pot and play bongo drums, naked with this gay couple. It was like very normal because when it was during the Vietnam era and it was just, they were all hippies and we went from there to Florida, which was very regressive in that way and I had this friend, he was Cuban and his dad was very homophobic and his dad was really angry because he was reading the story and I'll never forget because I was 11 and he's like, oh, these gays want to get married and it was really mad. He was throwing this newspaper down the table and I remember thinking why does he give a fuck if these gay people want to get married? Like what is that? Like how weird is that? That he, because there's always going to be some parts of our culture that are still regressive. But if you compare that then to today, you know, so this was, I'm 55, so this is 44 years ago. So look back from 44 years ago today, well, it's normal for, you know, no one's going to say if I went over someone's house, they're like, these gays want to get married. Like what do you give a fuck? Almost no one gives a fuck, right? Exactly. You know, it's very, you have to be like the hardest right wing Christian fundamentalist to think that gay people shouldn't be allowed to get married now. Think of fast that happened pretty quickly. 2011, Hillary and Obama both said they were against the same text. Yes. Now they had to politically do plenty. They probably didn't do that. Yeah. Yeah. And now nobody is not even a discussion. And remember when interracial marriage was a thing. Well, me neither, because that was, you know, when I was a young child, but 1967 was the Supreme Court loving decision. It was illegal before that. Well, as the states write thing, many states had an illegal for interracial couples to marry astonishing. That's, that's, you know, the 60s. That's not that long ago. Right. And now no one even, posters don't even ask anymore. It's just like, well, so it's relative to the fact we have such a short lifespan. Like the progress is happening rapidly. If you look at history, like historically, it's rapid, but a human being doesn't live very long. Right. You know, so we were frustrated. We want these changes. We want progress to appear like almost overnight. Right. Yeah. I was reading a review of this book on witches and what just one town in New England and what life was like there. And it's just this miserable life where everybody, you know, people are dying in diseases and Indians are going to get us and the drought and the winter storm and, you know, pretty much life was nasty, brutish and short. Yeah. And there's like, we have no explanation for this. It's the witches. Right. Do you know the story behind that? What they think the motivation for the witch trials were? Which ones? The Salem. Urgot poison. Or Urgot, but I know about that. That is what? Because there's a lot of historical evidence it points to Urgot poisoning and mass hallucinations. Right. There's one from, I believe it was, it was at 1950. There was one in France where they had a situation that was similar. There was Urgot poisoning where a bunch of people died in fact because Urgot is also toxic. But in some quantities, it produces these LSD like effects and they coincide the Salem rich witch trials. And this is controversial, but there seems to be some evidence it points to that that coincides with a late frost and that this late frost produced this fungus on the wheat and the grains and that these grains were likely infected with Urgot. And I think they've found evidence of Urgot. I have read this. I think it's possible as an element. Nothing in no human behavior is going to explain by one thing. Right. It doesn't exist in a bad way. So you could have, I could see, like one say teenage girl does this in hallucinates and chattering in voices or whatever. And the other, her other friends, they start mimicking it sort of a social contagion. Like it's fun and then it's like, oh, it's more than fun. And then the adults go like, oh, what's going on here? Safety. You know, then you have like a half a dozen elements going on there. Right. And in the case of the witch, you know, in a way, the witch crazes is a kind of conspiracy theory, right? Because one thing conspiracy theories do is they offer a causal explanation for chaos and randomness. Our brains are not well designed by evolution to understand randomness. My examples of this are like the stars in the sky are random, but they look like patterns. Right. Or the, the apple iPod shuffle feature was introduced in which your songs are fed to you randomly and Apple got complaints. It's not random. Certain songs are coming up more than others, like that is random. So Apple apparently I'm told had to reprogram it and program it so it feels random intuitively, but it's not. That's crazy. Right. So much of life is just randomness. Yeah. It happens. The bumper sticker shit happens. Right. But that's uncomfortable. It's like, no, there must be something behind it. And if you don't have an explanation, no meteorology to explain whether and no germs theory of disease to explain disease and so forth, what did you got? Right. Which is well, if you you talked about the, the satanic craze of the 80s, right? So imagine the satanic craze of the 80s and then on top of that, ergot poisoning. Right. Well, oh my God, now you're now you're drowning witches. Right. And that was the thing they would drown a lot of witches and they would say that they, if they drowned, drown them if they lived, clearly they were witches. Well, no one fucking lived. So is a lot of whoops. Well, I guess we killed a fucking innocent. They just kept killing people thinking that they were witches. Right. And there's, there's a lot of research on this also, um, accusing people who were marginalized poor people, women, and so on who didn't have any power. And so the magistrates, people had power and money that could have women, whatever they, they escaped. Right. Right. And also, there was motivation to accuse people of horrific things. And you know, you could use that to take their property. Do you know the story of Elizabeth Bathory? No. Elizabeth Bathory is a woman who lived, god, I want to say it was like the 1200 something like that. And she was accused of doing these horrible things to other women. Like she was accused of being like one of the greatest mass murders and serial killers that's ever existed. And that you would take these beautiful young women and kill them and bathe in their blood and all this. And so we told this story. And then someone sent me a link to an article that said, there's probably something more to that. And that really what it was was they were, they were accusing her of these things so that they could, uh, imprison her and take her land and that it might have been that. And so they accused her of these horrific atrocities in order to take away her land. Yeah, there's some of that kind of practical thing and revenge against people you don't like. Sure. Yeah. And then there's something called preemptive denunciation. You denounce people before you get denounced. Right. And the indianouncing somebody means you must not be a witch if you're denouncing them. And then you get this kind of competitive denunciation. No, you're a witch. No, you're a witch. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Like the communist show trials, right? Right. You've got to denounce your neighbors as communists before they, they denounce you or is non-communist, they denounce you. So you get the fear during mass hysteria that people are going to turn on each other because they're afraid that someone's going to come after them. So they come after you first. Right. I think we're going through that a little bit with cancel culture. Sure. For sure. Yeah. I'm going to, you know, get somebody on my campus and they said the wrong, they use the wrong pronoun or the wrong adjective. And I'm going to denounce them before I get denounced and make mistakes. Right. I will be the social justice war. So you couldn't possibly think that I had done it wrong. Right. Right. Yeah. Yeah. So you get this thing called pluralistic ignorance or the spiral of silence where everybody thinks everybody else is thinking something when in fact nobody's actually thinking that the classic experiment on this was binge drinking on college campuses. So you ask individual students by themselves, how do you feel about this? I don't really like it. But I know everybody else likes it. You know, so everybody thinks that everybody else likes binge drinking, but actually individually they really don't like it. But I got to do it because everybody else is doing it. Right. So this in part explains the kind of sustaining of the Nazi regime. Everybody well initially Hitler was popular because he stopped the depression and you know got the economy going again and so on. And then he starts escalating. And everybody thinks, well, I'm not too happy about this policy and the thing with the Jews. I don't know. But everybody else seems to be going along with it. And then by the time you get to the point where somebody needs to speak up and say, you know, this is wrong. They have concentration camps for those people and they did it in a way that you could see your neighbor being hauled out and think, I keep in my mouth shut. I'm not saying anything. Right. So this is a what's called a common knowledge problem. If I know that you know that I know something then together we can kind of both stand up and say, we're putting this stop to this. It's like the Leah Thomas thing with the swimming thing. You know, none of the women competitive swimmers thought this was fair. Right. There's a guy competing against us and that, right. But any one of them by themselves that speaks out, you know, they may just get kicked out the team and get punished by their fears or whatever. It would really take, you know, how do we reverse this trend we're in. It would take all of them together saying we're not going to compete all of us if that person comes in here. Right. And that's the only way it was so. So that's a common knowledge problem. You know, how do you know, we all have to know that we know about this to put a stop to that. So that's an interesting modern example of that, right. Because that is the case with when you see someone who's a biological male who competes against biological females and dominates them when they were as a biological male not doing nearly as well. There's clearly something wrong here. And yet these women are called transphobes and they're, you know, ostracized and some of them are kicked off teams and it's a horrible situation. It's very similar to that. Have you seen this video that just came out of a male, the female trans playing competitive volleyball? And she goes up for the spike and just boom and it hits this girl in the face and she's down and out, you know, concussion. And it's like, okay, I support trans rights. You know, I don't think people should be discriminated against for whoever they want to identify as or whatever. But there's conflicting rights. What about women's rights? Yeah. Yeah. And you know, my favorite quote from Thomas Older are no perfect solutions. There's just compromises. You know, yes, trans rights, but women's rights, you know, women's bathrooms, but the guy wants to go, no, no, you can't know. You just can't have everything, right? Right. You can have everything because also you're going to have people that take advantage of the, you know, the current cultural climate that might be sexual predators. There are examples of that. Yeah. It's not a hysteric thing that's happening everywhere, but it has happened. Right. But then there are people that are legitimately trans and they probably should be able to use the woman's restroom. So how are you? Right. What is the compromise? Well, you know, sex bathrooms, I guess. Yeah. Yeah. I'm not that worried about the bathroom thing. No, I'm not. But it's a weird sports thing. The sports thing because I've been an athlete my whole life. And it's obvious why we have women's divisions and sports. It's, it's, it's, it couldn't be more clear. You know, we just celebrated Serena Williams career. She had no career if there was no women's tennis division. Right. And it's like that for most sports. Although I'm always curious why there are women's divisions and chess. For example, I really don't know why that is the case. You know, this is the case with pool as well. There's a trans woman who is become a world champion in certain billiard games. And people are confused about that. That's a weird one in my opinion because it's not a power based game. But there's something about testosterone and understanding of 3D space. There's some sort of an advantage. It's very weird. Pool is a weird one. It's because it's a game that I'm obsessed with and I've always wondered. There's only been like a few women who have been very competitive and been able to beat men consistently in competition. And a lot of them are lesbians. I don't know what that's all about. But there's, well, they have more masculine. Yeah, physiology. That's why it's an on average. Think of over two overlapping bell curves. Of course, there are some women that can beat some men. Sure. That's not where we're talking about. But we're talking about the best of the best. Right. When you get up to the six standard deviations out, you're 0.01% top performer. Right. One percent is a huge difference at that level. Gigantic. Yeah. It's curious. The chest thing is also very curious. That was what was fascinating about the Queen's Gambit film. The Netflix thing. This woman is just dominating all these men. She has this superior chest mind. But in reality, that doesn't really exist very often. Right. It's weird. Like why not? Yeah. Yeah. Well, you've always made a point of MMA fight if there was a trans woman that killed a woman that probably ended, probably lawsuits would end it. Yeah. Well, I'm for people being able to do that if they want to do that. If it's a woman who's a biological woman who chooses to compete against a trans woman. And one of the examples that I've used is there's a woman named Tremaine Durand to me who's a multiple time world multi champion. She was a UFC champion. And she actually had a boxing match with a man and knocked him out. Biological man. But she's extraordinary. She is the 1% of 1% in terms of elite female combat sports athletes. Right. And so I'm in favor of her being able to make that decision to compete against a man. But to force a biological woman to compete against a trans woman in MMA, I think is criminal. I think that is crazy. And to pretend that the same thing is crazy. That doesn't make any sense to me. If there was enough, you could have their own division. Yes. That would solve it. That would solve it. And that's what that's really the that I think is the solution. That to me is the only compromise. And is there enough? I don't know. Maybe maybe if you made a division like that. Look, for the longest time, they thought there weren't enough women to compete in combat sports to justify a UFC's women's division. But now the women's division of MMA is some of the most competitive and exciting. Really? Oh my God. Yeah. There's a there's a a straw weight division, a fly weight division. There's a featherweight division, a phantom weight division. There's multiple divisions that are filled with elite female combat sports athletes. And some of those fights are fantastic. And you know, up until Ronda Rousey came into the UFC, which is not that long ago. Was it 10 years ago? When they first started having women's MMA fights in the UFC, there was only one division. It was 135 pounds. That was it. And you didn't have all these other weight classes. Now these other weight classes like fly weight in particular and straw weight, some of the most competitive. And they have incredible fights. So it's I think if you build it, they will come. And if there are that many trans female, you know, trans women MMA competitors out there, maybe if they developed a division and they had that, maybe you would see a lot of competitors that would enter that and you it would become an exciting division. Yeah. But to make them compete against biological females or excuse me to make biological females compete against people who identify as female. I think it's just insane. Right. So there I think we're thinking that fairness and justice trumps rights. Yes. Yeah, you should have the right, but it's also be fair. Yes. What's interesting in many sports is women are allowed to compete against men. Biological females are allowed to enter into certain wrestling tournaments with biological males. They're allowed to. You can do that. But we never allow biological males to compete against biological females. We never allow someone who is both biological male and identifies as male to compete against females in sports. You know, in the 1980s, I got into ultra distance cycling, you know, race across America. I did that five times. Then the 90s, I was the race director. So we had in 93 and 94 and 95, I had two women that were competing, China, Hogan and Muffy Ritz, and they were phenomenal athletes. Just really tough as could be. Now this is coast to coast. Nonstop. Every competitor has a motorhome behind them and so on. And it's just the clock never stops. And so it's a really ultra distance. And I remember in, I think it was 93 or 4, China led the entire field all the way into Colorado. And me and my staff are thinking, maybe we don't need a women's, men's division. Maybe we are the sport. They can, you know, it's all equal. Right. And, but by the end of the race, it was like a one day, like 26 hour difference between the top man and in China. And it's like, okay, I think we need, and I also talked to the women about it in, in, off season conversations. It's like, do you want a women's division? Yes. Yeah. Because there's even with ultra distance in the people who are making arguments at the time, well, maybe, you know, women can endure pain better than men. And, you know, the course of 3000 miles, rather than 100 miles, all those differences even out. And, but no, even there. And it just, it just wasn't fair to make them compete against them. And so we had two divisions. And of course we have like, most sports age divisions, you know, to, I think the first cut is at age 30, 40, 40 plus 50 plus 60 plus and so on. For obvious reasons, biological decay of testosterone and strength that just goes down in the, so to me, a male to female trans post puberty is doping. It's like taking testosterone or human growth hormone or EPR or whatever. Like, as you know, and cycling, this was a big issue. Because it makes a difference. I mean, I think Lance said it was like a 10% difference. If you do the drug cocktail, you do it right and you have somebody professional that's coaching you on this. That's a huge difference at the top level. And it would be the same if you're post puberty. So the NCAA had that rule. You know, if you go one year of testosterone suppression, post puberty, then we're going to count you as a woman. But I don't see the evidence for that at all. Then the swimming and international swimming organization finally said, no, that's that's not enough. Because post puberty, the changes have already happened. Yes. It took to Leah Thomas started dominating that they made that decision. No. Yeah, exactly. Right. Right. But there's when somebody finally, some of these women and the parents were speaking up like this is not fair. And like the boy who pointed to the emperors has no clothes, you know, finally, everybody goes, yeah, we all see it. He doesn't have clothes. Finally, somebody said something. Everybody could see this is not fair. Everybody knows it's not fair. What is that about human being so that they don't want to speak out and that we're willing to accept something that we know is not fair because culturally, that's an accepted thing. Well, part of his fear punishment, you punish the outliers, the people who speak out. And that's part of why we punishing the outliers when that seems so obvious. Okay. That's an interesting question. So there might be some complex psychology there where I get this preemptive denunciation and also virtue signaling, like if I stand out as being super virtuous, I'm going to get some points for that. Some of that, I think is going on multiple factors. And we're in the middle of it now. I think probably within five years. I mean, what five years ago, no one was talking about, was it a Ricky Dervais bit about the use of the term, a woman without a penis or whatever? We would have never uttered this sentence five years ago, whatever it was. It was really funny bit. And probably five years from now, we won't be talking about this either. Well, that's a good example because Ricky Dervais got a lot of death threats because of that. He had a really radically ramp up his security. All right. Yeah. Well, okay. So there. So he's non-canceable. Right. But what about all the comedians down here that are cancelable? They're going to probably keep their mouth shut. Yeah. But I don't know that. It's the thing is there's a reward for speaking out and saying the things that everybody thinks that, but they're afraid to say, particularly with audiences. Like when you're anonymous in a crowd and you're having a couple of cocktails and it's dark and someone says, I like, yes, finally. You know, like you see it in comedy clubs that people are taking chances because of recognizing that it's rewarded to speak out and say these things. Another thing I think back to the kind of moral progress that we might be experiencing now is we've made so much moral progress. Today's young activists that want to do something to make the the world a better place. Well, slavery, torture, civil rights, women's rights, gay rights, done. Yeah. What's the next? Oh, trans rights. Okay. I'm going to get out there. Okay. Good. That's good. But as you said, the problem is that I think that's the way of women's rights, right. Especially when it comes to athletic competition. Right. So conflicting rights. Well, you can't have everything. Right. So anyway, I think that's part of it. Like I want to do something. Right. Or like just thinking about the George Floyd protests and the BLM movement. You know, what can I do about police violence against African Americans? I'm nobody. I'm not the chief of police. I'm not the mayor. I'm just a citizen. Well, there's a march tomorrow. And we're going to go down there and we're going to voice our disapproval of the way African Americans are treated. Yes, I'm going to go down there and do it. So I feel like I'm doing something. Right. A little bit like commenting on Twitter. You know, I'm outraged by this. Like, I feel like I did a little something, right. Even though it probably doesn't do anything. How do you think this stuff all plays out? Do you think eventually it's one of those things? Like as we were talking about before, the ebb and flow of things that there's an over correction and then it's kind of bounce. I think I think you said it right. That's right. It's a pendulum. Yeah. And I think the pendulum going in this direction. Well, that's good. That's good. That's good. That's good. That's good. That's good. A little crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Real that thing in a little bit. And then overall through time, we will get moral progress because of that. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there are trends. There are, you know, there's intersects people. There are people who identify as the other sex and so on. Sure. That's real. Is it really the numbers that we're now seeing, you know, spike 2000% spike in the last two years and in these massive increases in the UK and probably some of that is social contagion. Yeah. It's sort of this is the thing to do. Some of it may be real. Well, we know social contagion is real. Yeah. We know that's real. That's a real phenomenon. Right. So to say that that can't be it seems a little disingenuous. Right. And seems like a lot of virtue signaling. Right. Right. So it's well, their counter to that is we'll societies more acceptable now, uh, accepting of people that are different. So that's why these people are coming out. But the counter to that is yeah, but it's only in a certain cohort age 15 to, age 13 to 17 or so, where the huge spike is. It's a lot of biological females too. Yeah. And it's way more. Yeah. And that's Abigail Shrires work reversible damage. I had a student, uh, maybe two years ago that came out as trans. She decided she wanted to be a man. And it's like, okay, and everybody was super curious about this. It's a small discussion seminar type class that I teach. And and I, the course of the weeks went by it would come up almost every week. It came up a lot. I thought, I wonder if she really wants to be a man or she wants to be tram. And, and I, as the course of the weeks went by, it would come up almost every week. It came up a lot. I thought, I wonder if she really wants to be a man or she wants to be trans because trans is, this was a cool thing to be. And, you know, she got loved bombed and everybody's asking her questions. What are you going to do about this? How are you going to dress? What about that? And, and you could see it was, but if it was just like, I'm just going to be a man, I'm not going to tell anybody I'm just going to change the way I'm living my life. I think that would not be as interesting as rewarding. There would be no social, you know, reinforcement for that. So I think in part, again, multiple things, some of its real, some of the social Katea, I think some of it is this kind of a trendy thing to be. It's, you know, Andrew Sullivan writes about this. It's not cool to be gay anymore. The lesbians go, right? It's no more lesbians. They're all gone. And he makes the point that since he's a gay guy, he could do this, you know, that when he was a teenager, boy, 13, 14, 50, he finds himself attracted to other guys and not women. And what if he was told at that time, you're not gay, you're actually a woman. You're, you're just in the wrong body. And then that's kind of in a way he says it's kind of homophobic. Yes. Yeah. My friend Tim says that. He's gay. He has that argument about it that a lot of it is homophobic. But it's really homophobic in their hearts. I don't know, but it has that taint to it. Yes. That it's, there's, well, you know, I mean, that's also the argument that it's anti women, you know, that's, you're, you know, you're changing what it means to be a woman. You know, that's, that's the film, you know, what is a woman when you watch that film and you see the, the argument when Matt Walsh has these deadpan questions to these people and let's them like just speak their, their thoughts about it. It's like, whoa, I who thought this was where we're at right now, very strange. Mm hmm. Right. Well, there's a lot of confusion there between gender and sex. What do you mean? Right. Find this stuff. I wrote about this, you know, fuzzy sets. It's kind of a family resemblance. You know, what is a game? What is a chair? Well, chair is, you know, it's got legs, four legs. Well, this one has five. It's got a back. What about a bar stool? It doesn't have a back. What about a bean bag chair? That doesn't have legs or a back, you know, and so yeah, but I know when I see one, right? So I mean, so we know what a man is. We know what a woman is for the most part, we can identify him. But there's going to be a little fuzzy around the fuzzy edges. So we're like, okay, right. But is it really a whole other category? Right. So from an evolutionary biology perspective, if we really had more than two sexes, there'd be like a billion, you know, of the third sex. Yeah. Yeah. If that was a real thing, rather than as an anomaly. Well, that's one of the weirder things about homosexuality in general is that there's not really, like an evolutionary, like if you thought about like the reproduction of whatever it means to be homosexual, well, it's sort of like eliminates that. Like how is it that homosexuality has always maintained a certain percentage of our society? It's really interesting just from an objective perspective of looking at what it is, like as a in terms of natural selection. Like, there was a community that had a joke about that, Otto and George. Otto and George was a puppet act from New York hilarious comedian. And the puppet would say crazy shit. And he would go, what are you saying? You know, like that's how Ray, how could you say that? And his thing was like about the gays, he goes, he goes from a bunch of people that can't reproduce where the fuck are they all coming from? It was very funny. Funny because it has kind of an element of a true question. Right. Why is there homosexuality and it's actually reproducing species like ours? Yeah. So evolutionary theorists have debates about this. You know, maybe they're kind of surrogate parents or pseudo-parents or faux parents to their siblings offspring, you know, their uncles and aunts. And that, you know, lets them get their genes for homosexuality in the next generation or something, because they're not reproducing directly. Okay, maybe, but you know, it's not clear if it's that or if there's maybe there's no adaptive purpose to it at all. It's just a by-product. It's just things happen. There's just kind of randomness. Yeah. It seems like that. Because I've heard, well, there's a spectrum of like masculine females and feminine men. The problem with that, thought that theory is there's a lot of very masculine gay men. Right. So that's like, well, what is that? Right. That doesn't, that like a giant monkey wrench into your equation. Right. It doesn't make any sense. Right. It seems to be just an aspect of human beings. Right. But again, going to like moral progress, it is a clear sign of moral progress. The difference between when I was 11, my friend's dad, who was so angry that people were gay and they were getting married versus today, where it's like very accepted for the most part. Right. You know, it's time to percentage of people. I'm sure still over problem with it. Like really extreme religious fundamentalness. But for the most part, society is kind of accepted that. Well, because religion endorsed a marriage initially and then the state got involved. Its original purpose was reproduction. Yes. And so that was why there was resistance by the church all the way up until really 20 tens against it because you're not making babies. Well, what about older couples or couples that are infertile that are heterosexual but infertile? You know, and there's always exceptions to this. But that's kind of how it started. The purpose of marriage initially was to increase the population of either your religion or your government. Right. I mean, even today, you know, if you're married, as you know, you get a tax break, I assume you do here in Texas too. But the federal government gives you a tax break. If you're married, if you have kids, you get another tax break. In a way, the government say, we want you to be married and we want you to have kids and we want you to be a homeowner by the way. We'll let you deduct your interest on your mortgage. And so the government does these sort of things as religion did. You know, the whole primogeniture and inheritance of the wealth to the first son and so on. All these rules that we're based on, how can we grow our numbers and compete with the other religions? So, fecundity is a proxy for religious success. You just have a lot of babies. There's only two ways to grow a religion. You have babies or you have converts. It's hard to convert people. Those are one of the things that people were really worried about with the reversal of Roe v Wade is that gay marriage was going to be next on the chopping block. There was discussions about that. Which is, you know, that's a clear anti progressive. It is. I'm worried about that. I'm hoping that this is just a couple of far out GOP candidates that are trying to peel to their base by say, you know, we're going to take away gay marriage and by the way, we're going to get rid of contraception too. We want women. It's just being the baby's. I'm hoping that this is that the GOP in mass says, no, no, that's not what we're about. It is wild that in 2022, that's still up for discussion. The people are literally talking about getting rid of contraception. Getting rid of gay marriage, getting rid of contraception like, hey, hey, hey, hey, but isn't that the pendulum though? Like what we're talking about. With moral progress is going to be an over correction. That some people, you know, the outliers of the religious fundamentalists who don't want any progress. They want, they basically want things to go back to like a religious fundamentalist version of what a Christian society should be. And there's some people that are out there and it's not a small number. That's what's spooky. Christian nationalism is a thing. It's getting big. It's getting bigger. Michael Flynn, you know, the general. There's a new documentary out of, oh, CNN film about him in which this is a, he's got huge crowds in which he's basically saying we need to return America. America great again, but make America Christian again is what he's saying. He's one of those QAnon guys. Yeah. Which is if you've watched the documentary into the storm, if you've seen the HBO's it's amazing. That's so good. And I had the gentleman on who created that and just what a fucking wild thing it is to see the actual people that created it. And to see what a scam they pulled off and how weird it is that people just hopped on board and they really did think that there was some people working behind the scenes that were working for God and country and they were going to expose all these pedophiles and satanists and the deep state. Oh my God. It's amazing. Do you think when I talk about this in the book, do you think when people say I think they're, you know, they tell poster, yeah, I think there could be something to the QAnon or piece of gator, whatever. Did they really believe it? I mean, the one guy did have your well, she went to that comment ping pong pizzeria with his AR 15 and shut up the place. But most people don't do that. You know, if you really thought there was a pedophile ring, a crime going on and the police wouldn't do anything about it. Wouldn't you go there? Wouldn't you want to do something? So I'm thinking, I'm wondering, do these people really believe it or they just kind of like, well, I don't know. It seems like the kind of thing those Democrats would do. And I don't like them. Or there's a little bit of that tribalism. You know, I just think there's also a little bit of like what we were talking about earlier about conspiracy theories. They're exciting. For you to have secret information that's not available to everybody else that could expose, that's a big thing always. We're going to expose these people. We're going to expose the evil, expose the Satanists and expose the pedophiles and expose there's there's a lot of people that don't have real excitement in their actual life. And through online activities and message boards and social media groups and and the like they they they find purpose. And one of the purposes is like to take down the evil empire, to take down the deep state. You know, there's there's a real inclination towards that. It's like the hero's journey, right? The just the Campbell, you know, you go out and conquer the beast and come back and it kind of makes your life meaningful. I worked on this Netflix documentary on brainwashing and the producers found this woman in Texas who went down the rabbit all the Q and on rabbit hole. She was very successful and intelligent, educated, good looking, married with kids, the whole thing. And then she talks about this, you know, during COVID, that the shutdown, my business sort of collapse, I was bored out of my skull, I'm online all day. The next thing you know, like six months later, her husband's given in her ultimatum. It's Q and on or me. She actually blip, she had the phone. She's here's the message. She left me. Wow. And she said initially she said, this is the most important thing I'll ever do. I am exposed to crime. I'm changing the world. I am I am a warrior. Yeah. I'm out of here. And then a couple months later, I guess she woke up and went, what the fuck did I do? My husband's leaving me, I'm losing my kids and how's what? How did she get so wrapped up in it? Did she ever talk about it afterwards? Yeah, just just again, the daily kind of feed online, which could find websites on anything. That one in particular was like particularly engrossing for some people. It became their whole life and that was documented into the storm. With this poor people and some of them that were Obama supporters that just flipped over to you know, now I realize they're the bad ones and we're the good ones and we're the Patriots and it's crazy. Well, yeah, and there's entertainment value. These things are really interesting and fun to read about. That goes along with all the other conspiracy theories. Like I went into it unfortunately last night. I went down a rabbit hole bigfoot. You did. Yes. Yes. I went down the bigfoot rabbit hole last night. Boy, that's an old one. It's an old one. There was a video that showed up in my YouTube feed and I clicked on it and then you know how YouTube on the right hand side gives you maybe you want to watch this? Yes, of course. And so I forget what the initial video was but I went three or four videos down the hole and I got to a professor out of Oregon. Oh, I've actually melted. Yes, I know that guy. I've actually had him on the podcast before when I was doing that Joe Rogan questions everything. He was a guy that said that he would cut off one of his fingers if you could find out the bigfoot with real. Oh my God. So I went down and I watched him being interviewed and then, oh, now I remember it was when I was in England, I was watching a show on television that was like one of those discovery shows about monsters. And it was like just a clearly bullshit show where they're like, you know, we're going to go find them. We're going to use night vision and we're going to the woods and these people all believe it. And so I'm like, how many episodes of this fucking thing? And then I started. Exactly. It was so met. But this professor who I think he's a professor of anthropology. Yeah. He's a legitimate professor. Yeah. It's University of Oregon. Yeah. Well, this is again my argument why the rational believe the irrational, these are not uneducated stupid people wearing tin foil at. Yeah. No, they're not. They're smart people. But smart people and educated people are better at rationalizing beliefs they hold for non smart reasons. Yeah. Right. So Dino Reinhold Mezner, the great alpinas at the summit at Everest. I think seven times without oxygen considered the greatest climber of all time. And Jeremy German alpinas. He wrote a book about bigfoot. Yeti, you know, because he's heard all about Yeti. And he had told all the shurpers, okay, look, if you see this thing, you know, it's just wake me up at the tent. So one day they're like, boss boss, it's there. It's there Yeti. He's like, oh my god, oh my god. So they go, they hike and hang around the corner and there's this big bear. And he's like, that's Yeti. Yeah, that's Yeti. It's like, oh, okay. Yeah. Yeah, that's certainly a lot of it. A lot of his bears do walk upright all the time. Yeah. Especially if they get an injured front paw of the capable walk over. I've seen in the wild. That's fair. Oh my god. Yeah. Black bears from very close from 20 feet or 20 yards away. I've seen them walk multiple steps on their back feet. Now if you were looking at that through the forest, like a deep forest, like, like, well, I don't think it's a coincidence that the Pacific Northwest is where they cite a lot of them because there's a rainforest out there. They're so dense. It's like the way I describe it as like a box of q-tips, like seeing through the q-tips, you can't possibly see. So if you saw a bear walking on two legs through, like, a couple of trees and then your mind starts going, oh my god, did I just see a gorilla or some sort of an ape creature? It's big foot. And then you have it in your head that you saw a big foot because you saw a bear, you know, a bear, a big black bear is a seven foot animal. Right. It's a big creature. They're walking upright like that. You would assume that that is a giant Sasquatch. Yeah. Just saw it. Yeah. And then your mind starts working on your memory sucks anyway, especially with the oddick, you know, extremely novel events like that. And so then you get it in your head that you saw a Sasquatch. Well, this is how illusions work. You know, those auditory illusions where they put the words on the top of the screen and they play the voice. You can't quite make out what it is, but when you see the words that you can flip back and forth back and forth. So this works because when you can't quite tell what it is, then a q, a prime, it's called a primeing will direct your brain to hear one thing or the other thing or see things. This is how these visual illusions work. So it's always degraded information, right? The shadow, I can't quite see it, to squint and use your imagination. I could sort of see the two legs and maybe a little. And yeah. But for biologists, it's pretty simple to show me the body and I'll accept it. Yeah. You know who doesn't believe in big foot? The people that are in the woods all the time. All of my friends that are hunters, like the most extreme hardcore guys who backpack and go deep into the mountains for like, you know, weeks at a time, like none of them. Zero sightings. Really? Right. The sightings of the casuals that people don't spend any time in the woods. Well, you know, crypto's all I just say, well, we didn't know about the mountain gorilla until 1903. But we know. But we would know by now because people would get a example because this is fucking really clear video of the mountain gorilla. Right. Right. The thing about the Bigfoot thing that is, you know, there's always an element of something in there. The thing about Bigfoot that's fascinating is the Gigantopithecus is that it did coincide with the human beings of 100,000 years ago. So we know for sure then. So you would imagine that maybe 50,000 years ago there were some of them still. And maybe it's legend and folklore. There's many things that are passed on through myth and discussions and stories. And that's probably what it was. And at one point in time, there was a gigantic bipedal hominid that was eight to 10 feet tall. We know they're real. We know that's a, but it's just an animal that existed. Just like in a rangutan, just like a gorilla, chimpanzee, there was a hominid, a large sort of primate creature that was really enormous, but died out. Given our propensity to stereotype things, imagine if Neanderthals had not gone extinct. And they were still around. Right. And they were somehow different from us or whatever. Would we enslave them? Would we kill them off? Would we treat them equally? That's probably what the humans, the Homo sapiens did to them. Right. There's different theories about that. Well, so 2% of our genome is Neanderthal. Yeah. I call this the Steven Stills explanation. You know, Steven Stills, if you can't be with the one you love, love the one you're with. Right. Well, I'm alone in the cage tonight. And there's no Homo sapiens around, but hey, here's a Neanderthal. Yeah. It makes you wonder, like, was it Homo sapiens females that bred with the Neanderthals or was it Neanderthal females that Homo sapiens male? Wonder what was the pranominant? Well, given human sexual psychology and the differences between men and women and out, indiscriminate men are compared to women, women are much more risk averse. Yeah. About that, they have fewer partners. They want fewer partners. Probably male to female. Probably. Yeah. Makes sense. But also then, you know, who know, I mean, we're talking about an incredibly aggressive time. You know, how much of that was rape. Yes. Like a lot of animal breeding is basically, right? Yeah. A lot of the way, like, you see koala bears mate. Yeah. But cute little fellas. It's disturbing. It's pretty ruthless and violent and cats. You know, when you see cats, it's horrific. You wonder, like, it's also the human species is so fascinating too, because they're always finding like Dennis Olvins, there's always finding these new branches of human, like how many of them were there. And then there's probably the people. Yeah, the hobbit. Probably at least a dozen bipedal primates. Probably at the same time. The island of flora is hobbit people. That is fascinating. Because I think they boiled that one down to what was like 15, 20,000 years ago. Right. Not that long ago. Crazy. After Neanderthals, when they did. Yes, there were these little three foot tall and they don't really know what they looked like other than, you know, guesswork, but they think they were hairy. Right. And there's a little three foot tall bipedal people like things that were a separate branch of the evolutionary, you know, chain of primates. Remember when that story broke, it's a pretty dense forest at island. It was like, maybe they're still there. Yes. And it holds up and some gave. Well, there's a belief that there's a thing called an orang pendec. You ever heard of that one? Orang pendec is very similar in stature and description. And there's, I think they believe they're in Vietnam. I think it's maybe Cambodia or Vietnam. See, see, we can find that. But that is one of those mythological creatures. That until they found the Flores people, I think they found them and I want to say is the 2000s. The late 90s or the 2000s that they discovered those. And then they started saying, well, hey, maybe there was something to that orang pendec thing too. Because it's a similar part of the world in a similar shape creature. But they were talking about there it is. Have we found evidence of the elusive orang pendec? Hmm. Interesting. Describes last month in expedition, the jungles of Sumatra. Interesting. The trail of the, so even the age of satellite mapping, glo-biddishing, there are mains, lost worlds where few humans tread, where species of animals unrecognized by science live. I'll say this name. Corinne C.'s said, lot national park in West Sumatra is one such place. The size of a small country, it's dim, steamy interior has never been explored properly. And last month, I returned to these jungles for the fourth time to track an elusive and yet unrecorded species of ape known to the locals as the orang pendec or short man. This year's expedition was the largest of its kind to ever visit the area. consisted of two teams. The first made up of Adam Davies expedition leader for the Center for 14 zoology, Dave Archer and Drew Sanderson and myself would concentrate on the highland jungles around Lake Gunung, Gunung, Tugea. I'm just guessing. The second team consisted of Dr. Baba, Baba, Baba, Baba, Baba, Baba, Baba, Baba, okay. Was it say before, a team left one guide, Sahar introduced us to an eyewitness called Pak and Tis who claimed to have seen an orang pendec in the garden area in April. He described this around three feet tall, but with massive shoulders and chest, he pointed to a piece of washing on the line to indicate the color of its hair. A mid tan, it had an ape-like face, walked upright on two legs while swinging its arms. Huh. What else? Well, you need a breeding population for it. If they last centuries or thousands of years, you can't just have one or two. Right. But if this thing is living in an unexplored area, it's a small country. Yeah. That's enough. Yeah. That would be amazing. I mean, now that we know that it exists, we have plenty of fossil evidence and bone evidence and DNA that points to that. Homo florissiences. Right. Given how many of these species went extinct, where the only one's still around, imagine if it hadn't been, if we had gone extinct, and the entertles survived. Would they be making spaceships and internet computers? So it's a question of progress, evolutionary and cultural progress. Is there a certain inevitability to it, which brings us back to the study question? You can have a planet in which life gets all the way up to the level of the entertles, complexity with big brains and hands and art and so on. And maybe you never detect them because they never get to a stage where they make radio technology and space ships and things like that. Is that possible? See, that's a, I'm just kind of asking rhetorically. Seems like it could be. I mean, we probably would have never gotten to where we were if it wasn't for the asteroid impact that killed the dinosaurs. Right. Right. So so much of it is kind of chance. And you know, in the end of the day, it looks like they had language based on the skull size back here and some other things here and their genome. It looks like they had the genes for language, maybe something like not ours totally conceptually, but maybe something like that. Would they, where they held back by us? You know, because they had Europe to themselves for about 300,000 years. But their toolkits don't get progressively more complex and their art doesn't get more complex like ours does when we got to Europe and they went extinct and then you see that kind of progress. So it's an open question that no one knows the answer to, but it touches on the setting anything because is there kind of a directionality to evolution where you end up with communicating technologically sophisticated civilizations or is it pretty random? And you could get pretty far and then we never know that they were there. Well, I think if you think about the absolutely enormous numbers of possibilities, you probably have all of them. You probably have, you know, places where dinosaurs just rule and that's it and, you know, in shrewd stage shrews. The impact never happened on the planet. Or you get to something where you have a completely different sort of an environment and things progress far more rapidly. And they also don't have the concern with asteroidal impacts or natural disasters. It's a much more stable environment on these planets. I mean, you think of the variability would be endless. Just the sheer numbers of planets you're dealing with. The question is like, once we find life somewhere else, then it all becomes open ended. Once we find absolute evidence that there's a life form on this other spinning body that's circling around a star, we got one. Okay. Now we have some moving creatures that exist on this planet, Holy cow. Now we know for sure. That interesting discussion with Richard Dawkins at one time about to what extent that aliens would look anything like this. Like the alien abduction stories. It's always this bipedal primate with the big eyes and the bulbous head and no ears and so forth. But one of the chances they'd look anything like us evolved on some other planet, right? They could be like octopuses or something. But Richard points out, it may not be his random as I'm describing because Simon Conway Morris, who studies convergent evolution, shows that based on physics of water, air, and land, to move around on the land, you've got to have something like legs to move through the water. You have to have kind of a smooth, fusiform body to slide through such a dense medium. If you're in the air, you've got to have something like wings, right? And so you're going to have probably creatures with most of the century apparatus and brains on one end, waste disposal system on the other end, some arms and legs to move around on the land. You could get something like a bipedal primate, maybe a mammal or whatever it could be a dinosaur that was bipedal. And if you have a big enough brain, they could have baked tools and so on. So it could be something like that. It could be. But then you also have the intelligent life that we know exists on earth that doesn't have the ability to manipulate its environment like orcas and dolphins, which is fascinating because the orca and dolphin have enormous brains. They have complex languages that we can't decipher. They have very sophisticated social systems. And but they don't possess the ability to manipulate their environment like we do. They never needed it. They can move through 3D space. They're inside the water. They're the apex predators, particularly orcas. They have no threat. Right. That is really fascinating. Again, you could have a planet with that and we never know that they're. Right. Unless we go there and see them. Is there any evidence that there were any dinosaurs that had any sort of advanced larger brains? No, not that I know of. Although people like Jack Horner, the paleontologist, he thinks they're much more social and communicating in a social way than we've given them credit for. They weren't dumb. Not big brains like you're thinking of like the cetaceans. Cetaceans have big brains to the body size. There you would expect more intelligence. But yeah, well, I don't know. Probably not. They never had tools, for example. So they don't really need them. But it seems like super intelligent life forms, they're either like us or they're like a dolphin and an orca on this planet. There's a orcros. Yes, cros. Right. Sagan was always careful about this anthropomorphizing what the aliens would be like. You know, just kind of the chauvinism of it. They're going to be like us. Well, how many species on earth are like us? Right. None. Right. We can't even talk to an octopus or a dolphin. Right. We don't know what they're saying. We can't talk to them and they grew up in their mammals. Right. And they're on the same planet as us. How are we going to communicate with aliens? This was an interesting group that Sagan was part of this dolphin. It was with the society of the dolphin society or something. John C. Lilly was this. Oh, yeah. Sure. I forget the name of it. Then he started giving dolphins LSD and stuff. Yeah. We also had that experiment where he had the woman living in the home with a dolphin and she had to masturbate the dolphin to get it to pay attention. Right. And so they killed the study once that came out. Right. Which is unfortunate. It's like, but he was also like, he invented the sensory deprivation tank. Right. He was a really out there guy. And he was in decettamine for whatever weird reason. He would take intramuscular ketamine and then get in the sensory deprivation tank. I've heard you talk about this. I just want to ask you directly, you know, when somebody takes LSD or one of the others and they feel like it's a door opening doors of perception into some other reality. Is there really a reality or is it just brain chemistry? It's a good question. I think you're thinking of a dimethyl trip to me. Yeah. The reason why dimethyl trip to me is so interesting is because it's endogenous. The human brain produces it. It's it's it's it's trackable. You can find it. And now through the Cottonwood Research Foundation, they've found that the brain, it's at least the thing was the pineal gland. But I had Dr. Rick Strassman on who conducted the first FDA approved studies on psychedelics through dimethyl with dimethyl trip to me and where they were IV dosing. conducted the first FDA approved studies on psychedelics through dimethyl- with dimethyl-triptamine, where they were IV dosing these people. And I actually had a conversation with Graham Hancock when I was in London this weekend, and he said that they're doing some at the University of London now, too, that are very fascinated, where they're doing the same sort of thing, where they're using IV trips, so they can prolong the DMT state for very long periods of time and then come back with these very similar descriptions of what's going on. Oh, who fucking knows? Who knows what is happening? If that is a doorway that opens up in the mind that leads you to another dimension, or whether it's the human consciousness, the imagination, and the visual cortex interacting with these incredibly powerful psychoactive compounds that give a similar visual hallucination to everyone. You know, I don't think there's a way to know right now. Right, so this is kind of an epistemological problem. What should I believe is true. I don't know about that because what if, so Richard Dawkins and I have this kind of standing invitation to go to this ayahuasca place in Costa Rica, and you know, Richard had a stroke. He's, I don't think I better do this. And I think I probably won't do it, but I'm curious. Now, what if I did it? And I came back. I said, oh my God, Joe, I've been a skeptic and I'm in a materialist and I've discovered that there's this other reality. And you go, well, how do you know, it's true? I said, because I experienced it. And then you go, well, how can I know it's true? Here, you try it. And then you go, yeah, I went. I did it. You're right. But how does Jamie know? Well, he has to try it. Is it? How do we get out of the loop that it's it may just be brain chemistry and nothing more than that? Or you're actually going somewhere. If we hit a no epistemological wall, we can't know. I don't know what the answer to that is. But I do think that it would benefit you to try it just so that you could experience something that's so profoundly unique that it throws into question what reality is overall. Because we think of reality as only being things that we can measure, things that we can touch, things that we can put on a scale and you as the editor of skeptic magazine, particular, you know, you're very skeptical about things. But what you experience with the most potent of hallucinogens, whether it's mushrooms, whether it's so sibern or whether it's dimethyl triptamine or any of these really, really potent ones, you experience something that seems so much more vivid than reality itself. It's very confusing. It's like what is happening here? Am I actually interacting with entities or are there thoughts that I have in my mind that are so potent and profound like things like creativity and love and emotions that if you attach them to this psychedelic compound, they dance for you in a way that seems like they're an actual entity. Who knows? But I would like you to do it. I'd like you to do it just because I respect your opinion and I'd like to see what your thought is when you come back from. I would imagine I would have a profound experience because most people do, right? I don't think I've talked to anybody who hasn't had a profound experience, or at least an interesting one. And I read Oliver Saks's memoir, who's on a biography, where he did this stuff and he decided it was just all brain chemistry. But it was super profound, like he's in a restaurant and the people all have these fly-like heads. Which one did he do? I think he did LSD or maybe... Actually, I can't remember now, but he writes about the brains and neurologists and so on. And it's like, okay. So what does this mean? What is he saying? And how would it be different? When I read about people who have near-death experiences, then I read Oliver Saks's experience. Or you talk about opening them, one of Sam Harris's books, he talks about taking... What did he take? I think it was LSD. It might have been LSD. It's super profound, sense of love for his friend there, and all these really super rich experiences. But he's pretty much hardcore materialist on this. So I'm curious to try to see where I'd fall. I'm like, oh yeah, I know this is just an interesting experience. It's just brain chemistry. Or what I'd be like, maybe Graham. Oh, there's this whole world out there that I had no about. And here's what I'm worried about, Joe. I don't... Like if we were having this conversation 500 years ago and somebody's telling us about dark energy and dark manner and quantum physics, and we'd be like, this is bullshit. And then I don't want to miss. Like, oh my God, there is this I don't think there's a danger in you doing it. So I think you should do it. Okay. Because I don't think, you know, it's... The thing about dimethyltrope to me in particular, which is what Ayahuasca, that's a psychoactive compound, is that it's... It's endogenous to the human body and it's one of the most transient drugs ever observed. It's really... The body brings you back to baseline very quickly, especially with the smoked version of DMT. The oral one is different. The Ayahuasca, you know, because you're orally, it's broken down in the gut by mono-aiming oxidase. And so what Ayahuasca is is a combinatori medication where you're taking DMT from one plant and MO inhibitors from another plant. And that's what allows you to take it orally. So it's a longer acting, but less profound in terms of like the flash of DMT is so much more vibrant apparently. But it's not... It doesn't seem to be dangerous. It seems like everybody who takes it comes back and you've been... Yes. I've only done DMT, which is the more potent version of it. The Ayahuasca version I haven't done yet, but I'm doing it soon. And that is supposed to be the long term. And the thing about the benefit, the long one, seems to be that the more you can interact with that state, the more you come back with life lessons. So we'll say, well, there was something about the Ayahuasca where you revisit dark memories and bad things in your life. And I'm not sure what to go through. Some people have it. Some people have it. My friend Tom just did and he said it was all good. There was no mad thoughts and bad memories at all. It was all beautiful. I think you can kind of prime your mind and prepare yourself with meditation and sort of put yourself in a good state of mind when you enter into that experience. Right. So you do this with somebody, a guide or somebody that you can ask. Yes. Yeah. Generally. Yeah. Yeah. So here this, you know, again, back what is truth. So if you channel your inner Jordan Peterson and he's say, well, it doesn't matter if it affects the person's life, then it's true. Whatever that means that word. I'm kind of locked in the kind of empiricist scientific view of truth. You know, it's out there. It's an actual physical reality of some kind of measurable and so on. But what if it's not that? What if it's truth is just well, it matters for me. Like I believe I have free will, maybe you're a determinist. But I don't care. I feel like I'm making free choices matters to me. Right. It's my truth. I don't mean this in that kind of I know what you're saying. Postmodern way, but just maybe it is a postmodern way. The way I've described it is imagine if you could have a conversation with God, absolutely real conversation with God where you could go to a place and have a conversation with this loving knowing entity that knows all and sees through you and explains to you that we're connected in this unseen cosmic way. And if you just address that in your life and treat people that way, you will live a better life and you have this brief meeting with God and it's very profound. And then you come back and you have to sort of come to grips with what you've experienced. Well, that you wouldn't be able to measure either that feeling that the experience, how would you be able to prove to people that you had a conversation with God? You would just have to like learn from that experience yourself and somehow another, not try not to slip back into the human folly and all the bad behavior and thought patterns that we've all existed with. Well, psychedelics in the most profound breakthrough way are like that. They are like having a conversation with God and whether or not it's a hallucination or whether or not it's actually meeting and interacting with all knowing entities, the experience is the same. So whether it's real or whether it's an imagination or a hallucination, the profundity, the profound nature of the experience is the same. So I don't know if it's real or not real. Maybe that's not even the right question. Right. We do have a problem with wanting things to be measurable because that's how we've gotten this far. Right. We've gotten this far. It works. If you take 20 tylenols, you'll be dead. But if you take one, it'll fix your headache. Right. Right. Yeah. So we're big on measuring things, which is important. You know how much this is a heavy table. You don't want to put it on your back. Right. You know, like we always it's measurably heavy. Yes, but these things are not measurable and that's one of the more interesting things about them that these psychedelic experiences are not measurable. And they're very personal and they're very profound. And I don't think it's I don't think it would hurt you at all. I think it would help you. All right. I'll do it. All right. We're in. Where is it? Right. You're going to shut the camera off right now. What if that is God? What if somebody had one of these trips way back 5,000 10,000 years ago and said, I talked to God and they did in their head. And other people went, you know, like that Ricky Dervais movie, the invention of line. He comes out and they think he talked to God. And he knows it. And it's like, Oh, because he can't lie. Right. We know that's maybe it's like that. And that's what the scholars out of the University of Jerusalem felt was the source of the burning bush. Right. They think it's the acacia tree and the decaciate tree is rich in DMT. Right. Right. And they think that that's what if that triggered the whole thing. Well, you know, that is also John Marco Legros, the thoughts sacred mushroom in the cross. That's right. I forgot about that. Right. Right. And he was a scholar who was assigned to be one of the people that is suffering the Dead Sea Scrolls. And after 14 years of working on it, it was his belief that the Christian religion was really initially about consumption of psychedelic mushrooms and fertility rituals. It's but you know, good luck trying to decipher that. And find out if it's right. Yeah. Yeah. So when someone like myself or Richard Dawkins says, you know, the did the resurrection actually happen to Jesus really come back from the dead? And then you have someone like Jordan say, well, it's metaphorically true or it's mythically true. And you know, people like Richard are like, what? What does that mean? Right. What does that mean? But to somebody who says, I believe it and it makes my life better, that's my truth. You know, who am I to say, no, it's the bet it's not true. You see what I'm going that. These are kind of conflicting conversations I have with myself. I've changed my stance on religion over the years. And then I think that the real benefit is that it acts as a moral scaffolding for a lot of people. And whether or not those things are true that clearly whether they're true or not, whether there's the origin was actually the word of God. Clearly they've been affected by human beings. Clearly human, when you read things in the Bible that treat women a second class citizens and can don't slavery and talk about murdering people for, you know, disobeying. Clearly the work of man is involved in there somewhere because every, you know, and we know people are full of shit. And we know that they rely. Yeah, they rely in order to, you know, to prop up their better interests. Yeah. And there's some, just clearly some of that in religion. But there's also a moral scaffolding involved in religion that seems to be very beneficial to some people because it allows them to live their life with a structure that they think is for the greater good. And a meaning, yeah, and that helps them get by in life. Right. Yeah. So if you think, well, what's the meaning of all in 14 billion years, there'll be no universe or whatever it is. Then what's the point, right? That's essential angst. Yeah, that's what the people feel. But to me, that's I call that, you know, what's that, what do I call it? The, who was the Woody Allen character in, Annie Hall, where he goes back as a child. He won't do his homework. So his mom takes him to the psychiatrist. Why won't you do your homework? Because the universe is expanding. What has that got to do? Well, one day the universe is going to all blow up because it's expanding. There's no point in doing my homework. And she says, what has that got to do? You live in Brooklyn, and Brooklyn's not expanding. Yeah. Yeah, that was a great scene. So, you know, it's the end of the others. That's the wrong level of analysis. You shouldn't think about your meaning of life, you know, 14 billion years. It won't have mattered what you do today. But it matters today to the people that you affect. Yes. It was interesting too that you were talking about this earlier. I'll be seeing her. That was this. Oh, yeah. Yeah. You were talking about this earlier that a lot of the, like, even like the woke attitudes that people have and the, a lot of the progressive dogma that people talk about, it seems to be religious in nature. It seems to be that we almost have like a default way of looking at certain things. And that if we are atheists and we are separated from this moral scaffolding that is imparted upon us by religion, we'll find it in other things that we have culturally agreed upon. Right. Right. So, it's back to that question. Why don't we have to punish people who don't accept the dogma? I mean, why would that make a difference? What do I care what you think? Well, it does matter because we're social and if you challenge me, that may undermine my worldview. So, I need to stop on that. And I need you to be in agreement with me because it gives me comfort. Right. Right. It's like there's certain people out there that you could get that with it. There's people that don't like if you have an android phone. Right. Like you should have Apple. I am Apple. You should be Apple. Why don't you switch over to Apple? They try to convince you. There's people that will convince you to go to AT&T Verizon. Socks. Why you have the right? There's people want you to be on the same page as them with everything because it affirms that their choices were good. Right. You know? Yeah. Yeah. Right. So, we get because we get our truths in part socially. Like other people guide us in our youth and professors and our teachers and books and experts and we determine what's true and part by what other people believe. So, you do depend on that. Yeah. Because none of us are smart enough to figure out the world on our own. So, we have to have other people. That's why we need communication like that. But the other people sometimes are wrong. Right. Yeah. And so, if our tribe believes, like all this tribal conspiracy, this is what our tribe believes is what we do. Right. And so, to challenge that may make me feel like I'm not part of my tribe anymore. Where's my moorings? Right. This is my group. Right. Right. You know. And so, if you're Catholic, you believe this. If you're Mormon, you believe that. If you do, you should believe this. And, you know, that's like I always point out to Christians who this theologians that I debate on. You know, the resurrection really happened. Here's the arguments. Here's the six best arguments. You know, the empty tomb that, you know, Mary was there. And then the body was gone. And this and that and this thing are in the side. And what not. Why, if these arguments are so good, why don't Jews accept Jesus as the Messiah who was crucified and resurrected? Well, if they understood the arguments, they would know that it's like, they understand the arguments. And these are smart rabbis that know a lot. Yeah. Right. It's that it's that just not that's not their truth. It's that that's not their religion. That's not it. Yeah. That's the real problem with religion. There's so much variety. Right. So there's no way to there's no way to run the experiment, which is the right one. Right. There's no experiment you can run to get if a Martian came here and said, okay, what's the right religion? Right. They'd be able to world war to claim the proper religion to express to the Martians. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Right. So I do think, again, if we live, you know, if you're chronically frozen and came back a thousand years from now, and you found out all this stuff that we're talking about, oh, this was this, that's the explanation. Oh, dang. I thought that was bullshit. Right. So I don't want to do that, but there may be these, you know, mysterious mysteries, you know, about the mysterious, these are the philosophers who think there are brains are just not structured or big enough to solve certain problems. We just can't know, like where the universe come from, ultimately, before the big bang, you know, why is there something rather than nothing God's existence or free will, you know, there's just certain things that are conceptually kind of don't make sense for our brains, like consciousness, you know, that this is why it's the hard problem of consciousness. It may be the wrong question. It may just, it just is full stop. You know, why is there a universe? I don't know. It just is. Well, it's also if you think about this stage of evolution that we currently exist in, we think of this as the pinnacle. But if you went back to the early hominids and you tried to express any of the thoughts that we have today or looked at the civilization that we've created, the cities, the flying airships and the satellite images and the fucking video flying through your cell phone to someone in New Zealand, instantaneous, right? All of it is witchcraft and voodoo and chaos. If you keep going, if we keep going in whatever capacity, if we evolve to a million years from now, we're going to look back on this is like what a bunch of goofs would a bunch of silly primitive people that couldn't even read each other's minds. Right. And then there's lying to each other and pretending polygraph tests are real and using it, not a regression to try to uncover past truths and God. I know. I don't want to be that guy. No. But I don't want to be a sucker too and believe bullshit. They are. You fell for that one. They're in your book. It's good to win in this. So it's available right now. Michael Schurmer, conspiracy why the rational believe the irrational. Do we come to any conclusions? I think the conclusion was you have to read the book. You have to read the book. Did you do the audio book? I did. I read it. I said to the I said to the audio book. But I wanted to make sure that you read it. I like reading. I like it when authors read their own. I do too. I do too. So much better. So much better. Even if they don't have a great voice. I don't like my voice, but at least I know it's coming from that. Right. Acceptance, Stephen King reads his books. You shouldn't do that. Oh, I haven't heard the people do that. He's terrible. Well, great author, but not so good at the. For novels, I think it, but voice actually would be good. I think so. All right. Well, thank you. I appreciate you. Nice to see you again. Bye, everybody.