The Jerogean experience. Yeah, but I think that there's this very little that people really, you know, the level of understanding that people have like a badgen The fact that we were fucking around with a nuclear bomb so like 70 years ago. They know and even really knew what was happening It's just like accidental like just dropping them all the time in the ocean. Oh, yeah Like fucking crazy as we're insane dude nuts. I just want to a friend of mine the other night at dinner Like this is what it looked like and you see the look on his face when the the fucking mile high wall of water comes out of the ocean It's it's so big. It doesn't even make sense. It's the best. Holy fuck right now When everyone's talking about this Russian hypersonic missile and like can you believe this weapon that like Russia has like it was like Wait a second the US spends like 10 to 20 times them on money Weapons and Russia that we have all that shit. I mean put the hypersonic missile. I mean that's probably what those UFOs quote quote UFOs from the The videos that were circulating a couple of years are just like, you know because those things are fucking crazy man The ramjet shit that like that but it's crazy is like art bell When we used to drive on to we're back in the day, they'd be like you listen to coast to coast at night There's nothing else, but you could find that scary as shit and you'd be looking over like that You know Arizona skyline like looking for shit driving in the middle tonight Here's an art bell isn't best and like around the time we were doing that like that's an art bells like family guy Kidnapped you're like what the fuck is going on in George nori would come on and then they were talking about ram jets and all kinds of shit Like I mean that shit. It's actually I think the ram jets with the powers of SR 71 like essentially like it takes a whole tank of Fuel to get that thing just up and go in like mock one or two whatever and then they have to refuel it To get it like ramming or never shit But like those so they refill them in the sky. Yeah, it takes a whole Tank to get them where they got the wildest shit ever pumping gas in the sky If you see like do the potential of these hypersonic missiles have you yeah, dude They like without even a warhead. They can't have like a megaton explosion just from the velocity of The speed they can go like Mach 15 or something and they can change course. Yeah, they can't just Predict oh this one's gonna go to Seattle no, it can turn left you can go to south You know that scene and like it's like Superman too or they have the ICBM like he's riding it like yeah I think you ride I think that's probably a lot of what those UFO sightings were I think a lot of the other ones are drones like the ones like The famous one is that tiktok one that they found off the coast of San Diego. I think in 2004 a Commander David Frevers saw this object that they had tracked they even recalibrated their device apparently to make sure that it was accurate but they they Read this thing yet more than 50,000 feet above sea level and got down to 50 feet in less than a second And they don't know what it is and they followed it around with their jets and then the people on the Nimitz said yet We've been seeing these for a couple weeks. He's like super credible naval pilots pilots guys Really understand like what's possible and not possible and they watch these things Dardoff and just vanish with the kind of speed that like it's just impossible no propulsion Signature doesn't like show that like anything's coming out the back like a normal jet It just looks like a tiktok and it goes at an impossible speed like what the fuck is that? That might be a drone it might be some Crazy fucking drone that they've been working on for decades. It's just not telling us about oh first And when I saw the panic on was talking about UFOs Yeah, they were talking about things are from alien worlds. I'm like yeah, really or maybe you guys have been making some cool fucking shit Yeah, you don't want everybody to know Yeah, and you're like oh yeah, it's not us. We don't have any hypersonic fucking UFO And tiktoks it's like back to full apartment when he does the unfrozen caveman lawyer is like I'm not familiar with your modern ways This legal system, but I do know my clients entitled to 3.5 million of punitive damage It's alien technology You know, we're with the Pentagon ever tell us because I always wondered like because Tom de-long He actually like worked with the government like they brought him in to talk about aliens because he's that much of an alien freak I think they thought they would like help you know, he told me he was like there's They're cloaked. They're all of us. They're cloaked and well, they're scanning and I honestly what he was describing was like satellites Happening into all of our phones and listening to everything we do which is I think actually happening Yeah, but they don't even need satellites to do that. No, they get right into the system. They can listen to everything you say That's Gavin a Becker is a security expert on my podcast was explaining they used to have to you do you still have a clickable Link used to be a thing you had to click and then you would act sedanally without your knowledge rather Download some sort of a software that would take over your phone now. They don't need that so now they just need your phone number They need your to get your phone number. They're just listening to they're doing they're watching everything you do They can do whatever they want now to imagine the stupid conversations that these people have solicitors Yeah, well it makes people more aware of how fucking stupid your conversations are if you think they can come up and It trial with Johnny Depp and Amber heard oh my god That kind of shit when you realize like oh my god like everything you've ever said and he's now reading like text message. Oh shit the vessel I donated my jizz to Oh