Ken, so I thank you very much for doing this. You've written a book on the Trump assassination plots, the two from the summer of 2024, about which there are more unanswered questions than answered questions. And there are so transparently ridiculous the stories that we have been told that it, my first question is where all the other books on this topic? What did this fall to you? That was my question too. And you're actually probably one of the only major media figures that's still keeping the story alive. So it's a pleasure to talk to you. But yeah, there were a couple books published in the wake like Selena Zidos, Washington Examiner reporter wrote a book called Butler, but it goes more into the cultural aspects of like the Butler community and the political effects, the political fallout of the event. It's not really like a forensic investigation. This is the first of that kind. Does Zidos book have a conclusion? Does it reach a conclusion about what that was? Or does she affirm the official story, which is this was a crazed left-wing long-term government? Yeah, it's more or less an affirmation of the official story. And again, just like the political fallout, that's more of the book. She was there that day. So there is like a autobiographical account of what happened from when she got there. But it doesn't go into like the details about what happened over on the H.E.R. building or the security failures or who Thomas Crook's was. So I'm going to state what I think is the official account of what happened in Butler that day. And then I would like you to just take us through what you know about what happened in Butler that day. The official account is there's this weird kid, local kid who really hates Trump and he's been radicalized probably online. We don't really know because he has no meaningful online profile. He's like the only young man in America who's not online. And he's somehow a very good shot. And he somehow gets into the one vulnerable place at the event site in Butler Township that gives him a sight line to Trump. And nobody notices this because there are just these unaccountable holes in security. It's just amazing. It's just a failure of security. And he takes the shot. He misses. He kills someone in the stands, a fireman. And then he's killed by a U.S. government sniper and he had no accomplices. He's just a crazy person, one of many. And that's all we know, case closed. And that's bad enough. But is that a fair representation of this day, the story of what happened in Butler? The biggest issue I would take with the official story about just what happened that day is that a lot of people think the secret service sniper actually saved the day. Everybody knows about the slope roof excuse for why they didn't have somebody posted there in the first place. The fact that that building was outside of the ostensible perimeter, even though it was, you know, again, like 150 yards clear line of sight to Trump. But a lot of people say, well, at least the secret service sniper stopped it from being a lot worse. In fact, Donald Trump said that a couple weeks ago after this most recent White House correspondence dinner attack, he's talking about, well, they did a lot better at that event than they did a butler. Although my buddy David saved my life at Butler, he was, he's the sniper, his name's David King. And Trump says he responded in 4.2 seconds from 400 yards away. Neither one of those surgeons by Trump are true, which is very bizarre that he doesn't know the details about the attempt to zone on his own life. In fact, it was a local cop who saved the day. The alleged would be assassin crooks fired three well measured discrete shots. And then there's a short pause and then he starts rapid firing five shots. And then the ninth shot comes immediately after that eighth shot all in the span of five seconds from the local cop on the ground. His name's Aaron Zalapone, he was a Butler ESU member. And then there's 10 whole seconds that pass by before David King finally puts the final bullet through crooks. Thomas Crooks fired nine shots. He fired eight shots. And then the ninth shot came from the ground from Zalapone. He heard eight shots. So let's, let's just start the beginning. Who was Crooks? Well, that's still an unanswered question. My book does have the most complete biographical account of Crooks, but he's still in aberration. He almost seemed like he was kind of leading a double life. All the public information I found out about him, paid some as just a really respectable young man almost, you know, hate to say it, but like the kind of guy you'd want your son to turn out to be like. He was a straight A student in high school well, like by his classmates and teachers. Graduates with the 4.0 goes to a community college for engineering while there. One of his projects was actually 3D printing a chess board and a Rubik's cube that were inscribed with Braille and his mother's legally blind. So it seemed like a pretty sweet thing to do for his mother. I got community college speeches where he says one of my favorite things to do is like cook with my family, love to sister Katie Crooks. And he was planning on going to Robert Morris University that fall to get his four year degree. That's the public face as of when was he planning on going to college? Well, that's a great question because it was actually I obtained his college emails. And I got one from June 14, 2024 where he's emailing the community college about the status of his diploma because he had just graduated, but apparently he didn't get actual proof. And he needed that to go to Robert Morris that fall. So less than a month before he winds up dead on a rooftop, he's asking about the status of his diploma and still making plans to go to university that fall, which is very strange. I just don't know what to make of it. Not doesn't sound like a man planning to die, you know? It certainly doesn't sound like a man planning to die. It's like the death throw and made asking if he can save some for later in his final meal. Does anybody around him later say yes, he was radical and crazy and violent? What do the new him his father, the night of the incident, the ATF response to the house and they're questioning him and he said, why didn't really know much about Thomas's politics? He like to play the contrarian. He liked to kind of whatever side the father and the mother would take. He would just be devil's advocate and argue the opposite side. He was a registered Republican, but he made a donation to act blue like the left wing pack on the day of Joe Biden's inauguration. So I guess the theory there would be if he was left wing, he registered as a Republican to vote in the primaries and try to vote for the weaker candidate, something like that. We don't know for sure. Probably the best evidence of his political leanings comes from the trove of data that you published a couple months ago in your documentary about the violent comments and kind of showed his political transformation in 2019 and 2020, but that was when he was like 16, 17. So we don't really know what happened those last three, four years of his life. He started using more encryption VPNs. There's not much of a data trail there. I did obtain his community college metadata. What I did there is FOIA it from the college and they sent me like a big string of jumbled up code, but I had somebody who knew what they were doing kind of decipher it and it showed the actual websites that he was visiting while he was on the community college campus. It doesn't show the contents of any of his messages or anything, but he voted. He visited like a Game of Thrones fan site. He seemed to be a Pittsburgh Steelers fan, Twitter.com, Reddit.com, nothing very unusual. I mean, he went to like AR15.com, but that doesn't really tell you that much. So yeah, he's a total cipher when it comes to the last few years of his life. What was that to me heard someone on their deathbed saying they wish it spent more time working, particularly filling out forms or even gathering possessions that's never happened. And the end, all you're really going to care about is the people you love. And that's why life insurance is important. It's a great way to make certain that you still support your loved ones even when you're gone. We highly recommend life insurance through ethos. Why? Because ethos makes getting life insurance fast and easy. It's 100% online. You can get a quote in seconds, apply in minutes and get same day coverage. There's no medical exam. All you have to do is answer a few simple health questions. To $3 million in coverage with some policies is always $30 a month. Low rates from a vast network of trusted carriers. That's the key competition. Take 10 minutes to get covered today with life insurance through ethos. Get your free quoted ethos.com slash Tucker. That's ethos, e thos.com slash Tucker application times and rates may vary. The FBI has a lot of this information. We should say it is not released for reasons. We can speculate about in a minute. But it's fair to say the FBI has a lot of information about this guy that's not public. That's absolutely right. So when it became apparent last July that the FBI wasn't going to voluntarily release information about Thomas Crooks or the event, the transparency organization judicial watch filed a lawsuit to force disclosure. We just got a status report a few months ago saying that they had 45,000 responsive records about Thomas Crooks in response to judicial watches lawsuit. A couple months later we get another status report saying we found another 30,000. Now it's up to 75,000. They started making monthly productions to judicial watch. It's been four months and it's been a couple dozen pages a piece. So like 200 in total. How do 75,000? Yeah. So if that rate will all be dead before all the records are produced, it's pretty egregious. Which and also pretty revealing. What is that? If the loan if it's a crime kid who by a loan gunman who's deceased, no one else involved in this case at all, then that's the official story, then what would be the motive to hide it? Yeah. I mean, as controversial as the Epstein files roll out has been one of the beneficial things that the Justice Department did is just put them all in a word, searchable database. And you think they'd be able to do something like that with the Crooks files. So people could just type in any word and it'll pull all the records with that word on it. You know, one of cash patellis excuses was that well, Donald Trump is a victim here and he has rights too. So that's why we're not releasing some of this out of respect for him. But that's not a legal thing. Like that's not covered in FOIA. Of course, they could redact Donald Trump's name, but they can't just say, oh, because Trump's a victim, we're not going to comply with FOIA. It's pretty ridiculous. Of course, no individual even president owns the US justice system. Justice is affected on behalf of the entire country. It's supposed to be a rule of law. Right. That belongs to the American people. That's right. These documents belong to the American people. The FBI belongs to the American people. So that's what it's a nonsensical argument to go to the argument actually. So tell us about that day. So this guy about whom we know very little who seems pretty normal shows up at this Trump rally and what happens. Yeah. So I guess the story starts eight a.m. that morning. There's a secret service site counterpart. Her name's Dana Dubre. She shows up and none of her colleagues are there. And apparently there's rumors that they had been out drinking late the night before at a Pittsburgh bar called Tequila cowboy. So she's kind of upset that her supposed a sensible partner isn't helping her with the setup. They finally start trickling it around 10 a.m. and they hold a briefing. And this is the first kind of weird anomaly is that Pennsylvania police trooper tried to participate in the secret service briefing and they actually kicked him out. So it seemed pretty insular. We don't know exactly why that is. So the briefing would be the meeting that law enforcement has at the beginning of the day to talk through what they're going to do and what the potential threats might be. Yeah, that's exactly right. And I guess one of the reforms to come out of this whole fiasco is the now they hold a unified briefing where they let the locals in. But you know, little too little too late for that. So how did crooks get there? How did he get in? How did he get to this spot? Like what do we know about all that? He first showed up around 10 a.m. when they're holding this secret briefing where they're keeping out the locals in the stages. And crooks shows up and apparently he just drives around and kind of cases out the place. And he later goes home to Bethel Park, which is about a 45 minute drive. He lived closer to Pittsburgh, but there's more out in the country. So yeah, crooks goes home. And meanwhile, we have the first security failure at the site before anything even happens. The counter drone operator, an agent named Eduardo Castro just can't get his drone detection equipment working. He's initially by the stage. He tries to move it. He thinks it might be some kind of signal issue. He even calls like a 1-800 number for troubleshooting. He doesn't get it working until about 4.20 p.m., which is when crooks finally returned. Crooks flies a drone over the site for about 11 minutes. And this is like 350 to 401. And then he returns with the drone and then the drone detection equipment gets up and working, which is an unfortunate coincidence, I guess. What is crooks get at his house? Do we know? Well, he got his rifle, which apparently belonged to him, but his father was in possession of it. So he asks his dad for his rifle. And he goes to a local shop. He buys some ammunition. He also bought a ladder that morning. And I think a lot of people think that he got up on the rooftop on a ladder, which isn't the case. He actually scaled some air conditioning unit. And the ladder was found in Bethel Park in the woods later. So I think what probably happened there is he bought the ladder. He went that morning and cased out the site and realized that he wouldn't need the ladder. He could use the air conditioning and then just abandoned it in the woods. And like I said, supposedly the rifle belonged to him, but the father was possessing it. But the ATF would eventually track the rifle to the father. And the father said that he sold it informally to his son a couple years ago, but there's no paperwork for that. So the paperwork shows that the rifle belonged to the father. And I guess there's a loophole in Pennsylvania state law where you can transfer long guns. Two Pennsylvania residents can do that with each other without any kind of paperwork. So we don't know for sure. I mean, that's the story that he transferred it, but there's no paperwork to that. This trucks get a rifle onto the grounds of a Trump event. It was probably broken down in his backpack. Yeah, that's we don't know that for sure. There is surveillance footage that the FBI's still withholding that would presumably shed light on some of these details. Like there's an ice cream shop north of the AGR building that apparently has footage of crooks actually even scaling the building. But that's just one of like the thousands and thousands of records that the FBI is refused to disclose. Including the footage of crooks training on a local firing range that might give us insight into how this kid was able to get off the shots that he did. Yeah, Clarity Sports Club, we went there 43 times in the span of maybe 10 months. I did find with those records that there were four times where he signed in with somebody else at the exact same time and for the exact same range. So you could go to either the pistol, pistol range or long rifle range. And every time that somebody else signed in at the exact same time, they would go to the same range. It was even a day where he went to pistol and rifle and this mystery person. It could have been his dad, but the names were dacted in the records. So the person that signed in at the same time also went to the pistol and rifle. Another interesting thing I found as far as that goes is again, back to the community, college emails. November 9th, 2023, he actually emails his teacher saying that he's going to be late to class. And that was the day that he went to the range presumably with this mystery person. They trained on pistols and rifles. And you can go to the range anytime. Thomas was again, a model student. I think he missed class maybe like three or four times his whole career. So I've got questions about why it was so important for him to go to the range that he emailed his teacher and said, I'm going to be late today. Because you were going with someone else, obviously. Sure. But the deeper question, why was it urgent that day or why they needed to go that particular time? He was at one point in contact with security at the event, correct? He got a rangefinder through. Well he never went through the magnetometers or went through security, which is another weird anomaly is that he registered through an encrypted email to get a ticket to the event, but that he never went through, went inside. So I don't know what his original plan was. Again, he might have gone there that morning and realized like, well, shoot, this is easy. I don't even have to go through security. Like there's a clear line of sight there. But yeah, he never went into the perimeter. Well, there's nothing like waking up feeling like you actually got a rest full sleep. Unfortunately, it's hard to do that. That's not a byproduct of just getting older. It is directly tied to your hormones, your body. Our friends at Joy and Blokes are ready to help you. Blokes was built for men who are feeling tired of feeling like a shadow of themselves and who are ready to do something about it. No more drooping as a brain fog. A game all the time. Here's how it works. Every blokes lab includes a 30 to 60 minute consultation with a licensed clinician who connects with your feeling to what is happening inside, inside your body, then builds a substantive plan to fix it. That's like TRT and peptide therapy that address root causes and help you feel like yourself again. Stronger, sharper, truly present. So don't settle, visit joy and blokes dot com slash Tucker. Use the code Tucker for 65% off your labs and 20% off all supplements huge discounts. That's joyandblokes dot com slash Tucker code Tucker for 65% off all your labs 20% off your supplements. Get your edge back with joy and blokes. He gets up on the roof. Do we know how long he was there? He was up on the roof. Yes. Yeah, he was up on the roof since about 6.03 p.m. And this is actually a pretty bad local security failure. I do believe it was a mistake and not something intentional and I could actually show you and I'll try to articulate what's going on here for people just listening. So this is the AGR building and a local sniper spots him here and the local sniper, crooks runs off when he spotted and the local sniper says he's going all the way around the building when in fact he went into this alcove and climbed up. So this is like 603. All of local law enforcement is responding here thinking that he ran all the way around when in fact he went in and up on the rooftop and that was just one of the few mistakes made by the locals. 603 is when he was first spotted. Well, that's an interesting question because the local snipers in that building, there were three in there and one of them left around 4.20 p.m. And he texts his buddies inside the building and says there's this guy sitting out on a parking bench. He's looking up in the building. I think he knows you guys are in there and just flagging this for your situational awareness and it was initially reported in the wake of the shooting that that was like the first sighting of crooks. But then somebody released cell phone footage showing crooks walking on the other side of the site like over a half mile away. The question is like who did these local snipers really see that they thought was suspicious? One of them, not one of the snipers but another one of the local cops on the ground is names Chris Copus. He insists that yes, that really was crooks that we saw at 4.26 p.m. I swear it was him except he was wearing pants instead of shorts. But obviously, you know, crooks can't be in two places at one time. So there was a lot of false sightings or I don't know if they were false sightings or not. But another a rally goer said he saw somebody that looked like crooks carrying a long rifle north of the AGR building. And this would have been captured by that surveillance footage from the ice cream shop. And the reason I take this sighting seriously is because the rally goer who says he saw this was communicating with a Pennsylvania state police trooper with a body cam. And so he actually soothes to get the footage of the body cam that would have shown this young man open carrying a rifle. And he didn't tell anybody about this lawsuit. He like didn't want the attention. But a local newspaper uncovered the lawsuit and found out what he was doing. And the upshot of the lawsuit is that the state police said, well, we don't have any footage for you. Like it doesn't exist. But again, the reason I think that's a legitimate sighting is because he didn't want attention. He was actually trying to prove his case. He's not just like talking, you know. So when was the shooting? What time did you pull a trigger? Six 11 p.m. So putting aside those possibly false sightings or, you know, God knows what's going on. It's around 520 that a local sniper inside the building against these crooks. This time crooks has a range finder. Now instead of putting this over the radio, he texts some of his local counterparts and to including the command center leader, Butler. Yes, you commander Edward lens and nothing is really done because I guess they're not checking their phones. It's not until like 540 that people finally see like, oh, this is like the infamous pictures of crooks sitting on a concrete wall by the AGR. Yeah. Said he's lurking around. He has a range finder. And they identified it correctly as a range finder. That's we've never seen a picture of the range finder, but they say they found that in crooks's pockets after he was killed. So yeah, I think that's so if you're trying to protect the life of the principal somebody and someone at the scene has a range finder. I mean, could there be a clear indication of intent? And the locals did respond to it accordingly. The local command center leader Edward lens says that he called the Secret Service Command Center by the way, they're separate command centers, which is a huge issue. He talks to a Pennsylvania state police trooper inside the Secret Service Command Center, who then tells the command center leader, Jeffrey Burr. And instead of putting that out over the radios, though, Jeffrey Burr then tells the counter drone guy, Castro about it. Castro calls some agents to go search for it, but they never put it out over the radios. And this by now is like 5.50 PM, about 21 minutes before the shooting. So we know crooks is on the roof at 603. What happens between that in 611? Okay. So yeah, crooks gets up on the rooftop. Meanwhile, all the cops are searching north of the building like they don't know. But then a local cop does spot crooks on the rooftop around 6. So 6 PM says somebody's on the roof. He seems to be running around again. They still don't know what exactly to make of this. I don't think they even knew it was the guy that had the rangefinder. This gets passed on to the local command center, Edward Lens. And he puts it out over channel three at 608 PM that there's a guy on the rooftop. It's not one of ours. But the problem here is it's the local radios. And specifically, he was on a channel that was only heard by like the traffic cops and like some of the people on the ground who are pretty much assisting in like crowd control and things like that. He never switches over to channel four to inform the actual snipers in the building or his QRF team that was ready to deploy in response to emergencies. Instead, he again calls the Secret Service Command Center. And here's where things get especially controversial because he says, Lens says that he calls the PSP trooper in the Secret Service Center. And then they both inform Jeffrey Burr about somebody's on the rooftop now. A Burr claims that he never heard this. So I've kind of called Jeffrey Burr Jeffrey a deafenedumbur because he never, he says he never heard anything and he never put anything out over the radios. Even though now obviously the threat has escalated, you know, we should point out that Trump's on the stage at this point. He took the stage at 602, which is exactly, you know, that's citing the crooks where they think he's running around, but he goes up top. So things are getting serious. And at some point, people in the crowd beneath crooks notice him up there. Yeah, people notice him up there like around six or later and they're watching the locals kind of frantically scramble around seeing how they can get up on the rooftop. And yeah, it's kind of a spectacle. And even some people inside the perimeter start to notice, you know, the commotion going on by the HDR. So then, um. up. And yeah, it's kind of a spectacle. And even some people inside the perimeter start to notice, you know, the commotion going on by the AGR. So then a local cop tries to get on the roof. What happens in when? Yeah. So while all this is transpiring, detective Collins, Tyler Collins, is actually at the Butler police station, maybe a mile away. And he's hearing all this chatter. And he's, I guess he's a relatively younger and fitter guy. So he decides to go assist in the chase. He drives directly to the AGR building. And you know, this is seen on body cam. He has one of his buddies, boosts him up to try to get get up on the roof. He gets up there. He looks, he says, he saw crooks, crooks swivels, his rifle at Tyler Collins, Collins drops down. And now he says, the person on the roof is arm. Now, now we're probably talking like 30, 25 seconds before the shooting. Inflation makes credit card statements, particularly scary. You work 40, 50 hours a week just by groceries and gas things you, you should be able to afford without thinking that much about it. Then the bank's charge you 20% interest. The system is designed to keep you underwater. It's working. But there's another option. Our friends at American financing are doing something the big banks despise. They are helping people mortgage rates in the fives, supporting the American dream of homeownership. And they're showing homeowners how to take their hard earned equity to wipe out high interest debt. Now we're against debt in general. But in this economy, most people have no choice at all. So don't go bankrupt and sleeving yourself to to a lender. Average savings are right 800 bucks a month. And it takes only 10 minutes to talk to a salary-based mortgage consultant. Now upfront fees are obligation to see how much you can save. Give American financing a call 800 6 8 5 56 96 as 1 800 6 8 5 56 96 or visit American financing.net slash Tucker America's home for home loans. So one of the most interesting, I mean, it's minor, but it's interesting facts of this is that crooks is on the roof. He's surprised by a local cop, heems his rifle at him. Then pivots and starts firing within 30 seconds at over 100 yards and hits drums here famously. That's pretty, that's like biathlon level shooting in that. There's clearly lots of adrenaline. It's a quick turn. And you see all these people on TV. Oh, that's an easy shot. It's not an easy shot for a man filled with adrenaline. It's just been confronted by a police officer like that's that's someone who is either like remarkably cool under pressure or who's done a lot of training. Yeah, crooks from what I can tell was a really good shot. This wasn't his training at Clarity Sports Club. He also took a pistol course that I think it's called like the Keystone range in Pennsylvania. And there was one other guy who was with the class in the class with crooks. He's called by the FBI a couple days later when, you know, the FBI finds that crooks was training here. And this guy gave an interview and said that crooks once shot a target in the same spot with a nine millimeter so many times that he blew a whole lot of the target. So yeah, crooks was really good. And you know, I've heard you talk on your previous podcast about this with Sean Davis. Yeah, that's an incredibly difficult shot under that pressure situation where you see a local cop, you know, coming up to get you and you have to focus and you know, keep your breathing under control and and yeah, came within millimeter struck really struck by that. So then he sets some places prone. He's lying and he gets off eight shots. What happens to those bullets? The first one grazes Trump's ear. The second one flies over Trump's shoulder. And this is the Pulitzer Prize winning photo taken by Doug Mills where Trump's beginning to bring his hand up to his ear, which is really strong evidence that this was like a legitimate shooting and that the bullets were real. Unless you want to make the argument that the New York Times are in on the conspiracy that this is staged. But yeah, it shows the bullet and it also shows that Trump doesn't have any kind of squid in his hand that, you know, for the fake blood. But in any of that, yeah, so the second one whizzes by his shoulder. And I'm pretty sure that's the one that hits David Dutch, who is one of the wounded rally goers. It actually I think split his liver. It was a pretty pretty nasty shot. The third one, I'm not sure about, it was the second volley of five that one of them hits the firefighter Corey compared Tory. And then Jim Copenhaver, who generously wrote the forward to my book, he got shot twice. And one of those bullets is still in his body. It's like too close to the spine. I think he's in his mid 80s now. So they can't really extract it. So four people are hit by bullets, including Trump. Yeah. Yeah, that's right. Initially, this is weird. Ronnie Jackson, who's once Trump's physician, I was in Congress. I think he initially said that like my son was grazed or something, but we haven't heard anything about that. I really don't know what happened there. But we know for sure of these, these four people. The man who is killed, who is he? Corey compared Tory. Yeah, he, you know, a firefighter, a family man, a girl dad. He had two girls, a loving wife, Helen. By all accounts, just like an upstanding member of the community, the kind of guy you'd want to be friends with, the kind of guy you'd entrust with your life, just a real tragedy that we lost him. So that there's been a lot of speculation about this being staged. It's fake. There are, you know, theological arguments for this that come out of the Old Testament, apparently there's a part that suggests, you know, the pricking of the ear is necessary for a prophecy be fulfilled, etc., etc., there's a lot of talk about this. What's your view of that? Yeah, the same people that make that biblical argument or prophecy argument also says that he wasn't really shot. So I don't really understand that if it has ear has to be pricked, then, but he didn't get shot in the ear. It's hard to really argue with the people who think it's fake, because I haven't really heard a coherent theory for how it possibly could have been staged. I mean, as we've discussed, the local response to the would be assassin was very much legitimate. The bullets were real. The blood was real. The bodies were real. This would require the complicity of the Biden FBI Biden's Secret Service. Keep in mind that he's under investigation at the time or facing prosecutions. I'm sure he's surrounded by FBI informants. They're probably listening to his calls. I don't know when he would have been able to plan something like this. And then one of my favorite pieces of evidence that I found in the transcripts of interview, Congress interviewing the local cops is that his personal physician was actually left behind in the chaos when he was shuttled off the stage and taken a butler hospital. So he had to have been examined by a butler doctor who then, because his personal physician was at the farm show, they take the butler doctor on Trump, force one to the next site. I think it was New Jersey. So I would imagine that if this was a staged event, it would have been something like he keeps the low, he keeps his own doctor close to his side. They go to butler hospital. They say, no, nobody's allowed to see Trump's ear for national security reasons. But that wasn't the case. It was actually a local doctor who initially treated him. And he would have had to been in on it too if this was one. There are three other people shot. So I mean, it's hard to, if it was fake, you know, no one told them. Yeah. Right. Yeah. So, okay, I think that the evidence suggests it was entirely real. Someone was trying to kill Trump. How did the Secret Service respond? They really didn't respond. Again, they're, we can go more into the failures leading up to it. I mentioned Jeffrey Burr, who by the way, he's the Command Center leader. And by the way, he's also the special agent in charge of the Buffalo field office, which I found a little bit strange. I don't know much about the inner workings of the Secret Service, but it was kind of bizarre to me that this 25 year old veteran or 25 year veteran in charge of an entire jurisdiction. He's now just a post-stander, manning the radios on the ground for an a rally outside of his jurisdiction. I think the argument was there was that they were short staffed and needed help. And he's a senior guy who knows what he's doing. But of course, he makes a lot of the key mistakes by never putting anything out over the radio. Another Secret Service blunder was when they did call the Secret Service counter sniper response agent who is like the agent on the ground that the snipers can say, hey, go check this out and he'll go run over there. And then, you know, he's kind of like the eyes and ears of the snipers on the rooftops. He goes to search for crooks when they're notified of the rangefinder. And he's actually turned away by another agent which is really inexplicable. And this agent said like, oh, we have the AGR building cover. There's people searching for the suspicious person go to the south of the stage and look there, which didn't make any sense because everybody knew the action was happening by the AGR building. But again, the granddaddy of them all is the fact that the Secret Service sniper waited up to 23 seconds before responding. And I say 23 seconds because we have footage of him looking through his scope before the shooting starts. He actually had, you know, he was looking through with scopes. I don't know if he had crooks in his sight or not. But he was looking in that direction. He was looking in that direction. And yeah, listen to your- And this is after eight shots have been this is before any shooting started. Right. But it mean he, the FBI sniper waited long enough that Crooks fired eight times before he was taken out. Yeah. And the eight shots happen in five seconds. He waited an entire another 10 seconds before he put that final 10th shot through crooks. And, you know, I could give him the benefit of the doubt. Maybe he wasn't prepared. He panicked. He had crooks in his scope. The local cop shoots crooks, crooks, staggers back. And now he's got a readjust. However, his congressional testimony is very troubling. The sniper initially tells the house task force that he didn't see crooks until after all the shooting had stopped. I said he was like on his binoculars, the shooting started by the time he finds crooks in his scope, crooks had already fired eight times. Then he tells a similar story to the Senate Homeland Security Committee. But a staffer- I don't know who this is, but the staffer's heroic, he pulls out, this is almost like a Perry Mason moment. He pulls out the sniper zone notes that they apparently got as part of a production from the Secret Service. And he says, when David, your own notes after the incident says that you saw Crooks quote, low crawling with an AR-15 into position and that you had seen him before the shooting start. I actually, I have the exact this is what the sniper David King wrote immediately after the incident. Quote, I and my teammates position ourselves to observe that area that everyone was moving to. I noticed in an individual white male, white or gray shirt, low crawling on the roof. I noticed an AR style weapon in his hands. As I moved to observe through my rifle scope, I heard weapon fire. I immediately got a laser rangefinder distance from my weapon mount and rangefinder. I looked up to see my engagement scope, look back through the scope, observe the individual shooting and engaged. So there's a major contradiction there. I'm not necessarily suggesting that he waited on purpose. I think again, I think he might be covering his ass because as we discussed before, Trump views him as a hero. And maybe he just doesn't want to admit that he did. Where is that that sniper now, David King? He's still, I believe he's still on Trump's detail because again, after the White House correspondent's dinner attack, Trump goes, I tell David, I love you, David, like acting like David says hero. And by the way, that's how we were able to identify him. He had his own local police body cam footage with his patch that says D King. And then Trump says, I think he first told Miranda Divine about a year ago that his name is David. So Trump almost kind of outed him. I searched David King's Secret Service, a LinkedIn immediately pops up showing that he this guy in the special operations division of the Secret Service. I reached out to him, he declined to comment and a reporter Susan Crabtree has since corroborated that identity, the David King name. But he still works there. Again, yeah, I think Trump expresses appreciation for him. Was anyone fired? Kimberly Chito, the former director resigned under bipartisan pressure. There were five or six suspensions that all came. Most of them came from the local Pittsburgh field office, even though they were kind of thrown under the bus in my opinion. But no, nobody was actually fired. Nobody is fired. Unless you count Chito, but that's again, she resigned and she has, I don't know if she's still a Secret Service protection, but she was given tax payer funded security after she was fired. I guess, you know, for the threats or whatever, because people thought she was in on it. So what happened next? Trump could shot, he leaves, he goes to New Jersey with the local doctor. What happens to Crooks' body? That's a great question. Crooks' body was actually left on the rooftop until 6 a.m. the next morning. Instead of taking him to the Butler County corner, he shipped to Allegheny County, I guess we've gotten conflicting explanations. I guess Allegheny counties or Pittsburgh is, they have more advanced facilities. But then I also heard they took Corey compared Tori's body to Allegheny County because the press was at the Butler County coroner's office. And they want to do avoid the press attention. Crooks was shot once, correct. I think the local cop hit him. First. Yeah, I definitely think the local cop hit him because you keep in mind, Crooks stopped shooting after the local cop fired. There's some speculation that Aaron's Al-Apony might have hit the buttstock of the gun and shattered it. But the thing is, that the X-ray of Crooks shows that there's bullet fragments still in his shoulder. And people, ballistic experts have told me that that 300 win-meg final shot wouldn't have fragmented like that. The Secret Services 300 win-meg round went through Crooks' neck out back in the shoulder. Then it fragments into two pieces and makes two re-exit wounds. They actually recovered those fragments. It's this material in the shoulder that was left in there. Actually, the body was released for cremation with the fragments still in the shoulder, which seems like a mishandling of evidence. But what do I know? How quickly after this event was his body cremated? I believe it was released for cremation a week or two after. We didn't find out about this until Representative Clay Higgins went to go look at the body and they said, well, you know, Mr. Higgins, the body doesn't exist. We gave it to the funeral home. How would you assess the thoroughness of the autopsy? Well, the medical examiner who did the autopsy insists that Aaron's Al-Apony didn't hit crooks, which I just think all the evidence points to the contrary. Not only the bowl of fragments, but reason would dictate that the shot did something because you know, because he stopped shooting after his al-Apony fired. So there's the releasing the body. I would argue prematurely. But the biggest question I have is about this toxicology report, which I obtained, which by the way, obtaining this report is kind of an interesting story, at least to me in itself, because this was kind of my first big scoop in late 2024 when I got these documents. When I found out that the body was taken to Allegheny County, I requested it from them and they said, well, we did the autopsy in the toxicology, but this is Butler County jurisdiction. I then asked Butler County for it and they denied it too. It was almost like they're pointing at each other, playing shell games with the evidence. I went through a couple of months long legal battle to get these documents and then actually got them in early October and put them up on our website, headline USA. So that was a big scoop, but I didn't think much of the documents, like they didn't really seem to show any scandal to me at first until a Twitter sleuth notified me a couple of months later and said, if you looked at this toxicology report, it seems incomplete. And I'll show you exactly what I'm talking about. So the medical examiner, area, area of gold Schmidt collected eight specimens from Thomas Crooks, four tubes of heart blood, a tube of urine, some high fluid, bile, and then an envelope of hair. And now these are numbered, one through eight. And now if you look at the findings, you have one, the heart blood, one, two, and then it's four, five, and six. But there's three specimens that, gold Schmidt, the medical examiner, collected and either didn't test or didn't include in the report. That's the, the bile, one tube of blood and the envelope of hair. So I don't know what to make of it again. But these samples, you could argue they would have shown evidence of some kind of perhaps psychotropic drug use. I don't know. As he explained his gold Schmidt, the medical examiner explained why he didn't test or there's no record of him testing. No, I reached when I found out about this, I reached out to him on numerous times, including his lab assistants too, and they haven't given any answers as to why this is. Okay. And that kind of is the question that hangs over all this. Why are there no answers in a case that according to the government is open and closed? Lone government, crazy person killed by heroic secret service sniper, no accomplices. There's no reason to hide anything. Do you have any idea why the FBI is continuing to hide information about this case? Well, I hope I would have spoken. You could tell me. I have some theories about it. Yeah. I mean, Joe Kent said is directly related to, he believes, directly related to our war and run. Um, you know, can't prove that. But I, uh, but just to establish clearly that they are hiding it, you've gone presumably to the Justice Department to ask for this information. What answer do you get? In fact, I did a FOIA request for all the 302s in this case, the day after cash Patel said about a year, a year ago that the investigation is closed, croaks acted alone, nothing more to see here. So, okay, great. The investigation is closed. Now they can comply with FOIA and make all this stuff public. I filed my, uh, FOIA and get a response about a month later saying we're not giving you these records because in fact, the investigation still open. So it seems to me as they're playing legal games with these documents. Uh, they've since cash Patel's changed his tune and said, well, the investigation is open, but not active. And in my mind, that's just, uh, way they're, an excuse they're using to avoid, uh, disclosure. So at the root of all of this is the question of Trump and his, you know, he was the target of the assassination attempt, which you have said I agree with you as real. Like someone tried to kill him, missed, killed somebody else. But if the president wanted this investigation to continue, it would continue, correct? Presumably, yeah, maybe in this first administration, you could argue that he didn't have total control over the, the deep state or whatever. But now yeah, he's got loyalists installed in most of the key positions. So it, yeah, I don't see any possible excuse for why, right? So it's not, it's not just that, you know, cash Patel's incompetent or damn bongino's incompetent. This is a statement of fact, Trump shut down the investigation into Bobber. So he shut down the investigation into his own attempted murder. And I think that's the most shocking fact to come out of this Trump term because I don't see a non sinister explanation for that. But maybe you have one. No, I mean, it's just total speculation, but I sometimes I wonder, did they stumble onto some sort of like MK Ultra program? I don't know. Is this, are they threatening Trump's family? It does. And this is why I like, I don't get too mad when people think he's faking it because he's so tight-lipped. You know, you can't blame people for speculating. I think that's exactly right. It doesn't make any sense at all. Are there any pieces of evidence that you have seen that suggests that crooks acted in concert with anybody else? I've seen nothing explicit. No, there is, there's some unanswered questions about what happened on July 13, 2024 that might point to others being involved on the scene. Of course, we have the false sightings of crooks, like if they saw somebody that looked like him, there are numerous such cases. So I have questions about that. And then the bomb squad, Allegheny County bomb squad initially responded to a van that was parked about a half mile away from the site. And the series of events raises questions in my mind. Crooks is dead up on the rooftop. They find a transponder in his pocket that they believe might be used to set off IEDs. They evacuate the rooftop. And after that point, the locals are never involved in the crime scene again. It's totally controlled by the FBI. They're searching underneath inside the building with bomb sniffing dogs. And at one point, they find blood in the building, which I guess a local trooper climbed over a fence and cut his hand and then got blood everywhere. They find a bicycle with a backpack that wasn't crooks is, but they initially assumed it was. And most interestingly, is this van. They searched the van with the bomb squad and towed away. And we haven't heard anything about this sense. And this is before they searched Crooks' car, which is parked, it was parked right on the street by the AGR building. So I have questions of why they searched the van before the car. I did a foil on the van and was told that yes, it was part of the investigation. But again, I was denied actual records about it. Is there proof that Crooks constructed bombs or a bomb? Yeah, the eventually found bombs in his, in the trunk of his Hyundai Elantra. And this was after they searched his home and found some empty ammo canisters and some racing fuel and other bomb making equipment in his bedroom that led to the search of the car supposedly. But again, I don't know why it's van, a house car. But we do know he made bombs. Yeah, we know for sure. And in fact, one of the community college emails, the only one that showed any possible evidence that he was planning this is him ordering racing fuel from a company. I think almost everything he did would have had to have been on his encrypted emails. But this one order he places through his community college email that does show him in January, 2024 ordering racing fuel, which is used to make like for and phobombs, yes, of the same material that McVay allegedly used the OKC. So like, yeah, little, little tiny miniature info bombs found in his trunk in the, but we have no idea why he made these bombs or what he plan to do with them. Yeah, my speculation is that again, he probably planned and attack that day. Maybe again, I can't get inside of his mind, but maybe he showed up thinking that I'm going to do a bombing and then realized that what no, I could do a shooting instead. I don't know, he might have had multiple possible plans because the bombs weren't even set to go off in the trunk. Like even if he pressed the button on his transponder, he would have had to flip switches to activate the bombs inside of the trunk beforehand. So yeah, I don't know really what to make of that use. Is his Google search history ever been released? Other than the limited release, well, they you got from what I didn't release anything. I got that from a source who got it himself. Yes, I would say to misphrase that. Outside the federal government. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, nothing. We've gotten assertions like he apparently googled how far was Oswald away from Kennedy. He googled R and C D and C Joe Biden Donald Trump, but nothing that would really shine light on, you know, the details that matter. Did they claim he was transgender too? No, they never claimed he was transgender. I think there were rumors about that at one point. The dad asked his son if he was gay, but that's just because he didn't have a girlfriend. But no, this wasn't a trans type thing. Okay. Shortly after there was widely publicized claims that Ron had something to do with this. What were those real? What was that? Yeah. I saw you actually debating Ted Cruz about this like a year ago saying there's no evidence that Iran, the government of Iran, yeah, the government of Iran tried to kill Trump and and Ted Cruz is like actually, yeah, they hired two hit men to take out Trump in 2024. Well, those hit men actually turned out to be undercover FBI agents. And there was never any serious threat to Trump. It appears to be totally controlled sting operations. You know, at the very least, if not an actual plot to manufacture a phony case about Iran. So what happened here is somebody did a Pakistan if not an actual plot to manufacture a phony case about Iran. So what happened here is somebody did a Pakistani man named a sief mershan was arrested July 12, 2024, the day before butler. And when the case was announced in August, everybody automatically assumed that it had to have been linked somehow. But if you look at the details again, it's a totally controlled sting operation. They were actually monitoring mershan before he even entered the country. And I think some intelligence may have been passed through Israel. That's what the New York Times posted reported a couple of months ago and so did a Max Bloomin thaw. Information was passed through Israel. What does that mean? Yeah, I don't information about the Iranian plot against Trump came in part from Israel. The New York Times specifically reports that the initial intelligence came from Israel. But the thing is, is these, how would argue again, phony cases have been, there's been years of them. The first such case was John Bolton in 2022, where the DOJ announced that Iran tried to assassinate him. And it turns out it was just some guy in Iran talking to an FBI informant. The informant took photos of Bolton's house to try to pretend to be like conducting surveillance. Bolton had full knowledge and was consenting to all this. They announced an indictment, but of course the defendants in Iran. So it's kind of like the the Russia indictments where they never have to prove this case. It's almost just like a big press release. So I mean, presumably considering that Trump launched a war against Iran in February of this year, if there was evidence that Iran was involved in the assassination attempt, the Department of Justice would be pursuing it vigorously and publicizing it in order to backfill a motive for this war. People have used the mershan case as evidence that yes, there was some sort of threat. But you got to measure a threat by both intent and capacity. And here, those absolutely no capacity. Like I said, they let mershan into the country in April 2024 on purpose as part of the sting operation. A reporter named John Solomon actually had sources tell him that this was similar to Operation Fast and Furious, where the ATF was allowing illegal gun purchases to supposedly track where these guns were going. Apparently the Biden administration was doing that with humans, whether you're like letting terrorists into the country on purpose to supposedly track where they're going. So mershan's led into the country and a leader at a local mosque connects him to a driver because he doesn't speak English, doesn't have a car, doesn't have any means. So supposedly a friendly guy is driving him around just because that's part of their culture. They're trying to help each other. But this guy turned out to be an FBI informant. He's actually an Afghan, an Afghan who served in Afghanistan as a translator for the US military. And the story about how he became an informant is unclear because in the DOJ's indictment, they say that he heard what mershan was plotting and he went to the feds and flipped and became an informant. And I could see your face. You probably find that dubious. We found out in court that the official story changed. Supposedly now, he says that he's driving mershan to around and he sees unmarked cars following them everywhere they go. And he's worried because of his experience in Afghanistan that maybe some Taliban is out to get him or something like that. So he happens to have the card of an FBI agent in his pocket who supposedly he had like a friend who died a few years earlier and he got a card from an FBI agent from then. He calls the FBI and says, I think, I don't know, the Taliban's out to get me or something. And they supposedly fill him in on the operation saying, no, we're monitoring mershan because we think he's dangerous. Will you work for us? Will you just kind of be our eyes and ears and go along with whatever he says? So again, this is the official story that came out in court. He agrees to become an informant. Him and mershan have a meeting in a hotel room in early June that's wired for surveillance. And keep in mind that mershan has not proposed anything related to the assassination or otherwise illegal at this point. But there are already full fledged surveillance of him. He sketches out some plan that looks like like a 10 year old would have drawn it about this is the target. How will it die? Again, this is all an Urdu. So we just have like an English translation of what was said. And I think like the vape, like he had a vape that he put down and like this is the target. So again, not not really sophisticated stuff. The informant then introduces him to to undercover FBI agents. The guy, the guys that Ted Cruz was were arguing to you that were hit men, the hit men, the agents take mershan to a strip club. And they have some kind of vague conversation about possibly either assassinating politicians, stealing government documents or staging like protests. Mershan tells them, you know, visit me in Pakistan in September and will give you the official target. They want the undercover FBI agents want him to make a down payment to show that he's serious. And he is trying to get $5,000, trying to scrounge it up from his family. Initially, he's turned down by his family in Pakistan and eventually finds, I guess, cousins in Tanzania who are willing to front him $5,000 through like the Hawales system where he can pick it up in New York, but borrow on it in Tanzania. So the FBI informant actually helps him do this. The informant picks up the $5,000, gives it to Mershan who then gives it to the FBI agents. Like instead of the informant just giving it, you could see they're really trying to set him up. And then it's when he is elite trying to leave the country on July 12th that he's arrested. He's not Iranian, by the way, just to restate. He's Pakistani. Yeah, that's right. He supposedly has family in Iran. And we should, you know, steal man the other side. And when he's arrested, he wasn't interrogated. And he did say that yes, I was working for Iran to try to do something. He wouldn't admit to the Trump assassination plot. So we could definitely, it's not like is egregious as the Whitmer plot, the supposed government kidnapped plot where they're just, they weren't even looking to do anything. And it was totally provoked by the FBI. This, this, you appear to have a somewhat willing defendant, but again, absolutely no capacity. No means, no money. Can't even speak English surrounded by feds. Like there was definitely no relationship to Butler that we know of. No, no, I've heard Joe can't ask that question. Like, well, was Mershawn in touch with Crook's? He didn't even speak English. So and I don't think he was playing with the full deck of cards. So I, yeah, he definitely wasn't. Joe Kent's always last was the informant in touch with Crook's. And I think that's a far more interesting question. But we'll probably never find out because there's actually classified information in the Mershawn case over 1.6 million pieces of evidence that not even Mershawn was allowed to look at it. There's something called the classified information procedures act, which says, well, if discovery is classified, not even the defendant can get it. So it's not a real trial. No, it was a total show trial. And bizarrely again, they tried out all this dubious evidence, but on the last day, Mershawn's attorney allows him to testify. And again, he says that yes, I was working for Iran. So he does think that. And I guess he said he was acting under duress. So, but it was pretty much just an admission of guilt. It's something that he should have said. And during like the plea deal proceedings and not, you know, on the last day of this trial. And so yeah, I have a hard, I don't know really what to make of that. It seems like legal malpractice to be frank. Yeah, well, it's not uncommon to see defendants in cases like this represented by lawyers who are acting against their interests, which is interesting. I've seen it a number of times. Yeah. And so that may be part of the whole, the whole performance. But I don't know. Sure. And just to steal, I guess I've argued with people online about this. And they say, well, even though we didn't have any capacity, we knew because of what he says that he thinks he was working for Iran, that Iran was plotting something. So why not let him into the country just to make this case and stick it to Iran? And, you know, there's a couple of responses to that, I think foremost, it's like while the FBI is constructing, fomenting this case, they let crooks and Ryan Routh totally slip under their noses. But even more importantly, I don't think anybody realized that is this case, arguably is what almost got Trump killed because the reason that the Secret Service snipers were sent to Butler was because of a so-called Iranian threat. The head of Trump's detail, Sean Curran was briefed about an Iranian threat. And he's getting briefed on the Mershaan case a week before Butler. And they decided to send Secret Service snipers to Butler as a result. It was the first time that a former president has ever had Secret Service sniper protection. And the first time that year that the Trump campaign had Secret Service snipers. And I would argue that if that phony Iranian threat never sparked the notion to send Secret Service snipers to Butler, that it would have been local snipers up on those barns behind Trump, instead of the guys who waited 15 seconds to respond. And I could almost guarantee you that the local response would have been better because the locals, they would have been on the local radios. That's another thing about the Secret Service snipers at Butler is they did not pick up the local radios that were on the show. Where's Sean Curran now? He's actually the director of the entire agency, which again is a totally baffling decision. So that's kind of the context that peaks my interest. I mean, I do think whenever you have a new report for a long time, you know that when you press down on one specific story, you find anomalies, things are impossible to explain. You also find coincidences that are just bizarre, but maybe they really are coincidences. But big picture, it's really crazy what we're looking at. So here you have Trump. Two days before the Republican convention, he has not yet chosen on running me. Everyone in, everyone in up for consideration is a neo-conic separate J.D. Vance. Okay. So, and so that's when the assassination attempt takes place before Trump has chosen a running mate of Vice President. The second this shooting happens, you see a bunch of high profile endorsements of Trump. And shortly after all of his legal problems go away. And ultimately in very short order, Trump becomes not just a neo-con, but like the leading neo-con in the world, way more of a neo-con than like Bob Kagan and Bill Crystal ever were. And so you see a complete change in Trump and in official Washington's view of Trump, like people who didn't like Trump and Doris Trump after this. And then you see Trump appoint the people who effectively allowed this to happen by their incompetence at best to positions of greater authority. And then you see Trump shut down the investigation into the shooting. According to reports. Right. And my, like, well, you're, you're exactly right. And according to a reporter Susan Crabtree, I guess Sean Curran is a favorite of Susie Wiles, which I don't know why Susie Wiles would have the power to keep or promote him to be Secret Service Director after he was pretty much. But it's about Trump though. I mean, it's like if you had bodyguards who was to protect you with their lives if necessary, and they allow again by their incompetence at best, somebody to hit you in the ear with a two, two, three round, you'd say, these guys have to go, like you failed. You're one jobs to keep us time for from shooting me at me and you failed. But instead of doing that, Trump promotes the guy. I have no good answer for you as far as that goes. I mean, I'm tormented by it. Yeah, especially considering what happened after where Trump gets effortlessly elected and then becomes this crazed neo-con, he becomes the one thing he said he hated. There's a total change in Trump. It is worth mentioning that Susie Wiles and Sean Curran were both involved in what I would argue like a a sigh up on Trump to make him think the Iranians were out to get him. And this is after the Ryan Ruth event, they actually tell Trump that the Iranians have smuggled missiles into the country and they want to shoot down your plane, which there's absolutely no evidence for that. I mean, no actual documentation, no witnesses, no arrest or made. If that were true, the war would have started a lot earlier. But in any event, they actually put Trump on a decoy plane with, yeah, they used Steve Whitcoff's plane and him Whitcoff and Susie Wiles would ride in Whitcoff's plane while the staff were serving his decoys on Trump Force One, which I'm not sure how they would feel about that. But I mean, it's pretty crazy. Like if you look at the reporting on this, the staff would be going to Trump Force One and the Secret Service would be like, oh, keep your head down. Like acting like a threat was out there. Like it really seemed like a total sigh up to me is bizarre. Repatory to this war, of course. Right. I would think so. Yeah. I mean, you could make the argument that Trump was already an Iranian hawk, but you know, this certainly didn't help. You can't make the argument that Trump was in favor of a regime change war with Iran since he was explicitly against a regime change war with Iran. Like for a decade. Yeah, that's certainly what he said. I did wasn't with the rumors that he was about to launch a war in the last month of like his first presidency. Yeah. I mean, more than rumors that he was under a lot of pressure to do that. But the fact is he didn't. And then he spent his campaign in the 2024 race arguing against regime change. We're attacking people who were in favor of it. And then he launched it and not just launched it, but became this kind of enthusiastic tool of the government of Israel. So I mean, maybe those are all organic changes of heart. But he's never explained how or why. And the demarcation, the change point, the pivot seems to be the shooting. Yeah, who's Ryan Ruth? Ryan Ruth was the second would be assassin. And this happened on September 15, 2024. Just just over two months after Butler, Trump's golfing on his palm beach golf course, he's on the fifth hole. And the Secret Service is doing an advance on the next hole in an agent spots, Ruth hiding in the bushes with an SK S rifle. The agent initially thinks this is a homeless guy until he sees a rifle pointing right at him. He shoots five times at like point blank range about from five or 10 feet away. Mrs. All five times because it's Ruth, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, he missed him five times a close range. And presumably the Secret Service officer had a rifle too. It's not like he pulled out his pistol or anything because he's on the advance, probably armed and ready. So Wow, I didn't know that. Yeah. Another security failure. Well, an embarrassing one too. Yeah. I guess he gets credit for at least not hesitating. He, but again, the guns pointed at him. But he did cause Ryan to flee and Ryan's caught 45 minutes later in another way. Yeah. Yeah. And so this isn't the Secret Service that caught him either. And he could have been at large. This could have been another like Tyler Robinson situation with the Kirk case where he gets into his daughter's Nissan Exeter and speeds off. And it was actually a witness who heard the gun shots and took down Ruth's license plate and gives it to the Palm Beach sheriff's who then put out a warning, be out on, be on the lookout for this Exetera and Ruth is pulled over on the I-95 in another county. And this is this is no way. Yeah. Yeah. Again, like he had an escape plan. Uh, he well, how did the Secret Service agent allow if he's that close to him? How do you what, what did he chase him down? That's, we've got even less details about the Secret Services actions at Palm Beach than we do from Butler. So I don't know. I don't have an answer to that question. So that what happens? So the arrest the guy. And here's where the most tragic part of the whole incident happens is that there's a bunch of traffic backed up on the I-95 do this unexpected arrest and a lady slams into the backed up traffic with her three-year-old daughter in the back seat. The daughter was put into a coma and has permanent brain damage as a result. So, um, regardless how you feel about Trump or anything else, like it's, it's very sad. And a lot of people actually think Ruth's is kind of like a clownish buffoonish guy, but I don't have a whole lot of sympathy for him because this narcissism led to this little girl's permanent brain damage. So what do we know about Ryan Ruth? We know a lot more about him than we do about crooks. I mean, by like midnight of that day, people had already dug up articles about him being in Ukraine and recruiting foreign fighters. Uh, the FBI holds a press conference the next day and says that we actually did receive a tip about him in 2019 that he was a felon in possession of a firearm. We didn't act on that tip, but we're trying to be forthcoming and, you know, we'll do better in the future, I guess, is what they were trying to present. But it's actually far, far worse than that. One of the things I did because I live close to where Ruth grew up in Greensboro, I pulled local police reports about these criminal incidents from the early 2000s. It turns out that he was actually on the ATF's radar since at least 2002. He was a construction worker and he had gotten, uh, he owned a construction firm. He had gotten into into a dispute with a legal immigrants who was hiring. Apparently he wasn't paying them. Uh, he threatens one with a 410 shotgun. They wrestle the shotgun away from him. He gets in his truck and escapes and almost runs over these, uh, these workers of his. They, the, uh, the workers call the police and the police respond and then they find that Ruth was like, uh, possessed in possession of dynamite illegally. And they put him in jail while he's in jail. Uh, somehow he gets a cell phone in there. He calls uh, somebody who was helping him run the business and says, get rid of the dynamite we have on the other sites because, uh, they're about to probably search those sites too. Uh, prison snitch tells the police about this. He gets charged with having that dynamite too. He gets let out on bail about six months later. He's in a police, uh, he gets pulled over. He's got a machine gun in his passenger seat. He runs away from the police, gets into a standoff. Um, and finally after a couple hours, he's arrested again. And the upshot of that is that after all that, he was only, given probation. Uh, but this case was reported to the ATF, which declined to, uh, take any action. How did that guy wind up? I think you said recruiting foreign fighters in Ukraine. Yeah. So can you recruit foreign fighters in Ukraine without the knowledge and participation of US government authorities? Well, he certainly had knowledge of it. Uh, and again, yeah, career criminal just to put a bow on that. He's charged again with a scheme of paying crackheads to steal stuff from a construction sites gets caught in 2010 with like $30,000 worth of stolen equipment that triggers a probation violation from 2002. But that gets waived the next day. And then he gets another round of probation. So a very bizarre of how his cases were handled. But to answer your question, I don't know how he became so politically radicalized in 2016. He was a Trump supporter 2019. He briefly jumped on the Tulsi Gabbard bandwagon. And then when Putin invades, uh, apparently he felt like, you know, he had to stand up for, you know, global freedom or democracy or something like that. So he winds down his construction business, takes a flight to Poland, tries to cross the border and volunteer to serve in the international legion. He's a 58, he's a 58 year old construction worker with no combat experience. So they say, no, we can't really make use of you. So he turns to recruiting foreign fighters as you say, uh, a little interesting factoid in his self published book, which is still available on Amazon. He said his best partner quote, best partner in this venture was an Israeli guy. I was never able to track down who that partner was. This is also crazy. It's absolutely good. But if you're running, I mean, if you've got an extensive criminal record for violent crimes and you wind up in Poland trying to join the Ukrainian foreign legion and then recruiting foreign fighters like CIA knows because they're running Ukraine and the war. They know you exist to their, I mean, of course. Yeah, he was in an A's off battalion commercial, which of course, A's off was sponsored by the CIA. The Nazi battalion. Yeah, the Nazi battalion. He was flagged by multiple people at one point. I think I counted seven federal or international agencies that were aware of what he was doing because a travel nurse, I think her name is like Chelsea Walsh, initially reported him to the FBI, the state department and customs and said, hey, this guy's got really dangerous rhetoric and he's doing sketch sketchy things. He was reported to interpool former CIA officer named Sarah Adams flagged him too. So of course, the CIA was aware. And this state department actually opened up an investigation for him violating international arms trafficking regulations, not that he was trafficking in actual arms, but that also covers the human fighter element of it. So there was actually an open state department investigation at the time of the September 2024 assassination attack. So in September of 2024, Trump was telling me and everybody else that I'm going to end this war between Russia and Ukraine and I can do it. I can do it in one day and I know Putin knows the lens key and I can do this. This happens on his golf course fast forward now, almost two years. And Trump has done nothing done the war. And in fact, his kept it going with American tax dollars can to this day. We're lying about it, but that's a fact. And that's like a big change. No. Yeah, another broken. The guy who is in an A's off battalion commercial tries to kill Trump with an S. K. S. rifle and then lo and behold, Trump is for the Ukraine war. It's bizarre. I don't think Ryan was explicitly told to do this because keep in mind he was put on trial and he actually represented himself. And I think in any time he could have blurred it out. Well, hey, you know, the FBI told me or whatever. I think it's a little more subtle. I did talk to a lot of people who knew him in Ukraine. And I think it's very easy to be influenced. He was around a lot of virulent anti Trump people. At one point, I'm talking to a guy who knew him. This guy thinks like the Russia P tapes are real. He goes off on a tangent to me about how he wants to punch JD Vance in the face. So it's like these type of turbo turbo liberals were like roof's friends over there. And moreover, this isn't like your wine drinking and the hates Trump. These are more high status people. They have they come from money. They have state department connections. Ruth probably thought like, oh, these are really important people. I could be a hero. They hate Trump. I could save the day by doing this. That said, the biggest anomaly I have that suggests something darker is the fact that Ruth had been traveling or been camping at the golf course for about 11 hours before the shooting actually happened. And if you read the house task force final report, Trump actually made a last-minute decision to go golfing. And the secrets for service was informed at 2 a.m. And look at the state search warrant. It says that according to geo location data, Pings, Ruth showed up at like 2 30 a.m. No way. Yeah. And that yeah, that's are you serious? I'm absolutely serious. Ruth that trial ever explained why he since Trump hadn't been planning to golf decided to show up at 2 30 a.m. That was never explained actually Ruth represented himself and the trial was a disaster. So we didn't get any helpful information. I mean, during his opening statement at one point, he goes off on a tangent about like the importance of human rights and democracy. The judge says, Mr. Ruth, this has nothing to do with your case. If you keep doing this, you're going to forfeit your own opening statement. He says, you know, yes, your honor. And he immediately delves right back into the same tangent. The forfeits his opening statement. So it was a real shift shows that there's also classified information like the Mershawn case. There's classified information in the Ryan Ruth case. And Judge Cannon sealed the information on the grounds that it could quote harm national security. Yeah. Now why would a multiple convicted felon construction worker who tries to murder the Republican nominee have classified national security related intelligence anywhere near him? I assume there's probably five of it involved perhaps, you know, surrounded by informants. So just to go back to the question of the classified information, I'm just baffled by this. What could that possibly why would Ryan Ruth intersect? You said, assisted FISA. I'm not sure what that means. Can you explain that a little more? Yeah, sure. So again, like the Mershawn case, there was classified discussion. You said, Sis and Fisa. I'm not sure that means we can explain that a little more. Yeah, sure. So again, like the Mershawn case, there was classified discovery in the Ryan Ruth case that subject to a law called the classified information procedures act, which means that you as a defendant don't have a right to your own discovery. If it's classified information, even if it harms your case. And I think the Cepa law was passed in the late 70s. And at the time, those very select usage of it. It was to like protect overseas informants and to protect certain Fisa information. But increasingly with the advent of text messages and chat groups, the DOJ is just using it to hide things. They might have an informers, an informant overseas, but that person's life is an in jeopardy. It's just all chat room stuff. Well, they might also be orchestrating crimes. And there's, yeah, there's major major scandals that this classified information procedure law has been used to cover up. Just to name a couple, the Pulse nightclub shooting where the shooter's father, Omar Mattem's father was an FBI informant. The shooter himself may have been an informant too. And that's according to Trevor Errenson, but classified the Cepa law was used to cover up information there. The granddaddy of them all, in my opinion, is the Garland Texas shooting in 2015, where there were two people who were allegedly upset at a draw, the Prophet Muhammad contest. They went there to shoot up the contest, which was like at a local fair, I think. And they were stopped right away. But there was a third guy who was behind them, who went to run away. The cops arrested him, but it turns out that that was an undercover agent who were friends, who was friends with the, you know, the supposed terrorist. And also in that case, I don't know if was the same agent or another informant actually told the defense, or the shooters to quote, tear up Texas. So it was a clear case of provocation. And to top it off, they had guns that were purchased at the lone wolf gun store that was involved in Operation Fast and Furious and Pat Khan, which was like this undercover operation in the 90s. So that's a really dark one. It's so dark. But what makes the two assassination attempts that you wrote a book about different is that they, I think, changed world history. My suspicion is that they changed world history and that they changed Trump, the president of the United States. So if you, and I know this, this book is in some ways like a list of unanswered questions. But if you could pick some number of top questions, the most pressing questions that the Department of Justice could answer, the Trump administration could answer, but won't what would they be? The first and foremost question I have in my mind is why did this, sorry to keep harping on this, but why did the Secret Service knife or wait up to 23 seconds before responding? Why does he have contradictory testimony? And this is the one Trump is complimenting in public. That's right. Yeah. And so July 14th, some, you know, Crooks' body still on the rooftop shop and Susan Crabtree, tree reports. And she, this is like a great reporter. She's very deeply sourced in the Secret Service. And she was told that the snipers were given instructions that you can't respond to a threat until that threat actually fires their weapons. This report from Crabtree sparks outrage people like that's preposterous. How could they have to wait until the threat actually start shooting? Tell the principal gets killed before they were spot. And then nuts. The Secret Service denies us as that's not true. They were not under these instructions at all. And I was, again, total speculation, but I, you know, can safe to say that Crabtree was really told this by a legitimate source. I think they were almost like trying to float and excuse out there and seeing like A, B tests, you know, seeing if the public would buy this when the public acted like this is the craziest thing ever. They walked it back. And then we just haven't gotten any good answer, you know, pretty much. But that's your number one question is why did the Secret Service sniper wait 23 seconds after the volleys, two different volleys, eight shots have been fired and one that hit Trump, three other people killed one. He did not respond. That's the number one question. And I I would follow it up by asking if that's the number one question. Why is this the number one guy Trump is complimenting praising. You're going to have flatter. Your guess is as good as my best. It's just bizarre. It is. It's incredibly, incredibly bizarre. I mean, I don't think this Aaron's Aliponi, uh, the local heroic cop who actually shot crooks. Like if I were Trump, I would make July 13th Aaron's Aliponi day, but he doesn't even acknowledge this guy's existence. I mean, on one level, it's just kind of sad, a little bit disgusting that he's not honoring the true heroes. But, you know, I think you're suggesting, you know, something more disturbing going on. I'm suggesting a fact pattern, yeah, known fact pattern that has no non sinister explanation that I can think of. That's all I'm saying. Sure. I can't. And I've, I mean, trust me, I've brought this this to a lot of different people. Like what is this? You know, people very knowledgeable people, and I've never had one person say, well, actually what you're missing is this. Here's why Trump shut down the investigation, which he did fact. Obviously, but it is also fact. I've, I know it. And so I've never had any person say, you know, don't jump to conclusions. Actually, there's a good explanation. I still don't see and you just wrote a book on it. You don't see one either. No, absolutely not. No. I guess another big unanswered question I have has to do with this. Seemingly incomplete toxicology report, which, you know, I hesitate to mention this because I don't know the significance of this, but the person who wrote this report, the medical exam in her, in Pittsburgh, who autopsy crooks, released the body for cremation with fragments and still inside, insists as alopony never hit him. And then doesn't, either doesn't test certain specimens from crooks or didn't put him in his report. This guy is actually a dual Israeli citizen who was in Israel after October 7th, helping identify the bodies there. So, you know, again, actually, actually, yeah, this is in the front page of like the Pittsburgh Jewish Chronicle. He's actually pictured, he's standing next to a guy named Chen Kuggle, who is in Israeli and a source of a lot of these dubious claims about beheaded babies. And, you know, in Goldschmidt, standing right next to him, I guess he volunteered and went over there to help. And again, I'm not- He is a dual citizen. He is a dual citizen. Yeah, that's correct. And he's the medical examiner who did at best an incomplete job with the autopsy or other report anyway of crooks. Yeah, that's a hell of a nine or 10 month run first career to go from, you know, responding to October 7th to autopsy and crooks. And yeah, again, I'm not necessarily suggesting anything, but because you such a key player, we do need to know, you know- And he is not the medical examiner that victims, dead people in Butler township Pennsylvania would normally go to. No, not at all. I mean, again, the excuse was that they had more advanced facilities, but then they do this kind of run of the mill autopsy and toto- So the fireman who was killed at Butler went to the local medical examiner, but Thomas Crooks went to this medical examiner, the dual citizen. Well, he actually, Corey compared to what was taken Allegheny County as well, but they've got contradictory excuses where they say they took Corey there to avoid the press attention at the Butler office. And then Thomas was supposedly sent there for the more advanced facilities. So the facilities that created- Different allowed him to be cremated with the fragments still in him and didn't list the testing of his hair. Okay. That's really, really interesting. Has he and he has not spoken to this medical examiner? No, he has. And he did testify at an open hearing where Clay Higgins pressed him. Clay Higgins, you know, say what you will about him, but I think he's been pretty good on this story. He's the only guy in government who's emphasized Aaron's alopone's heroics. And Higgins is trying to press Goldschmidt by like, how could you possibly say that, um, zalopone didn't hit anything? And uh, Goldschmidt just insisted that the secret service was the only person who shot Crooks that day. No, that's really bonkers. Um, okay. So those are your top two questions. My top question is why the secrecy. Do you have any theories on that? Just total speculation. Um, you know, I do think Crooks was probably almost certainly manipulated possibly in contact with the feds, you know, based on these violent comments that you disclosed a few months ago, you know, openly calling for assassinating politicians on YouTube. That gets you flagged a law enforcement. So that could be some kind of cover up telling like Mr. Trump if this is revealed, it'll be the end of the FBI. You can't do this. You have to keep your mouth shut. Um, could be something darker. I don't know. Do you expect that you'll be like the last guy to look into this? Cause that cause the cover up or the secrecy or the studied lack of curiosity doesn't sort of end of the just department. It extends into the media. Like what is this like, however you feel about Trump, everyone has an opinion. It's just an amazing story. And I just don't know why I'm ending where I began. Why are you the only guy doing this? I thought, yeah, I thought there was probably one of the biggest stories to happen in the last five years, you know, outside of the wars and things like that. And so, um, it's been really puzzling that I don't have much competition. Nor do I have a much interest. I mean, you're again, you're one of the only guys keeping the story alive. So I'm hoping that the book, um, you know, unfortunately it doesn't have like a big smoking gun. This is the guy who did it or this is the institution behind it. It is the best and most complete picture of what happened. I'm hoping it could be a starting point for future researchers, people who want to jump on board and help find out, you know, some of the answers to these bizarre questions we have. We'll probably both be long dead when someone, you know, writes the book. Um, I hope that's wrong, but in that's 10, 10s to be the way this stuff plays out. You know, it's 100 years after Lucitania and it was like, actually, there weren't our amendments on the boat. The Trump assassination plots with the investigations missed and why it matters. Ken Silva. Thank you very much for doing it. Thanks again.