Hey, everybody. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Squarespace. Squarespace is the only one platform that makes it fast and easy to create your own professional website. And I mean, really professional. Excellent outstanding website as if it was designed by like some Wizard HTML expert. Squarespace has beautiful designs for you to start with. All style options that you need to create a unique website for you and your business, a simple drag and drop interface, and the offer 24 seven support, which I doubt you'll need. It really works excellent. If you can attach pictures to an email or to a Word document, if you know your way around a computer, drag and drop, super easy to do, and it works on everything. It'll work on iPhones, and droids, windows, Linux. Really, like I can't say enough about Squarespace. I have a ton of friends that use it. And I'm actually starting up a blog that I'll be using Squarespace to design the website. So I'm going to build it myself. Squarespace also has a logo creator where you can create a clean, simple logo design for yourself in minutes. And every design automatically includes a unique mobile experience that matches the overall style of your websites, your content. We look great on every device every time. For a free trial and 10% off your first purchase, go to squarespace.com and enter the code word Joe. That's squarespace.com enter the code word Joe for a free trial and 10% off your first purchase Squarespace. A better web starts with your website. That's how every copy ends. I would suggest they remove that, but they make me sad. They don't make me, but I don't want to be rude. Tell them about their idea sucks. But they're fucking websites awesome. Squarespace.com. Use a code word Joe. We've also been sponsored by LegalZoom. And LegalZoom has an A plus from the better business purer. You can't get any better than that. I love it. I love that LegalZoom is a service that allows you to do things that you would normally have to go to an attorney's office and make an appointment, wait in line to all that nonsense and go out of your way to drive across town. You can do a lot of shit in your home easily. Things like form an LLC, form an S corporation, trademark, real estate documents. You can make a will, a personalized will, power of attorney, living trust, all that kind of shit. You can do all of that through LegalZoom.com. And it's very easy to do. LegalZoom was developed by some of the best legal minds in the country, according to them. I'm sure there's like a debate. The other legal minds weren't involved like bullshit. I'm the best. Anyway, excellent legal minds. Like I said, A plus from the better business purer. We've used it. Brian used it to form deathquad.tv. We used it originally to form on it.com. The LLC for on it. So very easy to do. And for special savings, be sure to enter Rogan in the referral box and check out, protect your family, protect your future at LegalZoom. What is it a gun? What do you say in LegalZoom was developed by top attorneys to provide self-help services at your specific direction, but they are a not a legal firm. They're not a law firm. But what they can do is they can contact you, put you in contact with a third party independent attorney. So if you're in the middle of filling out the documents, you're like, oh my god, I've done this wrong. I'm probably going to get sued or go to jail. They'll hook you up. Don't worry about it. Easy. Easy peasy. Again, go to LegalZoom.com, enter the code word Rogan, our OGAN in the referral box, check out and save yourself some cash. LegalZoom can't recommend them enough. And we're also brought to you last, but not least, by on it.com. That is O-N-N-I-T. What is on it? The idea of on it. Even the name on it. The idea is to get on it, get your shit together. On it is what we call a human optimization website. We sell the very best in strength and conditioning equipment. Things like kettlebells, steel maces, steel clubs, things that provide what they call functional fitness, functional strength. And what does that mean? Functional strength, functional fitness means like things that when you work out, it could directly translate to real world applications like simple stuff like moving a couch. Do a lot of kettlebells, lift a lot of weights, get your body strong, and you'll be able to pick shit up and move it around better. It sounds so simple, but that's a good thing to have. It's a good quality to have, to have a strong body. It's essentially like if life was a race and you were in a car and you could just do things to your race car to make it stronger and faster and handle better. Wouldn't you do that? Of course. Well, your body essentially is your vehicle for getting through this life. And you can improve it. You can improve it with nutrition. You can improve it with supplementation and you can certainly improve it with strength and conditioning exercises. And we sell the very best shit when it comes to things like weight vests and medicine balls. And we even have videos. I keep recommending it, but I can't recommend it enough because it's really excellent. The Keith Weber Extreme Kettlebell Cardio series. What's great about those is Keith's a stud. He's an awesome shape and he does the exercise while you do them. So you just follow along with him. And when someone's in really good shape and you're doing it along with him, you want to work out hard. It makes you motivated. So we're actually also having a 72 hour sale right now. As of right now, the time is 118 on September the 2nd. And there's two days, 22 hours, 41 minutes and 12 seconds. You can get 15% off everything using the code September 72. That's September 72 for the 72 hour sale. SEP 72. I shouldn't say September. SEP 72. So save yourself some money. 15% off everything. All right. Your freaks go to on it. Oh, and NIT. And if you listen to this after that time, use the code word Rogan and you will save 10% off any and all supplements. We got a lot of stuff at on it that has not been there before. If you haven't been there in a while, we're constantly adding new things that we find online, including. We have a new version of T plus that also comes with some new studies that we did that are published on the website. All the stuff that we have, whether it's Alpha Brain or Shroom Tech, everything is described in the greatest detail we can, along with research. All the research papers with reference pertaining to the individual ingredients in any of the supplements. And you can get it all at on it. Oh, and NIT. All right. That's it. Boom. Done. Sam Harris is here. Why fuck around? Cue the music, Jamie. Go, Rogan, flying fast. Check it out. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night. All day. My friend Sam Harris, author, awesome dude, martial artist and author of waking up a guide to spirituality without religion. I told you I first found out about you from my friend Joe Silva, who's the matchmaker for the UFC. Who gave me your book. He gave me letters to a Christian nation many, many years ago. When did you post that post eight, two thousand six? Yeah, he gave it to me like around that. He's like, got to read this. It's awesome. And I did. And look, we're pals. Here we go. Yeah. That's great. And your new book, waking up a guide to spirituality without religion. Well, that's impossible. So your book is nonsense because I need God your life. Well, no, actually, I'm running to the other side of that where spirituality makes no sense unless you believe in religion. But what's there's no such thing as a spirit. So, you know, why would you, why would you want to endorse something called spirituality? That's a kind of a, that's a, that's fair. Isn't it? Like, what is a spirit? I mean, don't you have to have faith in something to sort of just the idea of a spirit? If you're going to, if you're going to talk about spirituality or a spirit, like what are you really talking about? Yeah, well, I'm definitely not talking about a spirit or a soul or anything that can float off the brain at death. And I think spirituality is one of these words that we just have to reclaim because there's really not an English equivalent for, for this area of inquiry. So if you want to take seriously the, well, one question, I pull these off because I'm, yeah, yeah, I'm checking. Cool. You have what? I'm scanning like that. It's kind of distorted and sound. Oh, really? Yeah. Could be my brain could be the, but it's a lot better with these off. So maybe God talking year. You're blocking a mountain. It's possible. Yes. If God needs, if God needs these, we know his powers are limited. I'll take these off too. We'll leave it up to Jamie to find out whether or not. There we go. Cool. So nearly as loud. So, yeah. So this is a big hangup for atheists and secularists and skeptics. This idea that spirituality is a word that means magic and superstition by definition and by its etymology because it goes back to the, the Latin spirit who's which comes from the Greek, new, meaning breath and it's this idea that the spirit is, you're asserting some kind of dualism. This is a spirit that's internal to the body that is not produced by the body that can leave the body at death. And it's true that most people most of the time have some quasi mystical spooky association with the concept of spirituality and it's obviously linked up with all the stuff that people believe about crystals and angels and all the other stuff that I don't want to be entangled with. But I just think there's no word for, if you're going to take seriously the project of becoming like Jesus, whoever he was, or becoming someone who could actually love his neighbor as his self for becoming like the Buddha or just exploring the furthest reaches of positive human experience through meditation or psychedelics or some other methodology that really perturbs consciousness. There's no word for that endeavor and to call it positive psychology or happiness or well-being. Most people think they know what you mean when you use words like happiness and well-being and love and yet they have no idea how rarefied things can get if you take the right drug, if you spend three months in silence doing nothing but meditate. It's just there are many layers to this thing. So I've tried to reclaim the term spirituality and sometimes I was talking to a recently on a podcast, during an analogy to the word evil, which is another word that people are uncomfortable with because once we understand things like psychopathy and other ways in which the human mind can malfunction, it seems that there's no rational basis to be talking about evil but I think we need the word evil. I think we need to reclaim the word evil for a secular rational conversation because we need a big word for really the worst of human impulses. Well, evil and good, they don't seem to be dependent upon a religious belief. I think evil is just what affects a gang of people in a negative way or one individual, poison a water supply. Obviously that's an evil deed. You're going to kill a bunch of people. You're going to cause a bunch of pain. That seems to make at least some sense without religion and as does good, a good and evil. Actually, not for evil, the confidence in the use of the term evil has definitely eroded among secular scientists types because just picture it. Once you understand what we're calling evil at the level of the brain, once you find a gene for a dopamine receptor that correlates with psychopathy or deficit of such a receptor, then you begin to say, well, this is all just, we're talking about biology. We're talking about bad luck. We're talking about illness. Then what does evil name in that case? Right. Is it psychopathy or if you do something, say if someone, let's talk about like Israel and God's. I don't like say if you are in Gaza and a bomb is hit your apartment building and killed your family and you've made it your goal to kill as many Jews before they take you out. Is that psychopathy? Is that evil? What is that kind of retribution? Negative. Negative. Definitely a gray area. I think with evil we want to reserve it for those situations in which unprovoked. Yeah. There's no story that person can tell that would seem to justify this to a rational person. You can't think, well, if I were in that person's shoes, I would be doing the same thing. You think this is a twisted kind of sadism. This person is taking pleasure in causing suffering to other human beings unnecessarily. So a way that I can't, that doesn't resonate with me. So the far end of the extremity where you have somebody who's, you know, whether you, it's, you know, Hitler or a kind of a lower scale version of evil. I think my favorite example of late has been, I actually have one who I spoke about a fair amount on the topic of free will, which I think we'll get into, is Uday Hussein, Saddam Hussein's eldest son. I mean, this guy was just as pure a psychopath as you're ever going to find. This is someone who when he would see a wedding in progress in Baghdad, he and his thugs would descend and rape the bride and sometimes torture and kill the bride. And the theater to dogs. Yeah, I actually hadn't heard that. Yeah. So this is just so when you hear that, that's not the same thing as hearing that somebody's house got bombed and their family died and then they become committed to harming their aggressors or people like their aggressors. Right. So. But yeah, so anyway, just to back up and that point the, I feel like I'm embarrassed, frankly, by the term spirituality too. I think it's, it's just not, it's not a great word given its history and yet the only similar words that do a similar job or even spooky or something like mysticism, which is just even more esoteric a term. But I use the word contemplative to name any practice that would would be designed to discover what consciousness is like independent of just thinking about it. So yeah, I think we need a new word right. Yeah, new word for the thing is new, it's new words is also dead end to me. Yeah, I hate neilogism. I hate it when some author comes forward with his, his word that no one's ever heard of and he's hoping to voice it on the rest of humanity is yeah, here's a new noun that you all have to choke on. And it just also works. When it, whenever someone comes up with their own jargon like that it's, it's usually a red flag as well. It's like what are you doing? You sort of redefining the world or I start in a cult like coming up with your own jargon. You know, when people come up with their own terms for things and their numbered lists. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But what is, what is the purpose of this book or what is the theme of this book if you know get past the word spirituality without religion being a good person without religion. And the moral actually that was the thesis of my last book or the book before last the moral landscape where I talk about how we can understand strong claims of right and wrong and good and evil in the context of science that you can have a strong conception of moral truth without believing that you get your morality from God or from a holy book. And so that's something I've argued for. Now this is a, this is really in my view a completion of the project I started with The End of Faith where I started by just noticing how divisive and unnecessary and ultimately dangerous are incompatible religious ideas are and how we need to have a secular conversation about the problem there. And then I went into, so first I started talking about just how there's a, there's a, by definition a zero some conflict between science and religion because there's a zero some conflict between believing things for good reasons and believing things for bad reasons. And the people who are satisfied with bad reasons and willing to defend their bad reasons with violence or with even with, you know, policy are hostile to the project of of science. But then what you, so once you've criticized that problem and notice that these books can't possibly be infallible given all that we know through science and notice that they can't possibly be infallible given that they're all mutually contradictory. So Christians and Muslims can't both be right. Then you have to grapple with the fact that there's all these good things that people think they're getting out of religion and they want to find some other way to get those things. And so the moral landscape was my argument that we can have a strong conception of ethics without believing any bullshit. And this is my effort to open up a conversation on the topic of spirituality which is the center of spirituality for me is the phenomenon of self transcendence. And that's just the fact that it's possible to lose your sense of self, lose your sense of being an ego, lose your sense that you're a rider on the horse of consciousness riding around inside your head, not exactly identical to your physical body. Most people don't feel that they simply are their bodies. They feel like they have bodies and that their bodies are kind of vehicle that they're riding around in. They feel like they're behind their eyes in a way that they're not behind their knees. Their knees are down there. They're their knees and the rest of their body are kind of property in a strange way. And most people most of the time feel they're in their heads and that they're a subject and they're a thinker of thoughts and that there's a thinker in addition to the thoughts themselves. They don't feel that their thoughts are rising in consciousness but most people feel that they are the thinker that is authoring these thoughts. And this actually goes right to the issue of free will as well because the feeling of having free will is the feeling, is the other side of the coin of the feeling of being a self, being a thinker of being an author of actions and intentions. So I'm arguing that it's possible to cut through that illusion and their good reasons to believe that it's an illusion based on just the underlying neurology and what we know about causality and what we know about the brain. But you can actually penetrate this illusion subjectively and that the spirituality is the act of cutting through it subjectively and no longer feeling that you're an ego riding around inside a bag of skin. And that one's life improves in many obvious ways once one is able to cut through that illusion. So this is kind of a sustained argument for disciplined introspection in the form of meditation and other techniques in the context of science and a discussion of the brain and why the concept, the conventional notion of self doesn't make much sense given what we know about the brain. It's a very complex situation as well, isn't it when you talk about the concept of self and that the person is the consciousness is inside the body because it's also dependent upon how the body feels. Like the body feels bad, the consciousness is affected. Your thought process is affected when you're sick. Your thought process is affected if you're stressed out, if you're angry, if you're not getting exercise, if you're not getting good nutrition, if you're, you know, any sense of non-wellness in the body is reflected. On the way that person thinks, it makes it more difficult to think with clarity. So it's not as simple as like we're riding in this thing, but this thing also affects the way you know you, when you think of you, who you are. I mean I'm vastly different pre and post workout. I'm a different person. Yeah. You know, I mean my thought, if you presented me with the same situations, the same dilemmas and problems pre and post workout, I'd probably have a pretty different reaction to them. Yeah, and it's not even just, all the variables aren't even within your own body. You're different in different relationships, in different situations. You're walking to a restaurant and you're, you're talking to the hostess and just the frame around that interaction. Your expectation that you're in a restaurant talking to someone who wants to see you, that changes your, just the way you approach human interaction. And if you had a different frame, it would be, and things would be different. And it's almost true to say that different selves are called forth in those different situations. Where you're, you just can't be the same self with certain people. Yes. You can't even access. There's certain people who I am just effortlessly funny with because they are such an easy laugh. And I don't even know what it is. It's just like there's something, there's so ready, there's so poised to laugh. And for whatever reason, somehow the dynamics of our conversation are such that I am my funny as self with that person without ever trying to be funny. And I'm not aware of being on, but I just keep falling into this thing. And there are other people where I'm profoundly awkward with these people. If you get put me in front of someone who is, whose awkwardness is just tuned up a few notches beyond mine. I've become the Asperger's guy with him. And it's odd, but there's kind of a resonance that gets set up. And it's based on conscious and unconscious mechanisms, obviously, that we have certain variables that we, it's not to say you can't influence these things. You can go into a situation where they conscious thought that you're going to somehow transform it, and that will have whatever effect it has. And the mind is complicated. It's very complicated. And it's a lot of it is dependent. Our own consciousness is dependent upon interacting with other consciousness. Which is one of the reasons why solitary confinement is such a horrible torture to people. Like when you separate a person's mind indefinitely from any other mind, many other interactions. It freaks people out. I was reading about this. I was actually just a, you're going to endanger forgiveness because it's interesting you raise the point of solitary confinement. Because the experience that has got me to write this book is very much like solitary confinement. I went on meditation retreats in my, mostly in my 20s for weeks and months at a time. And you really are just on many of these retreats just locked in a room, meditating for 18 hours a day in silence. You're not making eye contact with anyone else. You're not talking to anyone else. To some degrees, it's not, it's obviously not like being in a prison. But, and you're there on your own, on your own volition. But this is many people's worst nightmare. And it would have been, at one point in my life, it would have been my worst nightmare. I went on a, it's actually where I start the book. I went on an outward bound when I was 16, which has a wilderness program in the mountains of Colorado. And it was this 23 day course, which culminated in this ritual they called a solo. Where they put us, they parked us all next on the outskirts of a mountain lake for three days and three nights. And there was no food so we fasted. And they were just told to just contemplate the universe. And we were given, there were no books. You know, all you could do was write in a journal. And this was the first time in my life where I was actually in solitude. I had, this was the first time in my life I had no one to talk to or nothing to read or nothing to distract myself with. And I was, you know, so I, in a tent, got a tent in a sleeping bag and a blank journal. And the most beautiful landscape possible. You know, where it'll almost 11,000 feet in the San Francisco Mountains. So you just got, you know, the perfect stars every night and this pristine mountain lake. And I was as miserable as I'd ever been in my life. I mean, just crushed by loneliness and boredom. I mean, just just that my mind was completely out of control. And all I did, my journal reads like they just the, you know, the, the, I mean, the unabomber is manifesto. It was a far more balanced, you know, expression of, of man's subjectivity than what I was up to at 16 on this solo. And I was just making lists of the foods I wanted to eat when I was just craving every, you know, I was making lists. It was just, it was insanity. And then when I came off of this after three days and learned that some of the other people on, on the course loved it and just felt completely transformed by having three days of, with nothing to do, I just, I had no idea what to make of this. I just like, how could they have possible, how could that have not been anything but a torture for these people? And so then I went for, I was 16 there and it took me a few more years to see any kind of path forward and become interested in these things. But I eventually went on to spend, you know, almost two years on silent retreats in my twenties, in circumstances of isolation and sensory deprivation far worse than, than that meet a mountain solo. Because I wasn't in, in a specially beautiful place. And so it really is, it's, your life is such, your life is entirely dependent upon your mind. Now it's not to say that external circumstances don't matter. But the, I mean, there are people who can be genuinely happy and at peace in, in terrible circumstance, subjectively terrible circumstances. And there are people who have everything who are miserable. And so the fact that, that, that the, the delta is that big and, and can be that uncoupled from external circumstances, shows you that it's really, you know, you are almost entirely dependent on the character of your thoughts, really. I mean, the, the, the mechanism, which I go into at a great length in the book is that, the difference is really the difference being, being lost and thought and recognizing thoughts for what they, are. Most people are thinking every moment of their lives and aren't aware of it. Or they, they may have an abstract idea that they're thinking every moment of their lives, but they're not aware of the, just the, the automaticity and the relentlessness of this conversation. They're having with themselves. And to be identified with the next thought that arises in consciousness is, is, is to be its mirror prisoner. And so the, the, you are then identical to whatever subjective state emotional state, meet a mood state, it dictates. So if it's, if it's a self critical thought or a fearful thought or a hateful thought, that's, that is the character of your consciousness in that moment. And, until you can break that spell until you can see thoughts as thoughts, just arising and passing away in consciousness, you, see no alternative. There's just no basis for an alternative. And then you're as miserable as your thoughts demand. Was part of what was really fucking with you when you were 16 years old, the fact that you were 16, you know, that's how old you were when you were up there at the mountain. Yeah. Yeah. It was, I mean, because you have, so few experiences to reference and the time alone with your mind is more painful perhaps because you're developing and you're not, quite a man, yeah, you're not an adult, you don't have personal sovereignty. So you don't have like this. I think like today, if like you took me and said, oh, you have to spend a few days alone up in the mountain. I'm so filled with things that I have to do on a regular basis. I'm so filled with responsibilities with, if I knew that I was going to do that, I probably would find some pretty deep enjoyment in it. Because I have so many life experiences drawn so many thoughts in my mind that would probably, that would probably benefit from having that time just with nothing coming in but nature. Yeah. Yeah. Well, being 16 might have had a little to do with it because almost everyone else on the course was maybe a decade older. So they, and they had a better time. But no, I think it was, I think there are 16 year olds who would have had a fine time and there are definitely 20 year olds and 30 year olds and 40 year olds who would be miserable in that circumstance because I see them on meditation retreats and on my own retreats I've experienced, you know, deep feelings of loneliness and sadness. Because it's hard to leave everyone you love for three months. You know, it's like, you go on whatever age, you know, 25 is, I guess I was 30 the last time I sat a, I was exactly 30 last time I sat a three month retreat. But you just get you unplugging from your life. You're saying goodbye to everyone, you know, you know, for all you know someone's going to die while you're on retreat. So there's this real discontinuity with every project and every aspiration and everything you have going on. And also most of the people in your life can't believe you're doing this. It's not much support. You know, people just totally inscrutable. Yeah. That you would decide to do this. And then you'll essentially lock yourself in a closet. I mean, like you essentially lock yourself in a room as big as these two tables and then you're just left with your thoughts. And the problem is just that just thinking itself, even thinking happy thoughts is stressful. When you actually, when you really start paying attention to it, that just the sheer automaticity of it, just to be just to not be able to stop the conversation. is stressful. When you actually, when you really start paying attention to it, that there's the sheer automaticity of it, that just to be just to not be able to stop the conversation. And you just can't stop talking to yourself for a second. And that, now, eventually you can't, eventually you become concentrated on, in this case, the practice I was doing is called Vapasana, which is mindfulness meditation. And the practice there is just to become very keenly aware of you start with the breath as an object of meditation. But once you get a little concentration, you open it up to everything. So sounds and sensations and even thoughts themselves become objects of meditation where you're just noticing whatever arises in consciousness. But the difference between noticing a thought arise and pass away and being lost and thought is huge. And this is the all-important difference. And it takes some real concentration to see a thought arise and pass away. Because without the concentration, all of a sudden the thought's just you. It just comes up from behind in a way. And you're just feel identical, in a strange way, you feel identical to this sentence in your head. You feel, there's, I mean, thoughts are just sentences and images. When you actually look at what a thought is, it's very hard to see how you could, how could ever define your subjectivity in the first place. It's just like, your thoughts are no more substantial than the sound of my voice. I mean, you're just hearing the sound of my voice as a kind of appearance in consciousness right now. And it's not defining you. It's not, you don't feel identical to it. It doesn't have a real implication so much for how you feel. You're not. It's just, it's easy to see, or to, in this case, hear that it is a, and just an appearance in consciousness. It comes and it goes. It starts and it stops. And it's all sort of in plain view. But with your own thoughts, with your own voice, it, it, it sneaks up on you in a way that is, and even to use the word you in this case is a little misleading because it, but it, it colors consciousness and trims it down in such a way that it just feels like you. It doesn't feel, it doesn't feel, it doesn't feel, I mean, the feeling of being a self, the feeling that we call I, the feeling of being an ego in the head is what it feels like to be thinking without knowing that you're thinking. It's the, it's the feeling of this next thought capturing consciousness. So when you say that thoughts, you are identical to thought. So if you're thinking something really fucked up like, I'm fat, I'm a loser, I'm always going to be a loser. Like that is identical to who you are because you are sort of framing yourself in this thought. These thoughts that are, you're carrying around your mind there, what's occupying your consciousness. If those thoughts are in the forefront of your consciousness, if they identify you, you are that, you are those thoughts, and you are identical to that idea. Yeah. And they're, and they're driving behavior and they're driving emotion and they're driving each subsequent train of thought. So it's, it's determining the future expressions of your consciousness and your body as well. So you're, you're, and again, I'm not, I'm not separating the mind from the body here. I mean, all of this is, we could talk about this in terms of events in the brain as well, but it's much easier to talk about it in terms of our first person experience as thoughts and moods and emotions, etc. But, you know, for the purpose of this argument, you know, there's no doubt that the brain is, is doing this. It's just, we're not, you know, that side of the story that is much less to say about that side of the story at the moment. The brain is doing it. But you're, you're, whatever it is, your personality, your consciousness, your, your center is sort of what guides the brain one way and another. Like, it is possible to, while in the middle of having these thoughts to say, you know what, I'm not going to entertain these anymore and I'm going to think about something positive, but it's very difficult. Yeah. Surprisingly difficult. Even as someone, like myself, who spent a lot of times, a lot of time meditating, especially a lot of time in isolation tanks, it's still difficult every now and then of something's bothering you to just get it out of your head. Like, yeah, especially for me, one of my main issues is my work. Like, like stand up comedy, for instance. Like, if I have a show and I fuck a bit up, it goes wrong. Like, if I have two shows in a night and I fuck a bit up on the first show, I'm okay. If I could redo it on the second show, we're good. But if I fuck it up on the second show, God damn it. Now I have to think about that thing all night. And I'll try to let it go. I'll try to get it out of my head. But I rationalize it by saying, the only reason why I've gotten so good is because of this crazy obsession that I have with getting it correct. And that when things go awry or when I go down a bad path, it doesn't quite pan out. And then I have to sort of restart the whole conversation on stage that that uncomfortable moment. And then the subsequent uncomfortable recollection of that moment is the very motivation that's led me to be a good stand up in the first place. So I kind of rationalize it. But fuck man, when I'm eating dinner after a show and I just flub one word that fucks up a joke, I'll be in the middle eating pancakes going shit. Yeah. I can't get it out of my head. It doesn't matter. I've had wonderful life and a beautiful family and had great friends and a fantastic job and a wonderful, just a dream life. It doesn't matter. I flub the word. And fucking idiot, you know, like why I'm cutting into my food. Well, that's an interesting moment because so there's a moment before the thought has arisen, right, where you have not yet remembered the flub lines. So you're just cutting into your dinner. And then it's an image or part image, part sentence, something, there's some expression of thought that arises in consciousness. And you are, you do not, you do not witness it arise. It's not like, it's a difference between seeing it watching a movie and being totally lost in the movie, forgetting that you're sitting in a room with a bunch of other people looking at light on a wall. You're just, you're totally captured by the movie. It's different between that and actually just seeing the screen, the light on the wall, hearing the sound of the projector, seeing the scene, the, seeing the artifice. And it's possible to see thoughts just as essentially like a play of light on the wall. You see it before it captures you. And the difference is total. And it is kind of like, it's almost like playing a video game where you can now not get killed in the same spot over and over again. Like, it's like, you know, not losing in the same boss fight over and over again. Yet we, we lose in that same fight a thousand times a day. But when you can actually see thoughts for what they are, so the next time you flub a line and the next, and the next time you recall it, it's possible with an, and again, it takes a certain degree of concentration to be able to do this. But concentration becomes kind of a native capacity at a certain point. It's like Jiu Jitsu or anything else. I mean, you have certain skills and then you don't really lose them. Then you can just see it and it just comes and it goes and it doesn't have, and it's, and it's going, it's going, it's really gone. It's, and it doesn't have the same emotional necessity. It doesn't trigger the same mental state. And now that's not to say that these negative mental states haven't had the, the benefit that you ascribe to them. So yeah, it could be that you were as good as you are because you were motivated to not embarrass yourself ever again because it felt so terrible. Right. So you hated this experience of flubbing a line. You hated the memory of, of, and the reliving of it the next day. You hated what it did to your, your time with your family. And so you thought, I'm, you know, the next tour, I'm going to get this, I'm going to, I'm going to get up earlier, I'm going to work harder, etc. So yeah, that, that's all part of the clockwork that's, that's causing you to, to hone your craft. But I would argue that a little mental suffering goes a long way. I think we, we, nine times out of 10 or 99 times out of 100, we suffer unnecessarily and there's no, no good comes from it. It's just, it's not actually making us better people. It's making us more neurotic people, we're more worried, we're worse, husbands, we're worse fathers. And, and it's time to, to break that spell. And, and, and then you can, you can selectively be as, as uptight and neurotic as you want. But you, but you can, it gives you a kind of freedom to pick your, your, your, um, your priorities in a way rather than be captured by just whatever the next thought happens to be. I've also found for me personally, the discipline and diligence are the, uh, the best mitigating factors for dealing with neurotic thoughts. Like if I have an issue, um, one of the big issues, if I've ever had anything, uh, go wrong was that I didn't work hard enough. So if I know for a fact that I worked as hard as I could, like back when I was competing, that was a huge issue. And it also, mitigated nervousness. Cause, look, whenever you're involved in a competition as terrifying as a full contact martial arts tournament where concussions are not just likely, but it's someone in, there's a hundred people fighting in this tournament. Someone's going to sleep. So I'm going to get knocked out. It's going to be you. Someone's going to get their nose broken. Someone's going to get hit. Um, a lot of people are probably. If I, if I trained really hard, if I know I did everything that I could, I ate right, I slept right. I put in all the practice. I worked on all my weaknesses. I, you know, I didn't neglect my strengths. I was much less nervous, much less nervous and much better at dealing with losses. Whereas losses, uh, I think losses for martial artists can be insanely devastating. Like, uh, I was listening to this interview with Travis Brown, you know, he is, you have to see heavyweight one of the top, top five guys in the world. Great fighter. lost recently to Fabrizio for doom. Uh, kind of a title elimination fight. So Fabrizio's gone on and he'll be fighting Kane Velasquez for the heavyweight title now in October, right in Mexico in a huge October or November. November. Believe it's November. One of those, um, he's fighting, uh, Kane Velasquez for the title, huge fight. It could have been Travis Brown. Right. Travis Brown lost the fight by decision. And, you know, it was a, it was, he lost without a doubt, but, you know, wasn't embarrassing. It wasn't, uh, he didn't get knocked out in the first round. He didn't get submitted really quickly, but he did lose the fight. And it was apparently devastating to him. I mean, he's talked in great depth about lying in bed in the fetal position crying. I mean, his just fucking 250 pound gladiator and he's curled up in a fetal position crying. Well, the truth is, I mean, the ego is always curled up in the fetal position crying. That's, we all have that, uh, part of ourselves. And it's, um, yeah, I mean, that, and that's what is so excruciating about the self, the self really is the center of the center of our problem. You know, and when things are really going well, we are consoled by how well they're going, but we know it's, it's vulnerable to change. Me, only as good as your last appearance in some sense. I mean, I could do something incredibly embarrassing in the middle of this podcast. And that will be the thing I'm thinking about tonight. And I'll be, I'm thinking, you know, God, I can't believe I fucked that up so bad in Joe's podcast. And that it's, you're always vulnerable to that for the reason for as long as you as long as you're in the center of this thing vulnerable to what other other people think about you and, um, uh, captive of your really crazy rehearsal of experience when something like this happens to you, just think of how many times you repeat it to yourself. It's like you tell yourself the same story 15 times a minute for hours. And it doesn't strike you as insane, but it actually is insane. It's like if you're, if you are thoughts could be broadcast on a monitor for other people to hear, and they could hear you repeat yourself over and over again, it would seem starkly crazy. It just, and yet it seems normal. It's kind of like like the dream state where you go to sleep and you're in your bed and you, you know, you're, everything's a bane, the laws of physics. And then in the next conscious moment, you are, you know, at a party somewhere, it's talking to someone who you know is dead and saying, Oh, I can't believe you're still alive now. And, and, and then, you know, there's a gorilla in the room. And, and, and, and none of this strikes you as crazy. It's, I mean, the, the, the craziest things about dreams is that the mind seems to just accept them, they accept these changes one after the other without any sense that there should be continuity. And this is due, there's no question that this is due to the diminished activity of the frontal lobes during REM sleep. And we just are, are truth a reality testing hardware has come largely offline during dreams. But there's something analogous happening when we're just thinking in the waking state because thoughts are, thoughts don't make much sense. Because the repetition is, we don't notice how crazy the repetition is and we would notice it if we were talking to each other. If I was telling you the same thing 15 times in a row without, you know, without honoring your expectation that I might move on to another topic, you know, you would, you would notice and I would notice, right? And yeah, and the other thing is that's crazy about thoughts is that much of our thinking, certainly our linguistic thoughts, are, it's structured as though we're a conversation and we play both signs of the conversation. So I, you know, I'll sit down here and, you know, I said, I came in and I sat down and, and I brought you a book and I wanted to sign the book and I see this pen over here and, and I think, oh good, there's a pen over there right now. I can see that there's a pen over there. So who am I, why do I have to say there's a pen over there, right? Who am I telling? Is there someone in me who can't see that there's a pen over there? Right. So there's a conversation that starts like, and I'm both sides of it. That doesn't make any sense, right? And yet we are, our subjectivity is continually just, it is, it is discursive in that way and there's just voices talking to each other. And there's not only, not only are there not two of us in there, there's not even one of us in there, there's not the thinker isn't there, but we seem to have two of them. It's like we're constantly talking to mommy and daddy and we, in fact, that could be the way this conversation gets internalized because, you know, I can see it in my kids now where they, sometimes I'll leave, listen to my daughter playing by herself and she's talking to herself out loud in the way that, that, you know, you'd have to be sort of crazy to do as an adult, but as a kid you're just, you know, you're just talking out loud. And eventually we all learn to internalize that conversation. But, and when you don't, when people who can't internalize it, well, they're the crazy ones. You know, the person who's walking down the street just saying, oh good, there's a pen over there. And what got up, we're late and God, I mean, Joe is going to really be pissed. I can't believe I should have checked the traffic before I left. These are the kinds of thoughts I could think, silently in the space of my mind, but, and it wouldn't be starkly crazy, but to verbalize them, then you're a madman. And that, that difference between letting them out and just knowing to keep your mouth shut is a captures a large part of the difference between being, you know, a proper lunatic and a normal person. But what I argue in this book is that it's normal isn't good enough. You know, I mean, normal, the normal state of consciousness wherein you are just chased at a bed every morning by your thoughts and you think, think, think, think, think every waking moment until you fall helplessly asleep at night, that's not necessarily a happy place to be. And it's not the only alternative. And so, and again, and thought is not that your goal is not to have a mind without thoughts. I mean, we need thoughts and you can't, you know, everything we do as human beings, for the most part, requires thought to get off the ground. So our relationships are based on thoughts and our every public institution and science. It's all, it's this conversation we have with ourselves and with others is based on, on language, almost, and concepts that are mediated by language. And so you need thought, but the difference is, the difference is between thinking and knowing that you're thinking, and really knowing that you're thinking in the moment of thoughts arising or being lost and thought. And then when you're lost and thought, it doesn't really matter what the content is. You're still confused about who and what you are. I mean, you could be thinking about the most profound things in science or in ethics or whatever it is. But if you're just thinking without knowing that you're thinking, there is a kind of delusion, there is analogous to the dream state in a way where you're just, you're not, it's not clear to you what's going on. You think you're the thinker of the thoughts. You think you're authoring your thoughts in a way that you're not. I mean, because thoughts just arise, we don't, we don't actually author them. Isn't it fascinating that even in higher education, there's very little emphasis whatsoever on controlling thoughts, on, on managing thoughts, on managing your consciousness, on figuring out how to best analyze and approach your own thinking process. Because if you really think about it, like what we were talking about earlier about getting obsessed about something, about something like getting into your mind and rolling over you, like that kind of process, that kind of runaway thought process can actually really negatively affect your life. And it can start a pattern that can create other events or other sort of neurotic type thinking, and that that can affect your future. And if you can manage that and sort of nip that in the bud, like literally nip it in the bud, like that could benefit your future, that could benefit who you become, how you evolve, how you transform as a person, a developing person. And yet, it's not really taught. It is because the people that are involved in higher education aren't aware of it, they don't know it, it's not a common thinking process, it's not a common thinking thought management process. I mean, what is it that leads, I mean, someone like you who's had a higher education, goes on, writes a book like this, then it becomes a part of whoever's reading it, a part of their mindset. But if they don't have that, if they don't have that book, I mean, they literally have to be introduced into someone outside of the realm of high school, college, even masters, PhD. Very few people that go through that entire process are involved in a comprehensive analysis of how to think. Yeah, well, there's mindfulness is actually increasingly current now, and it's a bit of a, in some sense, a fad, but I think it's probably an enduring one because it's so useful. So mindfulness is now more and more being taught in schools, and actually my wife has even taught it in a public school to kids as young as six. So there's, there's, really, that's amazing. Yeah, it was amazing to see too, you have this, just picture a group of there's an in a kind of lower economic public school, I think we're probably 30 kids in the class, and see picture 36 year olds sitting in a circle. And on the first day, it was just the chaos of 36 year olds. And by the fourth week, because she was teaching one class a week, they were sitting for 15 minutes in silence. No screwing around, no problem. It was just unbelievable. And they, and the stuff they were reporting back in terms of their experience was amazing. But and the great thing about mindfulness is there's nothing spooky about it. You don't have to develop any kind of affection for Buddhism or beliefs in the supernatural or not notion of karma or nothing. It's all it is. And there's nothing. There's no thing that you're strategically adding to your experience by way of meditating. So you don't have a mantra and there's nothing to explain. All you have to do is pay extremely close attention to whatever is arising of its own. And you start with the breath because the breath is always there. And it's just an easy thing to pay attention to. But very quickly, it's just, it becomes, you just notice insights and sounds and sensations and moods and thoughts. And it makes perfect sense because if you want to know what it's like to be you, if you want to have a very clear look at the nature of your own consciousness, it just makes sense to pay attention. And all you're doing is paying attention. And there's no, there's no conceptual overlay that you're, you're applying that's monkeying with your experience to try to change it. So the goal in that case isn't even, you're not even trying to have a better experience. So although you can covertly hope to have a better experience and sort of corrupt the process that way. But you're really just trying to witness just the exactly what the character of your experience is in each moment. So you're just noticing unpleasant experience without trying, without pushing it away and noticing pleasant experience without trying to grab at it. And it just so happens that once you develop that kind of dispassionate attention to experience, then certain very pleasant experiences start to come along because so much of what's unpleasant about our minds is our resistance to pain and our grasping at pleasure and our struggle with experience. So just paying attention really just openly and without any agenda that for the period of time you can do that, you really have surrendered the struggle. And that tremendous relief just comes with that process. And so yeah, so it's becoming something that they are teaching in schools at various ages. And it's, I think the one downside to the way mindfulness is being marketed at this point is that it's really being thought of as an esoteric version of an executive stress ball where it's a tool to optimize performance. And it's a kind of thing that a CEO wants to have in his toolkit. And it's all that's true. It is a tool to optimize performance. But it's much more like, and it's traditionally intended to be much more like the large hand-drawn collider, which is to say, a real tool for discovering something fundamental in this case about the nature of the mind. And the purpose of mindfulness is to discover that the self we think we have is an illusion. And so the real breakthrough is not just a little less stress or a little more concentration or an ability to direct your mind where you want it to go. So if you want to stay on a diet, but you're tempted by the chocolate chip cookie, you can just get back on your diet without eating the cookie. I mean, that's one way in which you could use mindfulness, but that's not really the center of the bull's eyes. The center of the bull's eye is to cut through this illusion that we're all riding around in our heads as a ghost in the machine. So we're not riding around in our heads. No. What are we doing? Well, you have a head, but the sense that there is a, well, interestingly, it's another way to talk about this. I don't know if you've heard of this writer, Douglas Hardin, he was a British architect who wrote a book called On Having No Head, which so he actually summarized the insight as a state of headlessness. And it actually does sort of capture the flavor of it in a way. He kept advocating that people just look for their heads. So you're walking around and you know you have a head, but you actually don't see your head. You and I are talking now, the only head you see is my head. So you see the world and my head is in the middle of it. But your head isn't showing up for you. So you can notice that if you look, if you look for where I'm looking, I'm looking at this thing that you think you have behind your eyes. And if you sort of incline your attention in that direction, it's possible to have an experience where that's that feeling drops away where you're just, you actually no longer feel like you are behind your eyes looking across space at me. You just feel like there's just, there's just the space in which my head is appearing. And so it's almost like you've been decapitated. It's like imagine being without a head. And so anyway, this is Douglas Hardin's metaphor for this insight into selflessness. But it does sort of capture the flavor of it because it gets your attention moving in the right direction. Because if you look for the center of experience, this feeling of being a self behind the eyes is this feeling of there being a center to experience. It's not just that it's not that we feel identical to experience. We feel like we are having an experience. We feel like we are appropriating the experience and we're doing it from a point behind our eyes. We're doing it from this sense of being a subject. But if you look for the subject, that sense of a center can drop out. And then there's just experience. Then there's, and that's very much like the kind of flow states or the unified kind of full immersion experiences that people have when you're just, when you're paying attention to something so closely that you lose yourself in it, whether it's surfing or martial arts or sex or whatever it is, you're just, there can be these experiences where for a moment, there's no distance between, you're no longer looking over your own shoulder having the experience, no longer trying to surf, you're no longer thinking about how good the wave is or whether you're really on it. There's just a moment where there's just pure flow and you are just, there's a unified field of experience. And people get really addicted to those, those are, those are peak experiences for people. And then the rest why a person would surf or do anything else which is giving them access to this state of consciousness where they're just, the self drops away and there's just experience. But the thing is you can have that all, you can have that at any moment you remember to look for it once you know how to meditate. And that is just, that is the nature of consciousness. You don't have to be on a wave in a wetsuit. You can just notice it, you know, just in the middle of a conversation. And that's, that's really the subject of this book. That flow state is very different when you, when you get great at something, when you, whether it's martial arts or you feel it in stand up comedy as well. It's a very similar state where you, I describe it on stage as being a passenger. You feel like you're a passenger on the ride. Like I know the words are coming out of my mouth. I know that the timing I know it, but it's because I know the material so well and I'm so comfortable on stage and I put in so much time that I could reach that flow state. And the same thing said can be said for Jiu Jitsu or for kickboxing sparring or anything like that. When you're, when you're, when you're locked in, when you know, you've done it so many times, you're completely comfortable with the movements. You, you under, you've done all the training, you put in all the work in the hours to get to that point. It's not as simple as like, you could be a white belt who meditates and reach a flow state. You can't. Oh, yeah, no, it's not going to, this isn't going to help you in Jiu Jitsu. I mean, it's still going to be a white belt on the mat. If you can drop your sense of self, there'll be no flow state. You're going to get strangled. No, it may, there can be a flow state getting while getting strangled. But that's, that's massive. But you're still going to not know what to do. Oh, yeah, no, because it can't be a flow state. You'll be acting and reacting instead of just in the zone. Well, no, you can be, no, there's just, the zone can be found anywhere. It's just people tend to only find it when there is this sort of mastery component. And this, the, there's no, there's no more error correction. So the problem that we all have when we're, when we're tuning up a skill is that we're constantly making mistakes and becoming incrementally more aware of the kinds of mistakes we're making and correcting for them and getting better, correcting for them. And there's all the self talk of, you know, what we should have done, what we should do, what we're hoping to do in the next moment. And flow states come when you get good enough for the most part so that all of that goes away so that like, you know, when you're playing golf, you know, there's no, there are no more thoughts in your backswing. You take the club away and you're not thinking 15 different. part so that all of that goes away so that like you know when you're playing golf you know there's no there no more thoughts in your back swing you take the club away and you're not thinking 15 different things as you know you're trying to hit the little white ball you're just you're just hitting the white ball because you've just grooved your swing so much that you just have no issue hitting the little white ball and so jujitsu has its analogous component where you're not you're not still trying to remember what you should be doing when somebody is in the middle of passing your guard away it's like you're just you're just part of the whole motion that is you're not having to make these conscious calculations you're just moving and so but you could you could be in you could be just as surrendered to the present moment and free of self talk free of neurotic expectations about what what's gonna happen in the next instance or what you wish didn't happen a moment ago and still be a total spaz on the mat I mean you could just just you could just this would just be it wouldn't help your jujitsu it just would help your state of consciousness you know you can just drop your problem while realizing that you don't know what the do when the guy's passing your guard but it's these so these but people find these experiences really addictive and not addictive in a you know technical in a biological sense but they're just really captivating and they they orient their lives around having these experiences and the really dangerous thing is that people traditionally have found these experiences in the context of religion and in the context of incredibly divisive beliefs about paradise and and the unique validity of certain revelations and and so you have people get tastes of self transcendence in the context of really frightening beliefs and then they become mightily attached to those beliefs because those beliefs seem to they seem to be the only explanation for the the meaning of these experiences so if you if you're a Christian and you feel you know absolute rapture and self transcendence while praying to Jesus well of course that's gonna be a data point if not the only needed data point in favor of the story that Jesus is the son of God and he's he's taking an interest in your soul and if you're a if you're a geodist feeling that just just as you get off the bus in Syria and you meet your recruiters at ISIS that's gonna it's gonna prove to you that this is of course this is Allah's will and this is you know you're fighting the one true you know cosmic battle against the evil infidels and you know that there's no question that these guys feel these very positive states of mind they're not all running around depressed out there they're having peak experiences and then there are people who have peak experiences at burning man you know and have a totally different interpretation of their significance and what I'm arguing is that the only thing that peak experiences prove is that they can't prove that all of these incompatible doctrines are true because they can't all be true you know that the geodist and the the fundamentalist Christian can't both be right and and not only are they not not the only people who have these experiences there are Hindus who have experiences that are that are identical but but are in the context of a totally different doctrine and atheists like myself have these experiences so these experiences can't prove that any of these doctrines these these provincial doctrines are true what they prove is that the human mind is susceptible to altered states of consciousness and some of which are really compelling and worth having and yet we just have to understand them in a secular and universal sense and non-sectarian sense is that what's going on when Pentecostal speaking tongues when they hit that what is that called glausalalia when they start tongues someone ala māla kalāmāla like you reach this you know I mean you know state of mind where you're able to communicate this bizarre nonsensical language free of ridicule you know you know worrying about how goofy or sound yeah well I think it's it to some degree it is a kind of surrender of Certainly one's dignity No, I mean there's clearly it's got to feel pretty good and you're surrender you're getting it you're getting rid of Certain hang-ups. It's like you know dancing wildly at a rave You know, it's like if you're you're no longer uptight because you're willing to Ride around on the floor with your aunts and uncles and you're on ecstasy. Nobody in this case. You're Pentecostal Yeah, yeah, the state that you achieved that allows you to sum ala māla kalākalāmāla when you see those people do that like I've saw a guy doing in real life Yeah, I've never seen it. So I don't know what I'm fear factor guy was He He actually won the event But it's so hilarious like the event was so ridiculous like some of the fear factor events were completely ridiculous and this one particular event was uniquely ridiculous Because it had absolutely nothing to do with your ability to overcome something or your ability to To even figure your way out through something you had like a fort You were attached to a harness and the harness was attached to a cable that attached you to Like a wire so that you you actually didn't fall off this cliff But you were on a four by four and you drove the four by four off the cliff So you just drove you hit the gas and you you were yanked up and the four by four fell and whoever's four by four went the furthest Oh, wonderful winnick fulfillment. Yeah. Yeah, let's full commitment, but There's no skill involved. You're just hitting the gas And going off a cliff the same point on the cliff as everyone else and this one I won And he was convinced that this was the will of God and he was Started doing this thing and I was like standing next to him watching this. I was like this is so strange You know it was uh It was weird to watch someone First of all if you are speaking in tongues What a shitty language it is because you keep repeating the same noise over and over Well it has none of the structure of a language that people have analyzed it and it's clearly bullshit Sounds like bullshit. It would be interesting, but it would be interesting if it weren't you know It's possible that somebody could Produce a performance like this where it would it would have linguistic structure and then people would just be spinning out trying to figure out How this is you know how this is possible, but no, it's just it's just gibberish, but it's a similar gibberish That's what made me wonder like how weird this is Because this this gibberish and I know I maybe it's repeating because these Pentecostals hang out with each other And it's like an accent sort of thing like one person develops a Boston accent Although people around them have that Boston accent, but when I watch this guy and then I watched Robert Tilden who's one of my favorite bullshit artists. That's all late night religious television He's one of those you know guys that Jesus wants you to he actually said this one time he goes every time you write a check to me Satan gets a blacker I fucking love that quote. Yeah, it's so but he does the same thing he goes It's the same summer la mala like that kind of well, they're teaching each other It's a kind of performance and they have they've all gone to school on each other's Performances, but I'm not I'm not insinuating in any way that it's actually divine, but I'm I was just weirded out by the similarities and their bullshit language and his bullshit language Yeah, I don't know if this guy's a Robert Tilden fan, but he was doing that same Like it's a it's a weird the gibberish is similar is it like Just they're not that creative like you know like you know There's not that many ways to make nonsense Sounds quickly and so that I mean there's probably some constraints and Eventually to see if if you're native Chinese speakers would would produce the same Yeah, they might they might have different. I would have expected would be different that would be interesting like to teach because Christianity has Spread to a lot of other countries. Yeah, Asian countries if you could get Pentecostals right in See if they you know if they have some sort of One that study has this right a check right here. We did do it is to you know It would be so unethical because you get these poor people believe in that they're really talking in tongues and just so you can listen to their their lingo Yeah, well, it's interesting to know where the line between Self-deception and conscious fraud is placed. It's like the those fake martial arts videos We watched last time I was here. You know the guys were taking those dives with their yeah, a keto master It's just hard to see It's hard to see that it's a conscious fraud entirely because people have too much time invested and Obviously the guy who invites someone from another school to come punch him in the face that guy It was believing his own Bullshit, I mean he thought his Certain point he must have been convinced that he had this power. Yeah because his you know for a decade or more He sees people flop around at the mirror, you know hint of a of a touch Kind of brings us back to what we were talking about earlier in that when you're around a certain people You're a different person in that when these guys are around all these people that really believe That they have some divine ability to control the people's bodies with air Like there's something about doing that over and over again and reinforcing that belief that it seems to be Like they are a master when they're around those people But then when you put them around someone who knows nothing about them and treats them just as an opponent in the martial arts contest and headkicks them Like all of a sudden Gone like where's my power like who am I? I'm not I'm not a magician I'm not a wizard anymore now. I'm just a guy getting the fuck beat out of me by some other martial artist And this is a terrible terrible scenario I found myself in that's what's so great about real martial arts It is it's like science in that you're running an experiment that is as close to a real experiment as you can run without anyone getting killed and You're seeing what works. That's what the UFC was in the beginning the UFC was just this absolutely enthralling Science experiment because no one knows gonna happen you throw you up What's gonna happen when you throw a boxer in with a with a karate legend with a sumo wrestler with it and just no rounds And just just let it let the clock run and see what it's just so now obviously now I'm now telling you your own business, but Now everyone has gone to school on everyone else's style and everyone knows enough jujitsu on the ground to be able to nullify the advantage of jujitsu And so now everyone is kind of converged on the the common Universal toolkit Combatively that you want And so you're not getting these this experiment is it has basically played out now Everyone's going in with the same expectation that when you're standing up You want to be able to kick and punch like a kick boxer or like a muy tie fighter somebody who really knows how to kick and punch and when you're Vertically grappling you really do want to be Like Randy couture somebody who's got you know real Clinch and you know pummeling skills and crack of skills and then when you go to the ground you want BJJ or sambo or something that gives you those skills on the ground and So there's not that many surprises left in store, but I mean maybe there are so long Maybe there's some totals of rice variables, which is interesting because martial arts in many ways really is a scientific endeavor that because You know, it's so much of it has it involves leverage and force and physics But also the introduction of new variables that haven't been They haven't been practiced and when you introduce new variables like new new kicking techniques especially Like when we'll care or something Or even traditional kicking techniques that had been discarded like when Anderson sova front kick v-torbelfer in the face and knocked him out Everybody's like holy shit. I who the fuck's that that coming you took to the highest level guys ever You know and he introduces the original technique That is the number one technique you teach when I used to teach white belts The first kick I would teach them as a front kick, but it's easy to learn you pick your knee up Extend your foot forward and I would teach them to do it at knee level and then you know eventually you have chest level And then you know the rare front kick to the face But nobody ever used it in a UFC belt, but now it's incredibly common. It's like one of the main You know but Travis Brownly I were talking about really knocked out Alistair over in front kick to the face Right and for years we had none Terry edam when he first knocked out or Edson Barbosa when he first knocked out Terry edam with a wheel kick to the head that was in 2000 I want to say 12 or 13 so there had been no wheel kick knockouts for the decade plus of the UFC I mean now now do you think that two decades in fact? Do you think that's somewhat an artifact of Everyone's expectations being so trained now that it'd be given you know all of the fights that have happened and and How all these traditional techniques have been discarded that now no one is expecting? Anything like a traditional kick so that it's almost like you Through a wheel kick in a boxing match where you've got two boxers and you know One has absolutely no expectation that kicks are even going to be involved and all of a sudden your wheel kick him right Is it just the sheer novelty or is there something else going on that it's just that it's that you that once you have All of the other skills that are the real foundation for being a good MMA fighter Then you can experiment with goofy traditional moves that wouldn't have worked if you were a pure traditional Martial artist Mary. Do you think if you brought in just a pure traditionalist who was like one of the guys who showed up at UFC one Now who really could only do things like wheel kicks and you know he just basically he's just straight up I don't know. Thanks. Udo guy right? You bring him into the UFC is he gonna get off a lucky wheel kick and exactly that circumstance or or as he would have to have all the other techniques as well right but I think it's it's pattern recognition and not very many people who are Martial artists in the sense of mixed martial artists fighting in the UFC can actually do those techniques I've worked out with high-level guys like guys who are fighting for titles guys who are you know top 10 ranked and I've worked out with them showing them martial arts techniques like taekwondo techniques and they don't know how to do them And it's amazing you're talking about a high level MMA guys who don't have a background a kicking background Don't have a taekwondo base background or shoto con There's a few kicking disciplines that incorporate wheel kicks and a lot of high kicks like Axe kicks and then things on those arms and they literally don't know the the effectiveness of these techniques because they don't they don't do them So they they what they do is a lot of more tie leg kicks needs the body elbows in close get the takedown ground of pounds submissions things that you see much more common and when I've tried to teach them these specific techniques It's amazing how incompetent they are at them. They they haven't even tried to learn wheel kicks Right so when I'm teaching them wheel kicks, you know, they're like their bodies all awkward If you're on it, we don't have like the fluidity that you need like it adds in barboza has where you know, you stand in there and then whoo he throws it so if you're not used to sparring with a guy like that You don't know that that can come at you like that Yeah, you're used to a certain distance as well the distance between Where a person could land a leg kick and a person could land a wheel kick is a little bit different and yeah You don't know you're in range. Yeah, it's also Some kicks like spinning back kicks are a little bit easier than a wheel kick the wheel kick requires a lot of flexibility So you might anticipate a spinning back kick and then the kick comes up high and you only have a millisecond you have the reaction Time and action time are two very different things. That's why sucker punches work The reason why sucker punch works is a punch the action time is like a hundredth of a second But reaction time is like a tenth of a second. That's a big gap Yeah, so the amount of time that takes for someone to punch you in the face and the amount of time it takes you Oh, this fucking guy's gonna punch me in the face. Oh shit I got a duck and you don't have time crack you get hit and that's why sucker punches work and that's why actually This opens up to I don't know if we want to go recklessly in this direction But this this opens up into the ethics of uses of violence and use you just kind of use of force philosophy and you have something like You know what's been going on in Ferguson, you know around this shooting People have erroneous assumptions about how violence unfolds as you're saying like if you're if you're deciding to block or to defend yourself In the mid once a guy has thrown his sucker punch You are nine times out of ten to eight. I mean you're just you you you you need a distance was at that moment Yeah, you need awareness awareness of possibility and if but if you know if a and I'm not making any claims about Knowing what happened in Ferguson with this shooting. I mean it could be Every inch the homicide that many people seem to think it was but The reality is that cops are walking Having to work in a universe where you know they do a traffic stop and someone pulls out a gun and shoots him in the face, right? And so so they have to assume That that is a possibility no matter what you look like no matter what kind of car you're driving and so you see the Metcops are incredibly on edge and you see them, you know unbuckling their the strap on their holster As they just walk up to give you a ticket But it's because they they don't have time they don't have the luxury of time They can't wait to see you produce a gun and then they say okay now my lethal force option is is is beyond reproach And so I mean the only mode to be in With a cop no matter how much of an asshole he might be is is to be compliant and then you you mean sue him later They'll you know in the middle of negotiating a You know with a cop you the no matter how Unjustified the arrest may seem or that's not the time to be telling him he's an asshole or or talking about how you are such a good guy and and this is a violation of your civil rights You just you do what he says and then you know sue the cops later But it's just yeah because because with the filter he is seeing everything through is Is this because it was what the sheer fact that a cop has a gun on his belt Makes any contact a Potential lethal encounter for him. I mean say you just you just go hands on a cop. You know you push a cop He doesn't know that you're not going for the gun on his belt He doesn't know that you're gonna not push him into into a car and he'll be knocked out and then then you're gonna get his gun And so it's it's all deadly from a cop's point of view and so Very few people understand that I've had a friend who was who was stopped by a cop And this is you know this is a kind of middle-aged Jewish guy who's like his mind the least dangerous person on earth and why on earth is a cop stopping him and and My friend said something to the cop and the cop on latch to you know the top restraint on his on his gun and My friend said what you're you're gonna pull at your gun on me with the and and the cops at what does a bad guy look like and And that and that just sort of cut through it for my friend and my friend just you my friend my friend knew he was not a bad guy But there's no way for the cop to know right he's not a bad guy And people just don't people are just not aware of that and they're interacting with cops and it's it's dangerous for everybody Yeah, the naivete of someone who is a good guy who doesn't know bad people and doesn't know what people I mean just go on YouTube and watch assault on police officer just YouTube assault on police officer there's a 100 videos that you can watch where people sucker punch cops. There's a terrific video of this guy getting pulled over and He's with his son and it's on a dash cam of the police car. They're the lady pulls him over and she asked him for his license registration the guy gets out of the car He's giving her stuff and he says what and she's like sir. Yeah, I need to turn you know turn around and put your You know lean your body up against him. I'm gonna handcuff you and he's like why are you gonna do that bang? He punches her in the face and before you know what she's unconscious on the ground He's beating on her his his his son is screaming for him to stop or his daughter was screaming in him I forget which one it was for him to stop beating this cop up But he's beating the fuck out of her and she's unconscious and he takes her gone and you know I don't know how it ended I sure off but there's a lot of those Yeah, you can't assume that someone's a good person. You don't know who they are You don't know anything about them and also the psychology of being a police officer the the PTSD involved in day-to-day interaction with criminals day-to-day interaction with people lying to you day-to-day interaction with danger violence car accidents death over and over and over and over again You've got to be on edge all the time and then thinking is this the day where they get me was this the day Am I gonna be the guy who gets his gun taking away? Am I gonna be the guy who gets shot like this guy? I saw in a video or you know, it's there's so many instances that a cop has to think about when you have that job I saw it argued someone made this really irresponsible responsible ignorant Twitter post about how being a cop isn't dangerous because Look how many cops die as opposed to look how many You know x amount of firemen or whatever whatever job it was died That cops actually are less likely to die than many industrial workers But that's because they have protocol that's because they think they think ahead That's because they have so many cops have been killed that they have all these standards of practices in place to make sure that it doesn't happen That's why when a cop approaches a car he does have his hand on his gun That's why he does say keep your hand on the wheel That's why he does say life's the right place to keep your hands where I could see them licensed in registration Please like they have to be aware because if cops just treated it like hey and cops never die like I saw this Twitter post It says like one tenth of one percent of cops die like I don't worry about that shit Hey man, where you going boom you're shot in the face, you know, it's that Statistics are often inaccurate when it comes to dealing with something where someone is There's many practices that are in place to protect someone from inevitable in variables Or inevitable variables that a cop is going to face don't yeah They also have much less training than you would expect especially with like hand to hand skills I mean you have so much more training than even You know elite SWAT operators in terms of your hand to hand skills so it's It's the public has an expectation that The only justification for producing a gun if you're a cop or if you're anyone is if the other person has a gun or some Similarly lethal weapon even I think so some people think that you know a knife isn't lethal enough to justify the use of a gun But the truth but the fact is cops are not superheroes and they can't handle a a person who is bigger than them stronger than them younger than them and more aggressive than them who gets the jump on them I mean, it's just you know that that's that's a tall order even for a black belt in jiu-jitsu, you know it's not and so They're there their tool belt is is there for a reason as they need to they need tasers and they need guns and they need Force of numbers in order to even do the job against somebody who doesn't have a gun themselves and so it's It's a very it's a it's a hard job and I've got huge respect for cops all the while knowing that they're undoubtedly some bad cops who are just Cycle paths and sadists and shouldn't be in the job and there are a lot of cops who are who are frankly Not as trained as they should be in any even with guns I mean, most of them. Yeah, they're not as trained with guns as they should be and they're not as trained hand-to-hand as they should be and that's You know, that's just it's doing them a disservice and it's doing doing the public a disservice, but still even if you're well trained You as a cop you were moving into situations, which it's just untenable to Give this stranger the benefit of the doubt, you know, you just you so you You have to you you look like a Someone who's escalating force too early if you're if you're a cop who's just taking Totally rational steps to stay safe in a situation where there's just basic uncertainty as to what you're dealing with I think we're requiring so much of someone who becomes a police officer that it's almost a job that no one can be qualified to do near your acquiring psychology or acquiring the physical ability to defend themselves against a wide variety of people where you have zero idea what their background is You know, you see some young guy and he looks reasonably athletic give no idea what he can do to you You might be a cigarette smoker with no martial arts experience whatsoever or he might be a moytite champion and if we're with You're within range of him all sudden boom. You're unconscious. You have no idea what happened He punched you in the face so fast. You have no idea and the the other thing about when people start talking about cops and and violence and danger Most people have never been involved in a physical altercation with a trained martial artist They have no idea how vulnerable they really are they're walking around I've seen people get an arguments before and get crazy with people and start fights and then watch the fight take place and I Boggles my mind like why was this guy so confident to get into a physical altercation? There's no idea what to do with a guy with cauliflower ear You know, that's usually tip off where you got you know guys got tats like you and he's got cauliflower ear and You still got somebody mouth in off to them It happens. It happens all the time and I think some people think they're gonna bluff their way out of it or I think there's so much ignorance in ego involved in the average person when it comes to physical All-dications I think it would do a lot of people good just to realize how vulnerable they are I when I was a black belt in talk window when I had national Level comp competitor had won multiple tournaments and then I started doing jujitsu. I got mall. Yeah, I mean mauled not mauled like Like well, you know, I kind of held them off for a little while, but eventually Instantly destroyed which is like wrestling with a five-year-old, you know, it's like the five year from the five year olds point of view There there is absolutely nothing to do. It's just you know Yeah, and that's that's what I felt like the first time I got on the mat with a with a jujitsu black belt I thought I thought I I thought I would have some Sense of just how to stop the The problem from them engulfing me and it was just it was it's totally hopeless And it's hopeless in a way that that's why I wrote that blog post originally that the pleasures of drowning It's like drowning because when you'd be Drowning doesn't make much sense. It's hardly like you're moving You know you get in the water and you're moving your arms and legs Like you've seen people swim, you know, it's like oh help help could there be that much to it? And in fact once you know how to tread water there isn't much to stay in a float But if you don't know how to tread water, you don't know how to swim all that moving of our your arms and legs is just Completely and effectual and you could be making a hundred percent effort and you're still going straight to the bottom and it's and jujitsu it's just so It's so surprising to feel like you have some skills Because you've done you've trained for years and some stand-up art and you did a little you know You took some crockman gawk lasses and you did some stuff on the ground and you you have a basic feeling that you know You know, hey, I would poke him in the eyes if it really got bad on the ground And then you get on the mat with somebody who who really has a deep jujitsu game And it's just it's like wrestling a Martian. Well, there's also levels like you know I'm a black belt, but there's guys who I roll with that could treat me like I'm a blue belt That's the reality of your situation if I'm if I'm rolling with like jock Array, I'm gonna get strangled and I'm I've been doing it for 20 years. It doesn't matter So how so how long do you think you could hold off? the tap with the best person if you're down with you know Marcella Garcia or somebody who couple minutes at the most and it's all It now have to be on full defense That's that's the difference like if I'm rolling with a guy who's a purple belt. I go offense Like if I'm rolling with someone who is below me or my level I'm going full I'm always defensively aware, but I'm going full offense But if I'm rolling with a guy like a Marcella Garcia is all defense. Yeah, it's all like oh It's all like trying to hold someone off and working like if you knew that you were gonna be Working against a guy like Marcella Garcia and you had like months to prepare. I would just bench press Right and do everything about pushing away And working, like if you knew that you were going to be working against a guy like Marcel Garcia and you had like months to prepare, I would just bench press and do everything about pushing away. Everything is pushing away, reps and pushing away. But eventually you're going to fuck up. You know, there's, it's like, good analogy also is debating because if you debate the average person who has a no logical standpoint on something, like I've watched you debate many people when it comes to religion and things along those lines, and when you have the tools in place, those tools being logic reason and defined arguments about different variables. And then the other person doesn't. And they have emotions and religious ideology on their side and just overconfidence, just having this ridiculous idea that they're right and they're going to win. And they go in there and they just get tied up. Like so quickly their arguments get, and they see them get flustered and you see their words come out all clunky and they get heartbeat raises. I love what there's one debate that you did with, I don't remember the gentleman's name, but he was a rabbi and you were probably David Wopey. Yes. And he got so dramatic in the way he was talking, which made it more ridiculous because you have this very calm, very flat way of expressing yourself, which makes anyone who's super emotional and super like dramatic seem preposterous. You see more ridiculous because you're all, and what God has said to us and the Word of God and all this. And then you're like, well, that's not exactly the fact over the reality is this and this and that and this is what we know about neuroscience, this we know about life. And this is just because of that doesn't mean this and you see the drowning. And they don't necessarily know their drowning and the crucial difference and one reason why due to it so satisfying is that there's no tap out in a debate. They're never forced to acknowledge that they lost the point. No matter how obvious it becomes to the audience or to you. And actually there's one thing that's kind of insidious about debates which is actually terrible in politics. I hate it when I see this in political debates where laughter is a surrogate for tap out. And so if you can get a big laugh in a debate, no matter how terrible your platform is as a politician, no matter how wrong you are on the facts. If you can get a big laugh line, you know, you know, you know, you're no Jack Kennedy. Right, right, right. That is all that anyone cares about. It's like the stand up comic wins the debate. Certainly politically and it's even true in in other contexts. So it's politically it's everything. And Jack Kennedy line was what was that 88 or something like that? When was that? Well, you're was that. That's Dan Quail, right? Dan Quail and who was this? Yeah, he was debating. Lloyd Benson. Yes. Yeah, I knew Jack and he set him up, man. It was like, jab, jab, over again. Boom. Right. I knew Jack Kennedy. Jack Kennedy was a friend. You are no Jack Kennedy and the whole audience is like, oh shit. You compared yourself to a dead guy who's like the greatest president ever who was shot in this national scandal. And the, I mean, the whole, all the build up to it. I mean, it wasn't even like he was comparing himself to theater or Roosevelt or something else. It was dead. You know, Jack Kennedy, a fuck man. It was this checkmate. Like he could never have come back from that. Yeah. But it's true. I mean, in that case, we were, you know, I was certainly on the side of, you know, certainly against Quail there. Yeah. But you see it happen in cases where it's, you know, the, the, the losing party, the party who's on the, on the wrong end of the laugh is really the one who was making the most sense in the debate. And they just, you know, you, you just know that, that debate was a disaster. Well, especially if the audience is stacked. You've got a bunch of religious people in the audience say, yeah, why don't you just tell that to God when you see him at the perfect game? Woo hoo. You know, like, yeah, that, that can definitely. Well, it's also, you know, people are looking, they're looking for a result. And they can decide that that result is correct. You know, he could through sheer force of will and through cognitive dissonance. And all the, the people in the audience refusing to recognize the actual thing that's being debated, but rather not a point that they get to express themselves. Well, this is, I agree with him. Jesus doesn't want us to let queers marry each other. You know, and they just hoot and holler and all that loud noise in that one room. Well, that's what's crucial about laughter. It's a really only laughter and applause or the only moments where you know, as a member of the audience, that, everyone's on the same page. That's the moment when everyone helplessly breaks into a laugh. I mean, this is, you as a comic. This is the, this is your career, you know, provoking these moments. But that, as a public speaker, it's interesting, you know, I don't, you know, put a lot of laugh lines in my lectures, but what I recognize that if you go long enough without having a laugh line in a lecture, you sort of lose the sense of that everyone is with you. Because it's just silence. Yes. Right. So I'm talking for 20 minutes and I'm hoping people are with it. I'm hoping they're finding this interesting. I'm hoping that I'm making sense. But it's only the next time they laugh that truly reassures me that for that moment, I have the entire room. And that's, and that's, so it's, it's interesting. Yeah. Public speaking is a very unique art form. Public speaking in terms of like lectures when you see people give public talks about a book that they have, like the ability to hold people's attention. It's like there has to be something that you're doing some dramatic moment. Either you have to have a certain amount of charisma or you have to have a certain sense of humor. You have to have something to be able to sort of glue the whole thing together. Yeah. You know, it's hard to listen to someone like lectures that like boring professors give. I remember like being in class listening to some of those lectures and 10, 15 minutes in, I'm checked out. I mean, I'm fucking thinking about my laundry. I gotta do, and I'm sort of paying attention because I have to, but I'm bored. It's fuck. But if the guy was humorous, like I remember I saw a debate once between a member of the moral majority. Do you remember the moral majority? And Barney Frank, who wasn't openly gay back, but this was when I was in high school. And Barney Frank was humorous and he was so good at, he knew how to publicly speak. And it was in a small auditorium in Newton South High School in 1984, something like that. And Barney, he was mocking this guy with an American flag on his lapel and what he was trying to, he was essentially setting up with this guy was trying to project to you. Like this is who he really is. This is what he was trying to protect. Like he's like, he's wearing a superhero outfit. Like oh, he's so concerned about the morality of America. But what he does understand is this. And I think that you people are smarter enough to realize that. And he was funny. Yeah. And I remember like listening to one guy talk and it was like sanctimonious and fucking boring and boring. It just, it just did not have to talk very well. And the other guy, even though it was just two people's opinions, it was more pleasant to listen to. It was more entertaining. So he was better at it. He won because of that. Yeah, the days of being able to get far without being able to speak well in public are behind us, I think. And it's interesting to say something that I discovered a few years ago. I actually blogged about this. Jefferson had a morbid fear of public speaking and gave exactly two speeches, two state of the unions. And his two terms as president and just read them in a crushed monotone because he was so terrified. And that was it. Which we could have heard those. Yeah, I'm sure they were terrible. They were barely for people at the time reported that you could barely hear what he was saying. And he just poured us of his. Yeah. And he just, he was, he would just walk like a condemned man to the scaffold when he had to give these speeches. And he avoided it because he was so uncomfortable doing it, but he could avoid it. Can you imagine being the president of the United States now and not feeling comfortable getting as long as possible? Yeah. Well, fully on the force of his writing, he had the influence he had. Isn't it fascinating too that you need not just to be able to speak well publicly, but you need to have a certain style of communication that where you address large numbers of people, it's completely unnatural. Like Obama has the long pauses. And there's just something about the way he talks where, you know, if someone was talking to you in your home in that same way, you would think they're absolutely insane. Like if you had someone over your house and you have a conversation with them and they spoke the way Obama speaks when he's addressing the nation, you would go, well, I got a fucking crazy person in my house. Like even if they were just addressing your family, it was just one person standing at the table and you said, hey, Barack, would you give us thanks for this meal that we're about this? Have you gave this presidential type speech? Yeah. The way he's communicating with his long pauses and weird affectations of his voice, he'd be like, oh, is this fucking guy? But he's not as bad. Where it really gets crazy for me is when it becomes a full oratorical performance. I mean, someone like Martin Luther King Jr. or a preacher, somebody who's just going for it in a stentorian way of just, it's just going for it. It's going to be big and it's going to be dramatic and I'm going to make you cry. And obviously it's incredibly effective. To see MLK speeches, something very powerful is going on there and he's standing in front of whatever it was, 400,000 people. So it's a big moment and it wouldn't be the same if he was just conversational. But it begins to look kind of hitlarian. I mean, Hitler was the ultimate example of this. To look at Hitler, give his speech, I don't know how anyone thought the guy was saying. It's so far from the normal, the norms of human conversation that it seems pathological to me. I don't know German. I don't know exactly. So when I watch him speak, I'm reading the subtitles and I'm getting his vibe and I'm not getting exactly what a German would have gotten. But I'm not comfortable. There's something, there's a dishonesty to the performance there that I feel. no matter what the content, what when the performance variable becomes, I frankly get this even with people like MLK where it's, I mean I recognize that the words are beautiful. I recognize that he's delivering it well. But there's a subtle dishonesty to the communication because it is a performance. It's not. And I'm not, as a speaker, I try to speak and this is one reason why I would never be. I would never be a great speaker. But I try to be as conversational as possible. Internally, to inhabit it, I'm only comfortable feeling like I'm actually talking to a person. So if it's just you or if it's 1,000 people, maybe that situation is going to dictate subtle changes in the way I speak, but it's going to be pretty close in terms of how I speak. And so it's because I just can't, the moment I start to ape parakies, I begin to feel dishonest. Yeah. It's weird because it's so effective. You know, Jay Leno, when he would practice his monologue for the tonight show, he would go to the Comedy and Magic Club every Sunday night. And it was like a regular show he would do there. And on Sunday night, when he would go to the Comedy and Magic Club and read these bits that he would try out for the weeks monologue, he would do them dead like monotone. And the reason why he did it, he goes, I didn't want to add any, you know, extra pizzazz to the jokes to sell them. I go, I just want to know whether they still don't their own. Right. And that was how we found out whether or not it was an actual funny idea or whether or not it was just his master showmanship ability that he was getting in across. And I think that's what you get when you get a Hitler or a Martin Luther King. It's like it's not just their words. It's just there's an energy behind them that's captivating that can be in the terms of like a guy like Martin Luther King. It can enhance the speech to the point where I have a dream is like one of the greatest speeches in human history. And one of the reasons why it's such a great speech is not just because he said, but imagine if the same speech was read by Noam Chomsky, you fucking fall asleep halfway into it. There's no question something would be lost, but part of it is a part of it is the context. Let me just just be in front of an audience that large and alive audience. And just the necessity of having to have your, even though you're miked, there's the sense that your voice needs to carry. Even though it's being aided by a mike, it's appropriate to be belting it out over the heads of the audience. Whereas if you were just in a room with 10 people, you know, blasting, I have a dream that loud would just be a be carted off. If you were right here, just you and I were in a podcast and started breaking out loud. It's time for a real naked joke. Guys, not just call the cops. Kenison, who started out as a reverend, used to break out into it on stage sometimes as a part of his performance. He would say, they asked me, Sam, if you had to do it, if you had to go back, if you had to teach the Word of God, could you do it? Do you have it in you? It's the Holy Spirit alive! And he would go into this thing. It was so compelling. It's just like whatever it is about human beings when we see someone who speaks with this dynamic power, this passion, this ability to project words. It's so impressive. Because most of us can't do it. That's part of it, I think. And part of it is there's just something about us that like the reason why you can get hypnotized by a fucking watch swinging in front of your face or something about certain actions are either hypnotic, certain patterns of speaking that are hypnotic. Oddly captivating, oddly influential. Yeah. Even just eye contact, this is something I write about briefly in the book. It's a one thing you get in the spiritual world with gurus of various flavors is you get this commitment to really intense eye contact. Tom Cruise. Is he good? Is he good? Tom Cruise really talks to you. It's like, it's just insane. It is amazing. It is a Scientology thing. They just lock us up on you and you just want to believe them. But nobody is incredibly intrusive. And there's every version of it. There are people who are just non-norotic. They don't feel any impulse to look away. They're not uncomfortable making silent eye contact with somebody. They're not constantly throwing their words into the space because they're uncomfortable. And yet they're just available. They're just looking at you. And their attention is free because they're not busy. They're not worried that you know, about what you're thinking about them. And they're just present. And these people contend to make highly unusually intense eye contact, which is to say, you know, completely unbroken on eye contact. And then there's, you know, psychopaths who do it. It's a real power game where it's just, you know, they're just, they're not, they're running something. And they have a very different agenda. But they're also comfortable, you know, eye-fucking you and just doing it from a place of aggression. But it's a, it was interesting when I got into meditation. And early on, this is, you know, I was 20, 21. And I got really into meditation. And this is a period where I was doing a lot of psychedelics. And one of the experiences you've probably had on psychedelics is the, the amazing experience of just looking into somebody's eyes on acid or mushrooms and just having that just open a kind of inner landscape of profundity or seeming profundity where you're just, you know, you can just be staring into somebody's eyes silently for an eternity or what seems like an eternity. And what often happens to people is that after having experiences like this, then looking into people's eyes can become a way of really of, of activating that state of mind where you, you know, you just being committed to looking into people's eyes and never looking away can be a way of sort of introducing that sort of liquid psychedelic experience, you know, inner personally. I was sort of into that to, for a while. And so I was kind of walking through life, you know, like, like as Tom Cruise does. Yeah, just basically, yeah, just like exactly. Just never just like, I'm just going to go with you know, it's a little see where this goes. And I'm just never going to look away from anyone ever again. And you, you get, you start having it's, it's intrusive and I stopped doing it. You, you start having unusual experiences. The first thing you do is you discover everyone else is doing that for whatever reason. So all of the psychopaths and the Scientologists and all everyone comes out of the woodwork because there, there's some number of people walking around Earth at this moment who are playing that game, who are just all it's like you look into their eyes. And it's just eye lock for as long as you're going to stay and you never, they're never going to look away. And so whether it's a barista, Starbucks or whether it's just somebody who is, you know, 50 feet across the room at a party, you make eye contact, they're not going to be the first one to look away. And so you get into these really weird encounters. And I had this, I remember this one party I went to where I was sitting on a couch and I looked across the room and there was this guy looking at me. And I, you know, probably 40 feet between us. And he looked at me and I looked at him and then it was just like war of the warlocks. It's like, no, neither of us were going to look away. And it just be, and I was doing a lot of meditation and I was, you know, I had probably taking acid once a month. So I was pretty tuned up for this kind of game where it's just like, you know, I was not, I had no problem making eye contact with some strange guy, you know, 40 feet away. And after a certain point, he jumped up and kind of raced over to me. And, you know, we had a problem. He's like, what the fuck are you doing? And, and it was like a real, so what I was doing was so intrusive. But he, he had his own game going because he, you know, he didn't look away, right? Right. He was available for it. But in any case, when you walk through life like this, you discover that there are a lot of people doing this for whatever reason. And it's, it's, you definitely have unusual encounters with strangers, a train once. And when I was a kid, I was probably like 16 or 17 years old in Boston. And it was some guy when we were sitting across from each other and we looked, you know, at each other. And, and he looked at me and he gave me like a little extra look to get me to look away. Like a little extra. And I didn't. And I was like, what's going on here? And for whatever reason, I don't, it wasn't like a, a conscious practice. I just decided I wasn't going to look away. I would act of defiance being a teenager. And he like progressively got more and more angry. And then my level of stress raised up to the point where like, am I going to have to fight this old motherfucker? Like we're going to have to go at it because we're staring at each other. And then finally something happened, one of us broke, but we didn't have a confrontation. But I remember the intensity of this lock with me and this guy looking at each other. And he's fucking looking like, what the fuck are you looking at? I don't remember how it resolved, but it did. There was no, there was no communication. There was nothing. But I remember very specifically thinking like this is so weird. All we're doing, there's obviously some aggression being displayed here. We're looking at each other in the eyes. You're in this guy just don't want to turn away. And I've decided I'm not going to turn away for whatever reason. And here it's like a moment that I remember to this day, you know, 30 years later. 30 years later it's still in my head. For no reason at all. Just me and this fucking guy looking at each other on the train. It's a very primal thing. And it is a biological transgression. We are primates. You do this to a makak or any monkey or ape. And they're not into it. If you're walking and I remember I was in Nepal a lot. And there are these monkeys that basically now mug people. They're so used to just showing up with their troop and demanding food that you need to just throw whatever you've got in your hand on the ground. But the, yeah, making eye contact is with a with a primate. Not even just a primate. A dog is a very aggressive thing to do. But it's interesting to be with someone who, I mean, I study with a lot of great meditation masters who spent years on retreat. Some of them decades on retreat doing nothing but meditate. Some of them spending years meditating just on compassion. And when you're with someone like that, then it's a very different vibe, obviously. And what you're getting from that kind of eye contact is just a fundamental freedom from kind of the neurotic self program that everyone's running. And you can meet someone who you feel like is just, they don't have a problem. They're not, they wish you nothing but well. And they're not, they don't want anything from you. They're not worried about what you think of them. Their attention is free enough to just see what you need and what you want. It's a very, it's a very freeing thing to recognize in someone as being possible. To just see someone who's just dropped down to a level of non-nurosis that you recognize you just haven't experienced in yourself. And there are surrogates for this and there's sort of artifacts which are confusing to people because, obviously in any situation like this, there are power dynamics when you're just the, when you're the guy on stage or you're the guy in the powerful role or you're the celebrity or whatever it is, you're kind of free to be non-nurotic when everyone else is dancing around being neurotic. You know, when someone's busy trying to not be not spazz meeting Jill Rogan, you often are just free just to be a nice guy who's, who, I don't know if this is true of you and maybe it's not true all the time, but it's, you can be sort of empowered by a role and it's kind of liberating and then you can find yourself in another context. This goes to the first point we made about different states of self. You can find yourself in another context where you're just trying, you're not Jill Rogan, the celebrity or you're not the guy who's on stage. You're just someone trying to get something done with somebody else who's not taking you seriously and you can feel all of your sort of normal level of neurosis kick in because you're not empowered in that situation. It's not the frame around the situation that is making you the center of attention or making anyone defer to what you're saying. So contexts can, you can prop up a totally fake guru who has no skills at all, who's just, I mean this experiment has been done. I think James Randy just created a fake guru, I think it was in Australia New Zealand, he got some suitably mysterious looking Latin guy and called him the amazing whatever and set him up as a fully enlightened man from the Andes or whatever, who had spent 20 years in a cave and now was going to deliver his wisdom to the world and they put out, put up ads and they convened 500 people and they gave this guy an earpiece and they were feeding him lines and every, you know, he transformed everybody's life in that room to some degree and there was actually documentary this Kumari, I don't know if he's all this. Yeah, is that on the same guy? No, different guy, but same thought experiment. Yeah. What is it called the Kumaari? Yeah, well worth seeing. I keep hearing great things about it. It's one of those things that's always on my to-do list and I never get around to. Yeah, hilarious. The guy does a great job because he's Indian and he speaks perfect English, you know, he just lays it down. English. That's awesome. Well, there's also the sexual attraction thing, the eye contact, that context whereas you can't make eye contact with a woman like that and just lock eyes without her thinking you want to have sex with her or she locks eyes with you without her thinking that you want to have the opposite. Right. That it's only in a gay sense with two men, you know, like the thing about looking at someone someone, like it's almost like you're given in the green light. I'm interested in you. I'm looking at you. I'm interested in you or I'm threatening you or I'm challenging your position of dominance or whatever the fuck it is when you're looking locking eyes. It's very different when it's intersectional when it's male to female. Right. Well, it can be just as intrusive. Yeah, more so. Yeah, yeah. Because especially male to woman, you know, because of a guy is locking eyes with another guy. It's weird, but it's not like, oh, God, this guy's got to fuck me. Although, between two guys, you get that monkey dance of, you know, what are you looking at? What are you looking at? And then it becomes, do we have to fight kind of whereas with a man to woman, it's just, it's intrusive if the guy is not picking up whatever cues of disinterest or, you know, boundary setting are there and he's just staring and that's just, you know, it's just uncomfortable given, given that, you know, women are the targets of sexual violence and just, you know, harassment. Free will. Yeah, we'll have to have to guess because we only have an hour left. Yeah. Okay. This is something that is perplexing, confusing, hotly debated. Is there free will and you would probably say no. Yeah, I have said no much to the consternation of many certain people, philosophers like Dan Dennett who I collided with on this issue, even though it didn't have to be as unpleasant as it turned out to be. How did why was it unpleasant? Well, what he had, I mean, what happened is I wrote this very short book Free Will, which was actually, it was a short section in my book, The Moral Landscape, which in which I laid out my argument against Free Will and it got so much attention and people found it so interesting and disturbing and it was clearly just one, it just, you know, I mean, it might have been only 10 pages in the book, but it was something that just people wanted more of. And so what I did is I took those 10 pages and I could blew them up into a 100 page, but still very short book that you could read an hour and hour and a half and published it as Free Will. And then Dan Dennett, who is a very well known and very smart philosopher, who's a colleague and friend of mine and comrade in arms on the whole religion issue, he and I have, along with Richard Dawkins and Christopher Hitchens, have often been talked about in the same sentence as the four horsemen or the new atheists. And so we've been, you know, we are aligned on many, many questions and certainly virtually all the questions related to the collision between science and religion. He and I make the same noises on. But Free Will has always been a topic of his, that he's spent a lot of time on and he has a different take on it and it's a take that I'm really not a fan of and rather than, rather than fully engage his view in, in my book because I actually, the truth is I think his view on Free Will, which is, which is called compatibleism, is the argument that, that Free Will is compatible with determinism. It's, it's, it's, it's, you don't have to, even if we're in a universe where all causality is just kind of running like clockwork, including every influence on the human brain and, you know, everything that's giving rise to thoughts and decisions and behavior. If it's all just a machine that's kind of running out from the big bang to the, here. influence on the human brain and you know everything that's giving rise to thoughts and decisions and behavior of It's all just a machine that's kind of running out from the big bang to the heat death of the universe free will is compatible with that determinism and so then he has Flushed out his compatibilism. He's not the only compatible as he's the most famous at this point He's fleshed out his compatibilism in a couple of books now. I think compatible is in his just Actually, he's just changing the subject. It's not it's redefining free will is something that is Doesn't actually track what people think they have and in my view. He's just not grappling with the illusion that Can be penetrated here and it should be penetrated here. So I Didn't really want to engage his I mentioned his books. I sort of I mentioned them only to kind of put them on the shelf as you know This is not this doesn't really get at the issue and this you know pissed him off frankly and he He thought he was being you know his defense. I think he thought he was being very diplomatic and measured and responsible in how he engaged me and What he did is he wrote a review of a free? I think he waited like a year but then he wrote a review of the book which I published on my website but it was a very hard-hitting but in my View misguided and confused review of of my book and so then I responded and you know He didn't like my response and then that that's kind of where we left it But it was kind of a very long review that that that Made a lot of noise To not much effect and in my view and then then I responded with a very long review where I hit back probably a little too hard and It's one of those problems you get into when you're just writing rather than having a conversation So what I what I urged him to do and this is the reason why my review came off is so frustrated and People can read people can find all this in my blog my my review. I published his His review on my blog and then af I forget that what the title was there but You can easily find in my blog and then my review it was called the the Marionette's lament and then it was my response to his review Free will But the problem was I told him I said damn we should we should just have a public conversation about this this is you The only it's only in conversation That you can correct for somebody else's misunderstandings in real time I mean you start to say something that is mischaracterizing my view and I'll say no No, that's not it actually this and then and then you get you can keep getting back on track It more or less effortlessly But what happens is when you when you have these when you're writing and you're you're having these mutual you know 3,000 or 10,000 word volleys where I'm just gonna lay it out what's you know What's totally wrong with your world view? And in the course of doing that I'm gonna make 15 huge mistakes That you know you could have that you could have corrected in real time But now I'm committed to them because I wrote a page on each you know and then and then we just go back and forth And so that's so I really urged him to have a debate with me or a conversation and He didn't want to do that and then he He wrote this review and I Said okay and hadn't probably showed me the review before I before he was gonna publish it was gonna publish this publish it in a On a website that was far more obscure than my blog Which he did but I I co published it on my blog But I said before you publish this just let me let me make this a conversation Let me take this text and interrupt you You know you can say anything you want to say but let me just build in some mechanism where you can correct for because like There are 10 places here where you're misunderstanding me and so let me just let me turn this into a conversation And it was no go there and so then he's he just finally published it and I said okay well Fine So in any case people can witness the collision there on my blog, but the The basic case against free will is this it's twofold one is that And again, it's the it's the obverse of this sense of self It's the other side of the coin where you Feel like you're a thinker of thoughts you feel like you're the the author of intentions you feel like you are a subject and Commenser it with that feeling is the sense that You are in a position to do what it is you do To decide to do you I can decide to lift my left hand or I can decide to lift my right hand and I can deliberate between the two and I can have reasons for one or reasons for the other and I'm in the driver's seat. I really am and then if you And so that's that's where everyone's starting the problem with that is Objectively we know that everything that you're consciously aware of all your thoughts and your intentions and your impulses and your impulses to to resist those impulses I mean, well however however however you're whatever's coming up for you We know that's all preceded by events in your nervous system of what you're not aware and what you didn't create and The state of your brain in this moment. It's in every sense Is the product of variables that you are not responsible for you didn't pick your parents you didn't pick your genes You didn't sculpt your genes you didn't pick the environment in which your genome Was going to be expressed you didn't pick the way that your interaction with the world and other people sculpted the Microstructure of your brain so as to give you the brain you have you didn't pick the number of Receptors you've had I have of every type at every synapse You didn't pick all the charges and that are currently in place in your brain at this moment You haven't you haven't created your neurophysiology and your neurophysiology is going to give rise to every next thought and intention That shows up for you and so so and we know that if you do an experiment like you put someone in a Neuroimaging device whether it's whether it's EEG or whether it's a fMRI or and you image their Their neural activity in real time and you have a very Simple choice between pushing the left button or pushing the right button We can predict Before the person is aware of having committed to right or left Whether they're going to go right or left and we know that that ability to predict is only going to become more fine-grained so that so that if you take away And again someone like Dan Dannett has a story about why this doesn't matter right but And the truth is it actually doesn't matter because even if we couldn't predict It matters in this in a sense that it's it's very persuasive to people that You know if I can predict what you're going to do before you're aware of what you're going to do Well, then the basis for free will seems to go out the window Okay two things one. How can you so for instance? Just just just notice this moment so let's say I had written down on a piece of paper The next sentence you're going to speak. Okay, right so I had verbatim what's going to come out of your mouth now and you just so you know you start your side of the conversation and I just hold up this pad And you see that I have everything that is just now occurring you just to Current to you to say that would be pretty persuasive to you That you're not running a free will program over there Right, right And so that's the intuition that I'm trying to get at so that if we can predict What you're going to think before you think it? Where is your free will? Because you're you're you're going to be you're thinking it is Is this is the basis of your sense of free will in the first place? You feel like you are authoring this next thought You feel like you're you feel like it's it but if I could show you that we knew what you were going to do before you did it That would erode this sense that You're free to do otherwise How in what sense could you have done? Otherwise if I can hold up this piece of paper And show you that you were committed To saying what you were using this sort of dishonest argument though because you can't do that Well, no, but we can do it in a very simple paradigm But you can you can predict Whether or not someone's going to lift their right hand or their left hand based on fMRI But how do you know when someone has decided or not decided like what what is that point of decision? What does that mean? I mean if there's a good question in decisive sort of a thing like lifting your left hand or your right hand Like if we just have an fMRI attached your head and say randomly Just every 30 seconds. I want you to lift your left hand to your right hand. Right. How do you know when a person has decided? Yeah, well good question it's and it's a little difficult to Operationalize or make Design an experiment around but what they've done is they they created a clock Which made it and this has been done in a few different ways, but in each one of these experiments They essentially created a clock that made it very easy for someone to discriminate time So it wasn't just like watching an ordinary clock, but it could be let's say a bunch of letters and numbers kind of streaming in front of you, you know, you're getting you're being presented with a bunch of different letters and numbers and I'm asking you you're free to decide you can take as long as you want You know you you're gonna choose left or right and I'm not forcing you to go at any particular time And you're just watching the letters and numbers and all your only job is to tell me what letter and number or number was present The moment you were you decided Right, so you you're watching you know K and X and four and seven and so all these different numbers and letters that are easily discriminated Coming appearing on a screen and you're just waiting to decide and you're thinking oh, maybe I'll go left Maybe I'll go right. I'm free to do whatever I want and you know, I'm just gonna I'm gonna wait this out a little bit, but all right I'm gonna go right and the moment you feel that you're committed you Just recall what number or letter you were looking at and then you tell the experiment or afterward I was looking at K. Okay was on the screen when I was committed now what's you might think this is Not so compelling when the time interval is very brief and some of these experiments the distance was like half a second right, but With this recent fMRI experiment the distance stretched out to like five seconds You know five to seven seconds so that the the the the activity That was was Inclining a person to go right as opposed to left was building up subconsciously For that long so that at a certain point the person said all right, I've decided but The data show that we could have predicted That with with great accuracy five to seven seconds earlier see that's relying on a person Being honest about when they decided It seems it seems rather crude and it also seems to conflict with what we were talking about earlier with which is the idea of controlling your thoughts the idea of getting to up a point in your mind where you are essentially in control of Which way your your brain goes whether you Adhere to one pattern of thinking or another and if you're you're talking about something as crude as lifting a left hand or right hand Deciding when to do so based on Whatever idea that pops into your head that seems like an incredibly crude way to argue that there's no free will Well, it's again, let me let me just be clear about this. It's an it's a very interesting experiment I agree. It's crude except I think that with this time interval it becomes There's less of a concern that the person's judgment about when they decided will be off by enough so as to to Make it a an invalid experiment, but I don't think it's enough. I mean to satisfy me, but let me just tell you There's no nothing hinges on this because even if your the decision that the the the neural activity In the brain that that gave you the decision and you are subjective feeling of having decided even if those were coincident Even if there was no time lag right it still is coming out of nowhere In a sense for for you subjectively you're still not in control of it and you're still it's still being caused By events that you didn't cause right so again you didn't pick your gee You didn't pick you didn't pick how you know it's so it's like and that the real illusion here or what most people think is that there's a very A very strong subjective case for free will we all know we have it we all feel it we're all living it and yet it's very difficult to map on to third person Reality it's very it's very difficult to map onto the physical world That that is not the situation for my point of view of my I think it it is very difficult to map on to the fact impossible to map onto the The physical world. There's no way to describe The way causes can propagate in the universe so as to make this idea of free will make sense because either they're determined or they're random or there's some combination of both and no combination of determinism and randomness Gets you free will determinism doesn't get your free will because you're just a machine Randomness doesn't get your free will because you're just a machine. That's that's throwing dice occasionally So but but the the feeling is that and this is a feeling that I think Dan Dannad has There's this very compelling subjective sense of free will that we somehow have to make room for And I'm saying we don't have to make room for it because if you look closely enough You don't actually even feel it It's not even you don't even feel that you have the free freedom that you think you feel because If you just look at how thoughts arise if you just look at if I just pay attention to how I get to the end of this sentence I don't know how I get to the end of the sentence in the in the in the cases where I fail to get to the end of the sentence where I Misaward I where I'm speaking away. That's not grammatically correct each one of those hiccups Is a mystery to me fun subjectively and no doubt it's caused by some Some events in my brain that that could be understood if we were scanning my brain But subjectively It's always a surprise but Successfully finding the word you're looking for is also in some sense of surprise It's also something that you're not actually authoring and when you when you look at why you choose one word over another you know you say something like You know there's a there's a consistency between This story in that story and then you say well now why did I choose the word consistency? You know there are other synonym there are other words that mean consistency that I could have used I could have said There's a harmony between this story in that story that That is subjectively mysterious and was determined by events in your brain that you are not responsible for and so if I Very simple experiment. I say to you what are you gonna think of next? You know so you're next thought so I'm gonna ask you to think of a City any city Chicago, okay So you thought of Chicago Now perhaps it in that where there are other cities that kind of percolated there that were vying for inclusion and then you you decide Not Chicago. Yeah, it could be but where you consciously aware of oh, I just think why okay I just randomly picked one. Okay. So Chicago now of all the cities. You know the name of right you picture Coggo now there are all the there's a bunch of cities that you don't know the names of so you couldn't have picked them Right so you're not you were not free to pick them But then there's you know probably hundreds of cities who you whose names you recognize and who would you could have potentially You could have said you know Budapest. You could have said Cairo. You could have said Paris but Those cities didn't occur to you for whatever reason now so the question is that this is where and this is as free a choice Is I think you're ever gonna make the question is were you free? To think what didn't occur to you to think? Were you really free to say Paris now you in some in in Dan? Dennett sense you were free to say Paris you and I don't not hold any a gun to your head saying don't say Paris You were you could have in some other Situations similar to this thought of Paris but for whatever reason Paris was not in the cards for you and it was not the based on the state of your brain based on the inputs that had happened Earlier today based on whatever variables could control how this experiment was gonna run You thought Chicago and you didn't think Paris now in a deterministic universe You were not free to think Paris and in a in and the if we add randomness It doesn't give you the freedom of will that you think you have what you? Because the freedom of will people think they have is they are free To to have done otherwise. They could have done otherwise. Right? You know you could have So what does it mean to say you could have said Paris? Right you said Chicago we can't take that back, but you are belief in free will entails the belief that you know if we if we rewind the movie of our lives right now We just go back in this conversation a few minutes and Sam says think of a city Leaving everything else the same every the universe is exactly in the same state. I could have said Paris And there's no reason there's no reason scientifically to think that you could have because that would mean the universe would have had to have been in a different state But are we not getting trapped in my new shi here because is it not a combination of determinism and randomness because of course There's determinism of course there's there's certain events that have taken place in my life that I can't change Of course there's jeans there's life experiences There's I have experience in Chicago. It's a city I love so it comes up to my mind pretty quickly But it's also randomness because I just Chicago I just picked a name but that doesn't apply to my life and when I think when you talk about free will when most people talk about free Will they they think about actions in terms of their life like if you have an opportunity to cheat on your taxes But you think it's morally wrong. You don't want to go to jail. Isn't it not free will to look at your Taxform and make the decision to be correct like is it that free wills and they're not free will Well, let's link it up to control your thoughts as we were discussing earlier exactly Let me address that question because you okay, it seems so this can all seem very abstract and academic and of no use to any right And what I argue in my book is that admitting that free will is an illusion Actually does have some important consequences. They're not the kind of consequences that people worry about It's not that you have no basis to be a better person or to change your life or to you to make efforts to improve yourself That all remains intact, but it does change our ethical views of good and evil to some important ways And so we can maybe table that for the moment or maybe we'll get to it, but the You look at the look at it. You're effort to be a better person So your effort not to cheat on your taxes or to cheat on your wife or to cheat on your diet Let's make it very simple. You're on a diet and you've decided you're gonna go carb free for the next week, but then see you come in here and someone's you know giving you some donuts and You're tempted to eat a donut, but then you have that moment at tug of war with yourself and you say no, no I'm I've decided to go carb free. I'm I'm gonna toss these That back and forth now you there there you've been in that situation many times before Sometimes you cave in and eat the donut sometimes you're just you've got a will of steel and you you donate the donut but in each In each case the difference there your your ability to resist your inability to resist your your your Just you which part of you wins in that circumstance is also being born of Variables in your nervous system that you didn't author that you didn't control them It's like a tiny and if you could and if you could understand them perfectly right if you could if you could see all the causality you would see that You were not in control at that at that moment your control that you had exactly as much willpower as you had in that moment and not a not a atom more and and you can't take credit and so but what that doesn't mean That doesn't mean that willpower is irrelevant that doesn't mean that training is irrelevant So it's like for you know if I want a black belt in jiu-jitsu I've got a train in jiu-jitsu. I can't just sit back and see what happens Right I can't just wait to see if I get a black belt your decision to train you're saying absolutely not it's part of the caught But it's part of the causality my decision to train will be the proximate cause of my going into a school and training My desire to get a black belt is going to be the proximate cause in each moment of My making it a priority to train my making the effort to train my my Getting over injury my ignoring injuries when I when I otherwise would be You know cow would buy them whatever all all of those Your your intentions and your efforts and your desires are just as causal and as important as you think they are I mean They are you are driven by desire and your an effort does matter and and training has an effect all of that's true But and so so you can't where people get confused as they think that Determinism is the same thing as fatalism whereas just you know if everything's just gonna happen as it happens Well, then I don't have to do anything right, you know, I'm not so I'm just gonna see if I get a black belt You know, I just not I'm not gonna I'm not gonna make any efforts because if I'm destined to get a black belt You know, someone's gonna give me one right that makes no sense right if I'm destined to learn Chinese I'm just gonna start speaking Chinese one day. So how's that not a combination of determinism and maybe the momentum of your past determination which is based on a conscious thought a conscious thought to decide to be disciplined Decide decide to have a very specific diet to write down goals I mean is that not free will in some sense because isn't the only way to truly tell whether or not there is the ability to alter your Events in your life and your behavior based entirely on your will when you have to have someone live the exact same life with the exact same genetics exact same life experiences and confront the exact same circumstances and decide or find out whether or not they act Randomly or whether or not it's you can determine it. Well, that's the thing the thing is that so the first part of your question Someone like Dan Dennett wants to say that is all we mean by free will the only thing you need for free will is this effect of Intention and training and willpower and that's all anyone cares about anyway So the rest of the stuff is irrelevant. Mm-hmm. They're determinism is irrelevant but I don't think that's true for a few reasons but the crucial piece is ethical so once you acknowledge that if someone Was it wasn't in exactly your situation given the same genes and the same parents in the same Environment same life and influences same political circumstance same be just micro Influences to his nervous system that person would make all the same choices You you're making he'd have the exact same amount of willpower when he was confronted with a donut He'd fall off his diet the exact same number of times and in the same places you the the movie of your life If replayed in your double on a on another planet that was exactly like this one Would play out exactly the same and in the way and if randomness intrudes to make it different Well, then randomness doesn't give you free will randomness just gives you randomness It's just if you know if I just told you that that that you're gonna be exactly The same as your double and we can completely predict your behavior A thousand years before you're even born right because we've run this experiment before and with two injured genes and your and your world Exactly you're just a computer simulation of your double right you're just gonna You run out exactly the same way so you've got no free will but we are gonna throw in a little randomness to make you You know mean random events random it but random events in your in your nervous system Yeah random events in the world and random events in your nerd way we can we can put the randomness Wherever you want but so it's gonna change your life in various ways You're gonna decide to eat the donut in one case and not in another and then your your your history Your joint history with your your double is gonna diverge But that's not free will that's just you know if you knew that Your decision to marry your wife as opposed to somebody else was born of someone having thrown the dice You know lab somewhere you wouldn't you wouldn't ascribe that to free will that you that would just be that would be a bizarre Thing to dictate your your decision process. So that's not what anyone means by free will so randomness doesn't give you the freedom you think you have Let me just say a bit about why this why this is important ethically It's just it's when you look at when we perceive Good and evil in the world we look at people as agents who really are the authors of their actions. We really we relate to people like the head free will and This seems to make ethical sense to us and it seems to it's definitely the basis for our Our impulse for vengeance and attribute of justice and the feeling that people really deserve to be punished you know bad people deserve what they get and I'm not arguing that punishment is never valid and there may be a role for punishment that we want to retain in our justice system but this idea of Punishing people because they deserve it Doesn't make a lot of sense and the way to see that is two Wait to see that one is You look at these cases where you have someone like Charles Whitman who got on the clock tower at the University of Texas and 1964 I think it was or 66 and shot dozens of people I think he killed 14 and he killed his mom and his girlfriend for Kell's mom and his wife first and then he got on the clock tower and killed 14 people and injured like 30 people and This is just like pure evil right? So this guy is if anyone deserves to be punished this guy does and he was killed by the cops And he knew he was gonna be killed by the cops and so and he had written essentially a suicide note But you look at his behavior and you think all right that's a stark that says a stark as evil as we ever see And this guy really is the cause of his actions But then you read a suicide note and he describes how he was overcome with rages that he found inexplicable and he does Did not know why he was killing his wife or his mom? He loved them both, but he just could he just felt like he had to do it and he recommended that doctors Do a post more to mom his brain because he knows something's wrong with it and this you know Maybe they can find the reason why he did all these terrible things So they do an autopsy and they see that he's got a giant tumor in his hypothalamus pressing on the amygdala and that is a certainly A plausible place for it to be driving some rages in somebody and to be undermining their their impulse control And so most people look at the story of Charles Whitman and they think all right This is an unlucky guy who had a brain tumor who Was driven to act out on the basis of this brain tumor and that is not free will right? I mean this is he's he was an unlucky puppet and a victim of biology now The problem is a brain tumor really is just a special case of physical causality and what I'm arguing is that if we fully if we had a perfect understanding of the brain if we could scan your brain at this moment and and See every variable that influenced behavior as clearly and as compellingly as a Brain as a golf ball size brain tumor Right we would see that you are behavior and your thoughts and you are innermost desires and your commitment to your diet And your love of jujitsu and everything was just as determined as Charles Whitman's rages by a Cleo blastoma And it all begins to look like a brain tumor It's your your responsibility and you're the fact that you're your immense and you're a kind guy as opposed to a A vindictive one all of those variables again getting that that got That you inherited courtesy of genes and environment Which are the only influences we think you have right and the truth is even if you add an a soul You know you add an immortal Christian soul to the clockwork you didn't create your soul You know you you can't you can't take credit for the fact that you don't have the soul of a psychopath So whatever you add is in some sense a gift, you know brain tumors souls genes Cosmic ray bombardment any influence and if we could understand these influences clearly it would all begin to look like Charles Whitman's brain tumor and if you add the rolling of dice You know you add some randomness to it that doesn't give you freedom that just gives you randomness Yeah, see when I'm talking about randomness. I'm not When you were saying like random events in the mind What I was saying is that the only way to truly determine whether or not someone has the choice to make a decision one way or another is to Have them live the exact same life meaning the exact same amount of randomness the exact same events inside their mind and see Whether or not conscious decision making has any part in what you do Like the idea of free will is people are confronted with a scenario and they decide What do I do here? It's based on a lot of variables based on life experience? It's certainly based on genetics It's certainly based on the environment that you grew up in the environment that you find yourself in but is there not It's based on a lot of variables based on life experience. It's certainly based on genetics It's certainly based on the environment that you grew up in the environment that you find yourself in But is there not a choice there? Is there not a choice? There's something that's going on in your mind where it's causing you to act in one way or another and in my opinion The only way to know whether or not it is all determined by Momentum and the momentum of the past your genetics is to have someone live the exact same life and see what they do the exact same thing But you can see the same chemicals the exact same diet the exact same no randomness at all And whether or not you decide to go one way or another. Okay, but we know that every decision Has to be preceded by something right? So it's and if you have you're gonna take a scientific view of these things We know it's preceded by Neurophysiology right? That's the same as your consciousness though if there is a consciousness Something in the mind right so so either it's whether you think what I'm arguing is that whether you think consciousness is arising out of the information Processing of the brain. It's just it's what the brain the mind is what the brain is doing Or you think consciousness is something else and even even something very spooky. Let's say it's ectoplasm Let's say it's Christian soul whatever it is Even in those even in that case of dualism You don't get free will you don't you just get you just get some spookier causality that we don't we can't describe But it's still just coming out of the darkness from from your point of view subjectively you don't know What you're gonna do next and when you do it? You don't know you really don't know why you did it and if you have a story about why you did it you don't know why Make it so you could you could take a thousand years to choose between your right hand and your left hand You can say it's gonna be left. It's gonna be right. No, no, I I rose my I use my right yesterday I'm gonna go for left You it doesn't matter how long you you take right you could take a literally a thousand years Mm-hmm and you could have you could write a you know a a a million page document about what what it was like to deliberate over this But in the final moment where you decide you know what after all this I'm gonna go with the right that There's there's an inherent mystery from subjectively speaking You don't know what tip the balance and the sense that you did is just this feeling of the Again, it's the other side of this feeling of just being the thinker of your thoughts It's the feeling of self. It's the feeling of I it's the feeling of I it's the feeling of I I feel in of may you're the one pushing the the machine I understand what you're saying but the choice of a left hand or right hand is completely irrelevant There's no consequences one way. No, but so that's just the simplest case But you can make it as big as you want with whether I shoot shoot the intruder in my living room or not or whether or not Stick to a diet or whether or not you choose to be inspired whether you get a defined Yeah, yeah Well, what what are those things? I mean, what is it that's causing those choices? You're saying that it's all just genetics life experience of course random variables in the mind that there is no Self that makes a choice. There is no self that the self even though the self is comprised of all these random variables like genetics life experiences the environment you serve surround yourself with the People that are in your life that influence you these Variables are the funnel through which all decisions are made and there is no conscious choice There's no today. I'm gonna be a better person But you saying today I'm gonna be a better person is based entirely on a bunch of things that are outside of your control right right and Yet, yeah, there's that experience seems semantic to me. We'll know this but there's that well Here's why it why it's not semantic in the sense that it's semantic It may be semantic in how most people will live their lives most of the time so you can still if you want to lose weight You still have to go on a diet right and if you and if you want to stay on the diet You still can't eat the donut right so you still have to have this negotiation with yourself but And then all the all the things that that Conventional matter in that situation matters So it matters whether you keep donuts around or if you don't keep them around a matter if you're if your friends You know support you on your diet or they don't support you etc But here's where it changes where you so you think of an evil person like you know who they saying who we've mentioned at the beginning The the view of him as just pure evil worthy of being destroyed Where the if we could if we could have locked him up, you know, it's worth he's worth is worthy of punishment as anyone we could ever capture And that it makes sense to hate him that The logic of hatred erodes here because it doesn't make sense to hate Charles Whitman right Charles Whitman was unlucky You know that poor bastard had a brain tumor that caused him to kill his wife kill his mother and then kill a bunch of people and get killed himself right Very unlucky person who day who sane Was also unlucky right so he so you and and you can see this if you just roll back the clock of his life right So you when you look at him as a 40 year old He's the scariest psychopath you've ever seen when you look at him as a as a three year old Okay, he was a little boy who was gonna become Uday Hussein he was a little boy who threw no fault of his own had Saddam Hussein as a father Right imagine what that was like he has the genes. He has right he has the the completely fucked up society that he has right and the honor culture and the and the crazy brother right and and He and you have to acknowledge given uh If Whatever variables you want to include genes environment souls If you could trade places with him you get the same genes you get the same daddy you get the same environment you get the same soul Same ectoplasm whatever you want to put in to the to the box You would become who day the same there's nothing there's nothing left Right and and it's the sense that there's something left which um is an illusion and But what I'm arguing is that this actually can become the basis For compassion and for a wise or just system and we have a justice system that's predicated on the notion of free will and we have we've locked up 13 year olds for their entire lives Based on a sense that this evil little bastard is really deserves what he gets Well, I think we've done that because we want to protect everyone else from this evil bastard I think the idea is not whether or not this person is free to make these choices No, no, no, they're a danger. It is not you know No, no, but the Supreme Court is actually said that our System is based on the notion of free will and the determinism is hostile to any notion of a tribute of justice So that consciously as a matter of jurisprudence Uh We think we are implementing a doctrine of free will well then how do you indict people based on their responsibility for some Because it was exactly like What we would do if grizzly bears were walking around outside so it's like it's heavy So if we if I walk outside in the parking lot after this podcast and I see a grizzly bear I can be afraid of it. I can defend myself from it. I can run from it I can shoot it if I have a gun I can I can decide to lock it up if if there's no place safe to put it You can do all of those things without attributing free will to it I don't think a grizzly bear is seeking it tribute No, you can distribute no free will to a 13 year old psychopath and still lock them up out of the change life Well change it well in the case of a 13 year old We know that a 13 year old is not truly representative of who he's going to become as a 40 year old and you can you can change Met most 13 year olds that the book isn't written on their life That's who wants to be responsible for letting some 13 year old is killed a bunch of people. Oh, yeah out on the street You know you put them back in some sort of an institution you train them for five years. He goes out and it kills again Are you responsible for that now? Did you have the free will to decide to let this kid free? We do a lot worse than that though. We let we let people go who are obviously going to reoffend in the most shocking ways And we do it because we're making room for people who are selling an asset out of their dorm room I mean, so it's like it's it's what right, but that's a different argument isn't it? I mean, that's an argument of privatized prisons and financial systems that have been co-opted by pharmaceutical companies and Special interest groups like prison guard lobbyists and there's a lot more going on there. I mean what is What is what's the what's the basis for decision-making when it comes to Keeping a society safe. It's all it's all about it. I mean, so There's another way to see the problem here. Imagine we had a cure For psychopathy imagine we had a cure for evil so so we we completely understand human evil to level the brain Turns out just by sheer luck. It's just you get caught one. You know, there's one neurotransmitter there quite possible, right? It's unlikely, but it's possible and Let's just say there's just one kind of One-dog or a shop. You know, just just a pill is just a nutrient You know, you just put it in the food supply, right? And we cure evil now imagine so now we we have this we have someone locked up It's a day of saying or it's this 13 year old who's done these evil things and we think you know what this guy was such an evil bastard We're gonna withhold the cure From him as it's just an extra punishment, right? And that wouldn't make any sense now that's that would be like withholding surgery from Charles Whitman When you knew that the brain tumor was the reason why he was gonna be Charles Whitman, right? So Charles Whitman you discover the brain tumor pressing on the amygdala Before he's gonna go out and kill everyone and you say all right, we're just gonna solve the problem here, right? So there'd be no ethical basis to before it though, but even but even after but afterwards There's this concept of retribution where people want revenge. That's the illusionable dead. Okay, but that's but peace You wouldn't have that on the grizzly bear so say that's the I would Well grizzly bear killed 30 people. It would be different. It would be different It would be want to give them a pill to make them a happy grizzly bear. No, no, but it's like I'm not well you understand that a grizzly bear can't help it be a grizzly bear. Yes And so that this it does actually people used to do this So there was this you could probably find this online. There was a circus elephant elephant in 1919 that random mock and killed a bunch of people and The town's people were so outraged and attributed so much evil to this this elephant that they hung it from a railroad crane I mean they lynched an elephant right and they felt they were very satisfied with themselves This is you know justice, but the reality is you have a mistreated circus element elephant that went crazy and and and trampled some people And he was just being an elephant This is if we With someone like Charles Whitman when you see that there's a brain tumor you recognize All right, he's just being a guy who's got a brain tumor in the wrong place right and and if we had a cure for it even after the fact That would be the appropriate thing to do if we had a cure for evil if we had a pill that just could make who day who's saying a nice guy We would just give him the pill right, but then they're not responsible for their past actions because they're a totally different person Now they've received this pill well. Yeah because because evil is just a The bad luck of having bad genes and bad neurochemistry. Oh, that's a hard pill for people to swallow if their Daughter was fed to the dogs of who day who's saying that's a hard bill But he's not responsible in any way for his actions in the past because he had some bad stuff going on in his child But then so again look at his timeline He's not the three-year-old who has Saddam as a father is in response. All right, so there's walking forward day by day What point does this point? Yeah, exactly at what point eight is 18th birthday is that when you want to just bring down the hammer on it? It's a it's an interesting question And I think it sort of highlights the grain nature of reality itself is that there's you know Everybody wants everything to be black and white. Yes and no plus and minus, but it's not there's a lot of weird variables when it comes to being a human being and I don't I see what you're saying But it's it's sort of a weird argument because these pills don't exist the shot doesn't exist To turn someone from who's a psychopath into a good person. Well, no, but that that just proves it's just the point of concept that it makes It doesn't make sense to hold someone responsible for Their genes any more than it does their brain tumor And if you can't the but once you start taking taking each of these causal factors Off the table of responsibility genes parents society environment Cosmic rays there's nothing left and you can even take the soul off of it You know the soul you didn't pick your soul right even if you think you have one you didn't think it and that's the problem and But again, it doesn't change the important things that it doesn't change or things like self defense Yeah, yes, you you want to defend yourself against who they're saying you want to love if you don't have a cure for psychopathy You absolutely have to lock psychopaths up. You can't let them run around harming people or psychopaths of a certain extremity obviously there are a lot of psychopaths out who actually haven't harmed people they're just making inappropriate eye contact but the the difference is Hatred and the kind of psychological suffering born of it doesn't make a lot of sense and Clear path to solutions Should they become available? opens up so that you know it's just like there's something so clarifying about the Charles Whitman story Once you once you hear about the brain tumor you just think oh man. All right. Well Let's just you know Turns out this was not evil. We're not talking about evil. We're talking about a brain tumor, okay? What I'm saying is the more we understand the human mind the level of the brain the more that feeling is going to encroach on All of these but do we know enough about the human brain to really make that determination because when we're talking about Where does a thought come from what what you know? What is going on inside your mind? We can very crudely look at fMRI's and see areas of the brain that are receiving activity But we don't necessarily know what is going on and so like creativity for example What makes a John Coltrane what makes a Richard Pryor? I mean is it just the sum of their life experiences their genetics or expression or is it when when a thought comes to a mind like okay? in your case when you're writing and you're sitting in front of your computer and You know, I'm sure you probably have those moments where a concept or a sentence comes and it almost feels like it appears out in at a midair Right Everything appears at a minute. I mean that's that's the other thing is that I Mean the other reason why I'm so committed to this is The subjective illusion The subjective side of the illusion can be cut through it's like again most people starting point is We have this really robust feeling of free will and self-authorship and self-creation and self-determination and It's just it's hard to make it square with Charles Whitman and jeans and you know the rest of the neuro the neuro chemical story and But I know I've got it, you know by God. I know I've got this thing. I can feel it right now Right that can be cut through you can actually feel you can actually feel that when you say Chicago That is as that's like me saying Chicago. It's like me saying okay He's gonna say Chicago now and you it's just coming out of your mouth But there's no consequence to these ideas like the picking a left hand or the right hand picking Chicago doesn't mean anything that to me I Well, that's simply the simplest case that we can easily demonstrate But you can you can raise the stakes as much as you want But it means a lot if I decide to drive drunk it means a lot if I I mean if you have let but arguably you have less control if I if I ask you you know you and I go out now and and Have a few drinks and we're sitting around for a few hours wondering whether or whether we're sober You're in a worse position to go to the talks kid Yeah, it was like the way you look at a bad example then what about speeding what if um I'm out of red light and someone revs their car engine Michael Yeah, bitch come on. Let's go and we crash into someone but again They've got more variables there that are driving you and influencing you and you and you and you feel like You're being led along around by the nose by the environment a little bit more there in this in this case This is the I mean there's no stakes, but this is as pure a a a moment of agency as you're ever gonna get when I say think now of a famous woman You're free to fit free to pick you know think of a bunch right? Okay, and pick anyone you want just and take as long as you want and just You just go back in Lawrence. Okay. There you go Jennifer Lawrence Wonder why that is as pure that's gotta be as pure a demonstration of freedom of will as Anything you're gonna get in life now. Okay, nothing turns on it But that's that's pure and and less constrained by I don't know should are you am I sober enough to drive or should I just speed or you know Should I should I buy this thing or not or am I gonna have the doughnut? It's nothing like there was nothing riding on it. So you were totally free Just you could you had Jennifer Lawrence, but then you had Oprah Winfrey and you could do what back Well, then but were you okay? So were you free to pick Oprah Winfrey? You know who Oprah is yeah, well Jennifer Lawrence is in the news. It's one of the reasons why okay, but that's that's That's demonstrate in a great strength that is driving you right? But I thought about Ann Wolf first actually was a boxer And I just started to observe right right. Yeah, so you would have been lost on me. Yeah I just think that I agree with you without a doubt that there are most certainly are a bunch of factors involved in Who a person is and many of them are outside of your control But but when I ask you your mid point you're missing here is that I'm not asking you I mean you can grant all of that the fact that they're those factors But what I'm saying is that you can subjectively experience The absence of free will in that moment of picking Jennifer Lawrence You can you can subjectively no longer feel like like the problem of free will really goes away You no longer have this problem of I see where you're I know I've got this thing and I can't figure out how to make it square with reality Jennifer Lawrence just comes out of the ether Mm-hmm and the even the internet yeah, and even if you deliberate No matter how many times you go back and forth What the fact that you've set a finally settle on her as opposed to somebody else? Is inexplicable right while trying to be funny. That's why I went with her because she's naked pictures of her all over the internet today I don't know if you're well, yeah, no, I I've heard that somebody was like some bunch of them some I've some Apple hacking thing apparently is not Apparently it may be that might be a factor But apparently people have been collecting images off of people's computers, but there's not just her it's a bunch of yeah, a bunch of celebrities Yeah, I see you're saying and I agree with you Mostly I don't disagree with you really I'm just sort of bouncing it around inside my head So when I when I say but what about this but what about that? I'm doing that as much for myself as I am to I'm not trying to disprove your point I think there's so many variables as to what makes a person to attribute any Anything to one thing whether it's discipline or whether it's Whether it's life experience whether it's what makes a man great what makes a woman fantastic what makes someone creative I don't know you know I think to boil it down to simply Chemicals in the mind and Neurosynapse is firing left or right. I don't know I don't I don't I think it's both I have a feeling that it's not just I don't think it's just determinism. I think there's determinism, but there's also I mean you could your life Changes based on whether or not you need a salad you need a salad or eat a bowl of pasta But I need a bowl of pasta you're just doing it in more neuro chemistry there. Yeah without it out Yeah, no doubt but what is the decision to eat that salad is the decision like I decided today? I want to be a healthier better person. What's making me decide that is it just neuro chemistry I mean it just synapses is just my environment my life experiences if that's the case and human beings are fucking Robots where yeah, yeah, but most certainly most not touching robot Yeah, but that doesn't think is that doesn't take out any of the good stuff of life So even if you from my point of view nothing important is lost here and Something ethical is gained. I mean it's so for instance that the possibility of having compassion for even even for evil people You know loving your enemy being like Jesus in that respect mm-hmm, which makes absolutely no sense until You I actually see a basis for having compassion for someone like who day is saying I Feel like that opens up based on this consideration But nothing else changes, you know if you do days of saying walked into the room, you know, you know, I Would put a bullet in him and self-defense as quickly as the next guy. I mean so it's just no though that doesn't change But it's it is the difference between Mean me guess some of my good days saying is a malfunctioning robot, you know He's he's a grizzly bear so in that sense we really are just a product of our environments We are really are just numbers. We really are just a sea of variables But we're also but we're consciousness Subjectively speaking we are consciousness and its contents now We know that there's a lot of unconscious massively affected by those sea of variables and in fact cannot be detached from those sea of variables yeah, and yet it's as beautiful as you ever wanted to be and it's it says profound as you Wanted to be it's doesn't become less profound And the spooky stuff that people want to introduce Doesn't actually amp up the profundity. It makes it makes it less profound Well, it actually makes us more responsible for engineering a healthy society because we have to be aware of all the variables that are involved in every single human beings developmental process and The more we can mitigate the negative ones the better we can make our society and that doesn't really discount the idea of People being responsible for their actions or punishing people or removing people not at all because punishment has its effects and But but but now we're now we're free to see That we just want the punishments that have the effects we want we don't we can we can get rid of retribution and vengeance and we can just think Okay, what kind of world we want to live in and so maybe punishing people in certain ways Can be justified totally on pragmatic lines because it has a certain effect it deter certain crimes It makes them better people whatever either whatever those punishments are. Let's say they they exist Then you don't need a Retributive story you just have a story of you know, we want we want fewer carjackings And we want the carjackers to be better people so we're gonna do x y and z and and deter Carjack on the one hand and rehabilitate carjacker carjackings on the carjackers on the other in another way that also highlights the really truly Unethical practices of privatized prisons of Things along those lines where you are Purposely setting up laws in order to victimize people to make it so that you know like you're playing a game You make it so that they're their pitfalls if they follow those pits Oh look I caught a beaver fell into my trap The incentives are all wrong. Yes, that's one thing that that I mean what you just said was was very important that seeing this Web work of causality makes us more responsible for Aligning society and all of its incentives more wisely so as to make better people and I mean this I think is the biggest problem Of our time or really any time we we have systems where Incentives are poorly aligned where we where we where even good people are tempted to be terrible because of The profit motive in the system or because or they're very issue of our law itself like when you have a prosecutor who's entire Your your reputation is built on winning. Yeah, you're so does matter be innocent That happens a win a massive amount of cases in a massive amount of cases They're well aware that it's possible they could be wrong But their job is to prosecute the same can be said for a defense lawyer The defense lawyer could be aware that their client is probably lying But they must defend that client to the best of their ability Yeah, including manipulating witnesses including the way they communicate with these witnesses to try to lead them down certain paths to get them to say things that might be Miskinstrude by the jury all those things become more Unethical if you look at this concept of determinism. Yeah. Yeah Yeah aligned incentives are are are huge and I mean that that one is a Is a classic case where what you'll get from defense attorneys is a very strenuous defense of Even the even the guilty need representation and you know our adversarial system completely depends on my giving the best possible Defense of Jeffrey Dahmer. I can Even though I know that if I succeed and I sure hope I to succeed he's gonna go off and cannibalize more people I Think there's a ethical problem with that and and it but it's set up by the problem on the other side where you have a Prosegatorial system which is really not that concerned About send locking up an innocent person for the rest of his life. So it's a sense the system itself is so inherently flawed That it's it's almost it'd be tossed out and it should be where no one has an incentive Whether that person is guilty or innocent. I mean that would be the most ethical way Just want to get to the truth. Yes, and whatever whatever system is gonna track the truth best I think is the system we want. Yeah, I mean You shouldn't be able to hire a Johnny Cochran you shouldn't be able to hire a Robert Shapiro They're too good at manipulating reality what you should do is you should have some sort of a system where you have people that have no Dog in the fight and these people have no There's no financial motive to make you guilty or innocent Like the idea of a jury system is also equally flawed because you're picking all these people You sit down with them. How do you feel about capital punishment? How do you feel about birth control? How do you feel about this that the other thing? You know you ask them all these questions and then you pick the Defense and the prosecution gets to pick you know from all these people based on their decisions with the idea being that this is our likelihood for success if we go with these people and they have like a whole Algorithm based on like what answers they were they're trying to get from these these various people That's a that's a really big hole in the system that's sort of highlighted by these ideas this idea that Someone has that you can benefit financially from someone being in a center guilty Yeah, and if we had a a reliable lie detector this whole problem go away Well, we'll be eventually maybe you know I know that I talked to you about this before one of your colleagues was on my Yeah with the fMRI results of someone being Arrested and prosecuted in India because they had functional knowledge of a crime scene. Yeah, and that was a troubling case Yeah, very same's premature. Yeah. We're running out of time. Yeah. All right, man Thank you very much. Yeah, a bunch of people's minds and freak the bunch of people out I'm sure people are going crazy writing blogs responding to you and bring other comments all over the internet and Whoever that guy is that you had the issue with tell them the fucking light enough Sam Harris waking up a guy to spirituality and that spirituality should be in quotes Postcare question without religion and it's available now. I got a copy of it right here. Is it on audio book as well? Yes, it's available. It's on sale next week. Yeah, we're weak early as an audio book. Yeah, do you are you reading it? Yes, oh great Excellent. I love that I don't like it when some actor read someone else's book, but they do that a lot Amazingly hard to do. I don't know if I'm sure you would be probably better out of than I am But I found it incredibly hard to do it's really humbling to realize that people do this professionally with other people's books It's amazing what was hard about it. It's just I you know, I find that I Inadvertently have written tongue twisters into my There were a few sentences I literally had to change words because I couldn't get through them It was like a Cirque de Soleil Act that I couldn't perform really just to read the sentence Well, that's interesting because yeah, when you read something and it's in your mind You have your mouth closed. You're not making noises. It's easy. You put something in there with it's got the consonants in the wrong place and It was one time it was like 20 takes and you got people in a you know, you're in a booth You got to a producer and an engineer listening to you and it's just all right We're gonna rewrite this sentence. Sorry guys All right, the book Sam Harris waking up Thanks. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thanks our sponsor. Thanks to Squarespace Go to squarespace.com entering the code word Joe and get 10% off your first purchase Thanks to legal zoom go to legal zoom calm use the code word Rogan at referral In the referral box at checkout for savings and thanks to on it calm. Oh and and IT use the code word Rogan save 10% off any and all supplements all right We'll be back tomorrow with Dom Iraira and then again on Thursday with Joe de Rosa see you soon Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye